Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (RESERVED)
Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES, PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (RESERVED)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC WELFARE AND ELECTIONS
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (RESERVED)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (RESERVED)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING
Title 18 CITYWIDE REGULATIONS

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.14 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.16 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
Chapter 1.20 FEES
Chapter 1.22 CITY SEAL AND LOGOS
Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND FINES
Chapter 1.28 CLAIMS PROCEDURE

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
     This is adopted the “Lemon Grove Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 222 § 1, 1994; Ord. 86 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the “Lemon Grove Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Lemon Grove Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Further reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code and such references shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.020 Authority.
     This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Lemon Grove, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1—50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. (Ord. 86 § 3, 1982)

 

1.04.030 Ordinances passed prior to adoption.
     The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 199, passed on July 1, 1991. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 199, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance Nos. 200, 201, 205 (Special), 206, 207 (Special), 210, 215, 218 and 219. (Ord. 222 § 6, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.040 Code references.
     Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Lemon Grove Municipal Code” or to any portion of the code, or to any ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove, California, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 222 § 3, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.045 References to prior code.
     References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 222 § 9, 1994)

 

1.04.050 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 222 § 4, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.060 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 222 § 5, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 222 § 7, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.080 Effective date.
     This code shall become effective on the date the ordinance adopting this code as the “Lemon Grove Municipal Code” shall become effective. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.090 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases has been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 222 § 8, 1994; Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

1.04.100 Reference to county and county offices.
     Whenever in the code, adopting by reference the ordinance code of the county, reference is made to:

     A.    Board of supervisors of San Diego County, or any abbreviation thereof, the same shall mean the city council of the city of Lemon Grove;

     B.     Any county office, agent or employee, the same shall mean the equivalent city official, and simultaneously the county official who may be then authorized to act on behalf of the city of Lemon Grove by virtue of the general laws relating to continued county services to newly incorporated cities or by virtue of any contracts for services now or in the future entered into by and between the city of Lemon Grove and the county of San Diego. (Ord. 16 § 10, 1977)

 

1.04.110 Existing law continued.
     The provisions of this code, insofar as they are substantially the same as provisions of existing ordinances relating to the same as provisions for existing ordinances relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof and not as new enactments. (Prior code § 11.104)

 

1.04.120 Construction.
     The provisions of this code and all proceedings under it are to be construed with a view to effecting its objects and to promoting justice. (Prior code § 11.105)

 

 

1.04.130 Pending action or accrued rights not affected—Procedure.
     No action or proceeding commenced before this code takes effect, and no right accrued, is affected by the provisions of this code, but all procedure thereafter taken therein shall conform to the provisions of this code so far as possible. (Prior code § 11.107)

 

1.04.140 Rights under existing license or certificate not affected.
     No rights given by any license or certificate under any ordinance repealed by this code are affected by the enactment of this code or by such repeal; but such rights shall hereafter be exercised according to this code. (Prior code § 11.108)

 

1.04.150 Service of notices.
     Whenever a notice is required to be given under this code, unless different provisions herein are otherwise specifically made, such notice may be given either by personal delivery thereof to the person to be notified or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid, addressed to such person to be notified at his or her last known business or residence address as the name appears in the public records or other records pertaining to the matter to which such notice is directed. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in the post office. (Prior code § 11.112)

 

1.04.160 Proof of notices.
     Proof by giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this code or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. (Prior code § 11.113)

 

1.04.170 Delegation of powers.
     Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon any city officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer or a person authorized pursuant to law, unless this code or state law expressly provides otherwise. (Prior code § 11.114)

 

1.04.180 Validity.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The city council declares that it would have adopted this code and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Prior code § 11.115)

Chapter 1.08 DEFINITIONS
1.08.010 Definitions.
     The words set forth in this chapter have in this code the signification attached to them in this chapter unless otherwise apparent in the context. (Prior code § 12.106)

 

1.08.020 Interpretation.
     A.    Officers, Boards, Commissions and Departments. Whenever in this code reference is made to some officer, board, commission, institution, department, office or division, it shall mean an officer, board, commission, institution, department, office or division of the city, unless otherwise specified.

     B.     Tenses. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present.

     C.     Gender. The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter.

     D.    Number. The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.

     E.     Shall and May. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code §§ 12.101—12.105)

 

1.08.030 Person.
     “Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust receiver, syndicate, county, city and county, city, municipal corporation, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Prior code § 12.115)

Chapter 1.12 GENERAL PENALTY
1.12.010 Violations—Penalty.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or of any ordinance adopted by the city. Notwithstanding any provisions to the contrary, a violation of any of the provisions or requirements of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or any ordinance adopted by the city shall constitute a misdemeanor; provided, however, any such violation constituting a misdemeanor may, by ordinance be made an infraction or, in the discretion of the city attorney, acting in the name of the people of the State of California, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction.

     B.     Any person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or of any ordinance adopted by the city, unless provision is otherwise made, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment. Any person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or any ordinance adopted by the city, unless provision is otherwise made, shall be punishable by fine only as follows:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

     3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

     C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a violation of local building and safety codes determined to be an infraction is punishable by:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year;

     3.     A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year of the first violation.

     D.    In addition to the penalties provided in this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or any ordinance adopted by the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city attorney, abated as such, and each day that such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense.

 

     E.     The city attorney, as an alternative to subsections A, B, and C of this section, may redress a violation of any state or local ordinance by civil action including but not limited to restraining orders, injunctions, fines, and damages. Civil action by the city attorney may also include the following in addition to any other civil remedy allowed under the laws of the state and the United States: forfeiture of any or all permits, licenses, approvals, and privileges or benefits of any nature granted by the city.

     F.     “Person,” as referred to in this section, is defined in LGMC Section 1.08.030.

     G.    Citation for Infraction. As an alternative to misdemeanor prosecution, the city manager or his/her designee, or the chief of the fire department or his/her designee may issue a citation to the owner(s), occupant(s) or other person(s) deemed responsible for violating any provisions of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. For purposes of this subsection, any such violation shall be classified as an “infraction,” pursuant to California Government Code Section 36900, which section and the penalties prescribed are adopted and incorporated in this section. (Ord. 340 § 1, 2004; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

1.12.020 Violations—Each day a separate offense.
     Each person who violates any provision or fails to comply with any of the requirements of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or any ordinance adopted by the city, shall be charged by a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted by any such person and shall, upon conviction, be punished accordingly. Civil penalties for failure to obtain any required permit shall begin to accrue on the first day activity subject to the permit requirement is commenced, and shall cease to accrue on the day the permit is obtained. Civil penalties for violation of any order to cease violation or notice and order to correct shall begin to accrue on the first day such order or notice is posted, and shall cease on the day the violation is actually stopped. (Ord. 340 § 2, 2004; prior code § 11.117)

 

1.12.030 Acts including causing, aiding and abetting.
     Whenever in this code any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, permitting, aiding or abetting such act or omission. (Prior code § 11.118)

 

1.12.040 Effect of termination or suspension of portion of code or ordinance.
     The termination or suspension (by whatsoever means effected) of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city does not constitute a bar to the prosecution and punishment of any act already committed in violation of the provision so terminated or suspended, unless the intention to bar such prosecution and punishment is expressly declared by an applicable provision of such code or ordinance. (Prior code § 11.119)

 

1.12.050 Citation in lieu of taking arrested person before magistrate.
     If any person is arrested for a violation of any one or more of the provisions of this code or any city ordinance and such person does not demand to be taken before a magistrate, the arresting officer may issue a citation in the manner prescribed in Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.6) of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code. (Prior code § 13.101)

 

1.12.060 Administrative citations.
     A violation of this code may be subject to an administrative citation issued under Chapter 1.24. (Ord. 356 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 1.14 NUISANCE ABATEMENT PROCEDURE
1.14.010 Maintenance of Property—Nuisances.
     The council declares that its purpose in adopting this chapter is to establish a procedure for the abatement of violations of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or of any ordinance adopted by the city, collectively referred to as the “Code.” The procedures established in this chapter may be used in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, which may be pursued to address violations of this code. It is also intended that this chapter be used as an alternative to existing nuisance abatement procedures established in other chapters of this code and the Lemon Grove Development Code.

     The city council declares that a public nuisance exists when any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code obstructs, injures, or interferes with the reasonable or free use of property belonging to a neighborhood, community, or any considerable number of persons and poses a serious threat to the public’s health, safety, or welfare.

     A public nuisance may be summarily abated under this chapter.

     Any person owning, leasing, occupying, or controlling any premises in this city on which a public nuisance exists is responsible for the public nuisance. Each of the following conditions is a public nuisance:

     A.    Land, whether in a natural state or as a result of human activity, that causes runoff pollution, erosion, sinking, or a surface water drainage problem that is injurious or potentially injurious to the public health, safety, or welfare or to nearby properties;

     B.     Buildings that are abandoned, partially destroyed, or unreasonably permitted to remain in a state of partial construction;

     C.     Buildings, walls, and other structures that have been damaged by fire, decay, or otherwise to such an extent that they cannot be repaired to conform with the requirements of the building code;

     D.    The failure to close, by means acceptable to the building official, all doorways, windows, and other openings into vacant structures;

     E.     Buildings with a major portion unpainted or infested with dry rot or termites;

     F.     Broken windows that are hazardous and invite trespassers or malicious mischief;

     G.    Overgrown vegetation that is likely to harbor rats, vermin, or other nuisances or to be detrimental to nearby property or property values;

     H.    Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, or other vegetation that is unsightly, dangerous to public safety or welfare, detrimental to nearby property or property values, or reasonably deemed to be a fire hazard;

 

     I.      Attractive nuisances that are dangerous to children, including but not limited to abandoned and broken equipment, ice boxes, refrigerators, and unprotected or hazardous pools, ponds, and excavations;

     J.      Junk that is stored in such a manner as to constitute a fire, health, or safety hazard;

     K.    Garbage that is stored in such a manner as to constitute a fire, health, or safety hazard;

     L.     Garbage that is stored in such a manner as to promote disease-causing organisms, vermin, or litter;

     M.    Garbage that is stored in containers that are not watertight, nonabsorbent, and puncture- and tear-resistant;

     N.    Trash and garbage containers that are stored in front or side yards and are visible from public streets;

     O.    Trash and garbage containers left at curbside in excess of twenty-four consecutive hours;

     P.     Packing boxes, lumber, trash, dirt, and other debris that is stored outside commercial buildings and visible from public streets;

 

 

 

     Q.    Dirt, litter, or debris that is accumulated in entrances, doorways, or the adjoining sidewalks of commercial or industrial buildings;

     R.     Property maintained in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare, to create a dangerous or substandard property or dangerous condition, or to constitute a public nuisance.

     S.     Property that is so defective, unsightly, or deteriorated that it is detrimental to nearby property or property values;

     T.     Property that is so out of harmony with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties that it is detrimental to nearby property or property values;

     U.    Property maintained in such a condition as to constitute visual blight. For purposes of this chapter, “visual blight” includes the storage of lumber, junk, trash, or debris; abandoned, discarded, or unused appliances, equipment, vehicles, cans, or containers; excavations; or any device, decoration, design, fence, structure, clothesline, or unsightly vegetation. For purposes of this chapter, there must be detriment to the property of others for a condition to constitute “visual blight”;

     V.    Property developed in violation of a development permit issued by the city; under Section 18.08.060 of the Lemon Grove Development Code;

     W.    Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provision of this code. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.020 Authority to declare nuisance.
     A.    All authorized personnel may determine whether a public nuisance exists on any private property and initiate abatement proceedings. Persons eligible to determine nuisances shall include the city manager, city attorney, fire chief, community development director or their designees.

     B      The city council may declare the existence of a public nuisance and initiate abatement proceedings at any time. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.030 Abatement required — Not exclusive procedure.
     All public nuisances must be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair, pursuant to the procedures in this chapter. The procedures in this chapter are not exclusive and do not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.040 Summary Abatement.
     A.    When the council believes that a nuisance constitutes an immediate threat to the public’s health or safety, the nuisance may be summarily abated at the expense of the person creating, causing, committing, or maintaining it, or the owner of the property on which it is maintained.

     B.     Where appropriate, the provisions of the latest edition of the Uniform Housing Code governing summary abatement may be used to abate substandard buildings and recover the costs of the abatement. Violations of this chapter may be considered nuisances under those provisions. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.050 Remedies cumulative.
     Except for the alternative procedures in this chapter, the remedies provided by this code are cumulative and do not preclude any other civil or criminal procedures or remedies. Where violations of this code are declared to be criminal, the city council may also authorize the city attorney or other appropriate official to commence an appropriate legal proceeding. The city attorney may authorize the filing of a criminal proceeding in the manner authorized by the general laws of the State of California. Violators may be cited pursuant to Chapters 1.12 and of this code, in addition to having their premises subjected to abatement procedures. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.060 Violations declared.
     A.    No owner or other person occupying or controlling property may maintain said property as a public nuisance in violation of any provision of this code, the Lemon Grove Development Code, or any other ordinance passed by the city; or violate any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     No person shall refuse to vacate a building or structure in accordance with an order given under this chapter.

     C.     No person shall remove any notice or order posted as required in this chapter.

     D.    A person may not obstruct or interfere with any city representative or with any person who owns or holds any interest in a building which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated, or demolished and removed, or with any person to whom any such building has been lawfully sold, whenever the representative, purchaser, or interested person is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating, or demolishing and removing the building pursuant to this chapter, including performing any necessary act incidental to the work. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.070 Violation defined.
     For purposes of this chapter, every day that each violation exists is a separate offense. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.080 Severability.
     If any portion of this chapter is held invalid facially or as applied, that portion will not affect other provisions or applications of the chapter that can be given effect without the invalid provision or application. To this extent only, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.090 Judicial challenges.
     Any owner or other interested person having any objections or feeling aggrieved at any proceeding taken by the city council in ordering the abatement of any public nuisance or in assessing the costs of abatement must bring an action to contest the decision within thirty days after the date the decision is made. All other objections are deemed to be waived. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.100 Preliminary determination.
     Whenever the city manager or the city manager’s designee determines that any premises within the city is maintained contrary to one or more of the provisions of this code, a notice may be given and a public hearing held by the city council to ascertain whether a public nuisance exists. The abatement of public nuisances is appropriate under the police power of the city. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.110 Notice of abatement.
     A.    The notice of abatement must contain:

     1.     The name and address of the owner of the property;

     2.     A legal description of the property and a description in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the property;

     3.     A statement of the code provisions allegedly violated, including a description of the manner in which the alleged violation occurred and facts sufficient to place the property owner on notice of the circumstances constituting a nuisance;

     4.     The date by which the nuisance must be abated;

     5.     A description of the consequences of failure to abate, including but not limited to a recorded abatement notice against the property, abatement of the nuisance by the City at the owner’s expense, a property assessment, and a tax lien for abatement costs, and, if appropriate, attorney’s fees;

     6.     Either the date, time, and location, which has been set for a hearing by the city council or a statement of a right to appeal to the city council. Notices for the abatement of substandard property nuisances must contain an established hearing date. The determination of whether to set a hearing date or provide an appeal option to the property owner must be otherwise based upon the following factors:

     a.     The extent of intrusion upon private property to effect the abatement;

     b.     The difficulty of the abatement;

     c.     The potential harm from delaying abatement;

     7.     Reference to this chapter.

     B.     The city council shall establish the period for compliance. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.120 Posting and serving notice — Recipients and time.
     A.    The notice of abatement must be served upon the following persons:

     1.     The persons creating, causing, committing, or maintaining the nuisance, if known;

     2.     The owners of the real property on which the nuisance exists. The owners will be determined according to the last equalized assessment roll;

     3.     Any residents or occupants of the property.

     B.     At least ten days before the date of the hearing, a copy of the notice must be sent by certified or registered United States mail, enclosed in a sealed envelope, with postage fully prepaid.

     C.     The notice must also be posted conspicuously in at least one location on the subject property at least ten days prior to the date of the council hearing.

     D.    Proof of posting and service of notice must be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and filed with the city clerk prior to the council hearing.

     E.     The failure of any person to receive notice does not affect the validity of the abatement proceedings. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.130 Hearing by city council.
     A.    At the time stated in the notice, the city council must hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections, and protests. The city council will receive testimony from owners, witnesses, city personnel, and interested persons regarding the alleged public nuisance and the proposed rehabilitation, repair, or demolition of the premises. Any person desiring to be heard may address the council. All witnesses are subject to cross-examination by the persons allegedly responsible for the nuisance. The mayor must ensure that the testimony and cross-examination are germane and do not violate the decorum of the meeting. The mayor has all powers granted by law to order the silencing or removal, if necessary, of all persons violating the requirements of germaneness and decorum.

     B.     The decision of the council must be based on first-hand, personal observations and knowledge of the witnesses, including reports by city staff members or other public officials when the author of the report is available for cross-examination. Except as expressly provided in this section, the council’s hearing is not bound by formal judicial rules of evidence or procedure.

     C.     The hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.140 Decision by council.
     At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council must determine whether the premises constitutes a public nuisance. If the city council finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to rehabilitate, demolish, or repair the property, the city council will adopt a resolution stating its findings and ordering the owner or other person controlling the premises to abate the nuisance in the manner and by the means specifically set forth in its resolution. The resolution must state the times within which the work must be commenced and completed, as well as a detailed list of needed corrections and abatement methods. The abatement period must be reasonable, taking into account the gravity and nature of the problems, the cost and difficulty of solution, and the responsible parties’ awareness of the hearing. The decisions and order of the city council are final. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.150 Alternative Decision.
     As an alternative to the provision of this chapter, the council may, in lieu of a hearing, direct the city attorney to take action in any court of competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.160 Notice of council decision.
     When the council declares a nuisance after a public hearing, a copy of the city council’s resolution and a copy of this chapter must be served upon the same parties and posted on the property in the same manner as required in Section 1.14.100. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

1.14.170          Abatement by property owner.

     A property owner may comply with the city council’s resolution at his or her own expense, provided compliance is completed prior to the expiration of the abatement period. If the owner abates the public nuisance and complies with the resolution in full, then proceedings under this chapter will terminate. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.180 Abatement by city—Authority.
     If a nuisance is not completely abated by the property owner within the designated abatement period, the city manager or the city manager’s designee must cause the abatement to be completed by city forces or private contract. The city manager or the city manager’s designee is expressly authorized to enter the premises on which the nuisance exists for abatement purposes. Prior to entry, the city manager or his or her designee shall obtain an abatement warrant from a court with appropriate jurisdiction. Other city departments must cooperate fully and render reasonable assistance in abating a nuisance. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.190 Abatement by city — Cost.
     A.    If the city or its contractor abates a nuisance, the city manager, or the city manager’s designee, must keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel where the work is done. The city manager must submit an itemized report in writing to the city council, showing the cost of abating, rehabilitating, demolishing, or repairing the premises, including any salvage value.

     B.     A copy of the cost report must be posted for at least five days upon the abated premises, together with a notice of the time when the report will be heard by the city council for confirmation. The report and the notice of the council’s hearing must also be served on the same parties and in the same manner as required in Section 1.14.100, except that notice need be sent only to those persons proposed to be charged for the work.

     C.     The city council must set the mailer for hearing, to determine the correctness and reasonableness of the costs.

     D.    Proof of posting and service must be made by declaration, under penalty of perjury, and filed with the city clerk.

     E.     Because council policy requires full cost recovery, the term “incidental expenses,” as used in this chapter, includes but is not limited to the actual expenses and costs of the city in preparing notices, specifications, and contracts, in inspecting the work, and in printing and mailing the required items.

     F.     The city may elect to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance. In the event city makes such election, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees. In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.200 Cost report—Hearing.
     At the time and place specified in the notice, the city council must hear and rule on the cost report and any objections or protests. The city council may make revisions, corrections, or modifications to the report as it deems just, including deducting any amounts already paid by the property owner. The city council must confirm the report, either as submitted or as revised. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections is final and conclusive. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.210 Costs —Recording.
     The city manager or the city manager’s designee must record with the county recorder all notices and instruments relating to the abatement proceeding and any special assessment. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.220 Assessment of costs — Lien.
     A.    The cost for abating a nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, is a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land to which it relates. Upon recording a notice of lien in the office of the county

recorder, the cost is a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. The assessment will be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and, in case of delinquency, is subject to the same penalties and procedures as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws of the state applicable to the levy, collection, and enforcement of municipal assessments apply. The assessment is also a personal obligation of the property owner.

     B.     If any real property against which the cost of abatement has been assessed is sold, or if a bona fide lien attaches to the property prior to the date on which the first installment of the taxes would be delinquent, then the cost of abatement will not result in a lien against the real property. Instead, the cost of abatement will be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

     C.     After confirmation and recordation, a certified copy of the city council’s decision must be sent to the tax division of the county auditor and controller’s office. It is the duty of the auditor and controller to add the amounts of the assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lots and parcels of land for municipal purposes. Thereafter, the amounts must be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and, in case of delinquency, are subject to the same penalties and procedures as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

 

1.14.230 Administrative fee.
     Any person who is responsible for a public nuisance may be charged an administrative fee to cover the costs incurred by the city in enforcing this chapter. The amount of the fee is set by the city council. The fee will be included in the cost report submitted to the city council under Section 1.14.200 and may be included in any lien assessed under Section 1.14.220. (Ord. 339 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 1.16 JUDICIAL REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATIVE DECISIONS
1.16.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     “Decision” means any adjudicatory administrative decision made after hearing, revoking or denying an application for a permit or license.

     “Party” means a person whose permit or license has been revoked, or whose application for a permit or license has been denied. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

1.16.020 Time limits for judicial review.
     Judicial review of any decision of the city, or of any commission, board, officer, or agent of the city, may be had pursuant to the Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 only if the petition for writ of mandate pursuant to such section is filed within the time limits specified in this chapter and Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.6, which is made applicable. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

1.16.030 Filing of petition.
     Any such petition shall be filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision becomes final. If there is no provision for reconsideration of the decision in any applicable provision of any statute, charter, ordinance, or rule, for the purposes of this chapter, the decision is final on the date it is made. If there is such provision for reconsideration, the decision is final for the purposes of this section upon the expiration of the period during which such reconsideration can be sought; provided, that if reconsideration is sought pursuant to any such provision the decision is final for the purposes of this section on the date that reconsideration is rejected. (Prior code § 11.120)

 

1.16.040 Preparation of records—Costs—Contents.
     A.    The complete record of the proceedings shall be prepared by the city, or its commission, board, officer, or agent which made the decision, and shall be delivered to the party requesting such record within ninety days after he or she has filed a written request therefor. A request for the preparation of the record of the proceedings shall be filed with the person designated in the final decision.

     B.     Within ten days of such request, the party shall be notified of the estimated cost of the preparation of the requested record. The party requesting such record shall, within ten days of such notification, deposit with the person designated in the notification an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost. If, during the preparation of the record, it appears that additional costs will be incurred, the party requesting such record may be notified and, if requested, shall deposit such additional amounts before the record will be completed. If the cost of the preparation of the record exceeds the amount deposited, the party requesting such record shall pay this additional amount. If the amount deposited exceeds the cost, the difference shall be returned to the party requesting the record.

     C.     Such record shall include the transcript of the proceedings, all pleadings, all notices and orders, any proposed decision by a hearing officer, the final decision, all admitted exhibits, all rejected exhibits in the possession of the city, or its commission, board, officer, or agent, all written evidence, and any other papers in the case. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code 11.120(c))

 

1.16.050 Extensions.
     If the party files a request for the record as specified in Section 1.16.040 within ten days after the date the decision becomes final as provided in Section 1.16.030, the time within which a petition pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 may be filed shall be extended to not later than the thirtieth day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the party or his or her attorney of record, if he or she has one. (Prior code § 11.120(d))

 

1.16.060 Notice to party required.
     In making a final decision, as defined in Section 1.16.030, the city shall provide notice to the party that the time within which judicial review must be sought is governed by this chapter and Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. Upon giving notice of any decision subject to this chapter, the person responsible to issue such decision shall include such a statement substantially as follows:

 

The time within which judicial review of this decision must be sought is governed by Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, which has been made applicable in the City of Lemon Grove by Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 1.16. Any petition or other paper seeking judicial review must be filed in the appropriate court not later than the 90th day following the date on which this decision becomes final; however, if, within 10 days after the decision becomes final, a request for the record of the proceedings is filed and the required deposit, in an amount sufficient to cover the estimated cost of preparation of such record is timely deposited, the time within which such petition may be filed in court is extended to not later than the 30th day following the date on which the record is either personally delivered or mailed to the party, or his or her attorney of record, if he or she has one. A written request for the preparation of the record of proceedings shall be filed with

____________________________________________________________________________.

(name and address of designated person)

 

(Ord. 190, 1991)

Chapter 1.20 FEES
1.20.010 Fees.
     Unless otherwise specified, all fees levied pursuant to requirements of this code shall be in the amount adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the city council. Said resolution shall be on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 190, 1991)

Chapter 1.22 CITY SEAL AND LOGOS
1.22.010 City seal and logos—Establishment.
     A.    The city hereby adopts the official seal for embossing official city documents, the design of which is set forth below:



     B.     The city hereby adopts two official logos, the designs of which are set forth below:

 



(Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

 

1.22.020 Custodian of city seal.
     The city clerk or designee shall be the custodian of the official seal for the city, in the manner allowed by Government Code Section 40811, as amended. (Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

 

1.22.030 Custodian of city logos.
     The city manager or designee shall be the custodian of the official logos of the city. (Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

 

1.22.040 Use of the city seal and logos.
     A.    Use of the City Seal. The city clerk or designee, acting as the custodian of the official seal of the city, is authorized to use the city seal on any ordinance, resolution, honoraria, certificate, notarial jurat or acknowledgement, or other instrument necessary to authenticate official city documents or to indicate institutional sanction for official, legal and ceremonial purposes.

     B.     Use of the City Logos. The city manager or designee, acting as the custodian of the official logos of the city, is authorized to determine the appropriate use of the logos and to ensure that the logos are used only on documents, property, and programs that reflect official city business, owner-

ship, or endorsement, and to identify persons duly elected or appointed to a city position or office. In deciding the manner by which the city’s official logos may be utilized, the city manager shall endeavor to protect the city’s brand, reputation and credibility by preventing use of the logos in such a manner as to suggest city endorsement of events, political issues, products and other uses that are prohibited by law. The city council may allow use of the logos in a manner consistent with this chapter and in a non-discriminatory manner. (Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

 

1.22.050 Prohibited uses of city seal and logos.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person or entity to make use of the city seal and/or the city logos or any portion, facsimile, mock-up, or reproduction thereof, or make or use of any design, symbol, emblem, insignia or similar device that is an imitation of said city seal or city logos, or that may be mistaken therefor, that is designed, intended or likely to confuse, deceive or mislead the public, for private or commercial purposes or for any purpose other than the official business of the city without the express written consent of the city clerk or city manager or their designees under the authority granted by the city council.

     B.     No person, firm, association, or corporation shall use the city seal and/or the city logos, or any facsimile thereof for purposes of supporting or opposing the nomination or election to any city or other public office of him or herself or any other person, or for purposes of supporting or opposing any ballot measure, nor include such city logo on any writing distributed for purposes of influencing the action of the electorate, or any part thereof, in any election. This section shall not be applicable to writings issued by the city of Lemon Grove or the city council as a whole pursuant to law. (Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

 

1.22.060 Violation—Penalty.
     Violation of this chapter shall be an infraction or misdemeanor, as determined by the city attorney, and punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Nothing herein prevents the city from using any other available civil and/or criminal remedies allowed by law to protect the city seal and logos from improper or illegal use. (Ord. 416 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS AND FINES
1.24.010 Findings and purpose.
     A.    The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for ordinances, permits and entitlements, reviews, and city

agreements. The city council also finds that an appropriate method for enforcement of various violations is an administrative citation program that will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process for those cited.

     B.     The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to criminal, civil or other legal remedies that may be available to the city of Lemon Grove to enforce violations of the municipal code or applicable state codes.

     C.     The city council finds that administrative penalties, which are authorized by California Constitution Article XI, Section 7 and Government Code Section 53069.4, are an appropriate method of enforcement.

     D.    The city council finds and determines that enforcement of the provisions of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code and conditions on entitlements or permits are municipal affairs as well as matters of purely local concern to the citizens of Lemon Grove.

     E.     The city council finds that the adoption and implementation of this administrative citation program is within the power and authority of the city of Lemon Grove and will achieve the following goals:

     1.     To protect the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lemon Grove;

     2.     To help ensure compliance with the municipal code and state codes, ordinances, permits and entitlements, reviews, and city agreements in a timely and efficient manner;

     3.     To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines that will fully comport with due process;

     4.     To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the municipal code, ordinances, permits and entitlements, reviews, and city agreements in the city of Lemon Grove;

     5.     To reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.020 Definitions.
     “Administrative citation” means a written notice that mandates corrective action and establishes a fine as a penalty for noncompliance.

     “City agreement” means and includes but is not limited to a development agreement, owner participation agreement, disposition and development agreement, road maintenance agreement, easement, license, other real property use agreement, and agreement to implement an ordinance, plan, permit, entitlement, or review approved by the city.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Lemon Grove, or his or her designee.

     “Enforcement officer” means any city employee or agent of the city, as designated by the city manager, with the authority to enforce the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, including, but not limited to a code enforcement officer, lifeguard, parking enforcement officer, inspector, and the fire marshal.

     “Hearing officer” means the person selected by the city manager to conduct an administrative hearing pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     “Municipal code” means the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     “Permit or entitlement” means and includes but is not limited to a conditional use permit, sign permit, variance, specific plan, parcel map, subdivision map, building or grading permit, encroachment or right-of-way permit, business license, storm water permit, and any other permit required by this code.

     “Responsible person” means a person, partnership, corporation, limited liability company, nonprofit corporation, trustee, association or any other legal entity, who the city manager determines is responsible for causing or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of the municipal code or applicable state codes. The term “responsible person” includes but is not limited to the following:

     1.     The owner, tenant, or occupant of real property;

     2.     The holder or the agent of the holder of any permit, entitlement, or review;

     3.     The party or the agent of a party to an agreement covered by this chapter;

     4.     The owner or the authorized agent of any business, company, or entity subject to this chapter; or

     5.     The parent or legal guardian of any such person under the age of eighteen years and who violates any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, review, or agreement described in Section 9.32.040.

     “Review” means and includes but is not limited to a development review, environmental impact report, mitigated negative declaration, negative declaration, and determination of categorical exemption. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.030 Issuance of administrative citation.
     A.    Any person who violates any provision of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code or regulation of the city, any condition of approval of a permit or entitlement, any condition of an environmental review, or any term or condition of any agreement with the city made pursuant to the police power may be issued an administrative citation by an enforcement officer as provided in this chapter. A violation of this code includes, but is not limited to, all violations of the municipal code and the failure to comply with any condition imposed by any entitlement, permit, city agreement or environmental review issued or approved pursuant to this code.

     B.     Each and every day that a violation of the municipal code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. A separate citation may be issued for each day a violation occurs.

     C.     A civil fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the enforcement officer and shall be payable directly to the city of Lemon Grove.

     D.    Fines shall be assessed in the amounts specified by resolution of the city council, or where no amount is specified:

     1.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance or permit within eighteen-month period from the date of the first violation;

     3.     A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for the third violation of the same ordinance or permit within eighteen-month period from the date of the first violation.

     4.     A fine not exceeding one thousand dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance or permit within eighteen-month period from the date of the first violation.

     E.     A second or subsequent violation need only be of the same ordinance, term, or condition to require the larger fine, and need not involve the same personnel or property, provided that the same responsible person is cited. The fine amounts shall be cumulative where multiple citations are issued.

     F.     If the violation pertains to building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, that do not create an immediate danger to health and safety, then the responsible person shall be issued a warning prior to being issued the first violation. The warning will advise the responsible person of the nature of the violation and the date upon which the violation shall be corrected. The responsible person will be given no more than fifteen days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within that time period, an administrative citation with a fine shall be issued. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.040 Service procedures.
     A.    An administrative citation on a form approved by the city manager may be issued to the responsible person by an enforcement officer for violations of the municipal code or applicable state code in the following manner:

     1.     Personal Service. In any case where an administrative citation is issued:

     a.     The enforcement officer shall attempt to locate and personally serve the responsible person and obtain the signature of the responsible person on the administrative citation.

     b.     If the responsible person served refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, the failure or refusal to sign shall not affect the validity of the administrative citation or of subsequent proceedings.

     2.     Service of Citation by Mail. If the enforcement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person by certified mail, postage prepaid with a requested return receipt. Simultaneously, the citation may be sent by first class mail. If the citation is sent by certified mail and returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to first class mail, provided the citation sent by first class mail is not returned.

     3.     Service by Citation by Posting Notice. If the enforcement officer does not succeed in personally serving the responsible person, or by certified mail or regular mail, the enforcement officer shall post the administrative citation on any real property within the city in which the city has knowledge that the responsible person has a legal interest, and such posting shall be deemed effective service.

     B.     The enforcement officer must complete a declaration of service. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.050 Contents of notice.
     A.    Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

     1.     Date, approximate time, and address or definite description of the location where the violation(s) was observed;

     2.     The code sections or conditions violated and a description of the violation(s);

     3.     An order to the responsible person to correct the violations within the time specified, if applicable, and an explanation of the consequences of failure to correct the violation(s);

     4.     The amount of the fine for the violation(s);

     5.     An explanation of how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid;

     6.     A notification that payment of the fine does not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation and does not bar further enforcement action by the city;

     7.     A statement that if the fine is not timely paid, a late payment penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the fine will be added to the fine;

     8.     Identification of rights of appeal, including the time within which the citation may be contested and the place to obtain a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation; and

     9.     The name and signature of the enforcement officer, the name and address of the responsible person, and, if possible the signature of the responsible person. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.060 Satisfaction of administrative citation.
     A.    Upon receipt of a citation, the responsible person must do the following:

     1.     Pay the fine to the city within thirty days from the correction date of the administrative citation. All fines assessed shall be payable to the Lemon Grove city treasurer. Payment of a fine shall not excuse or discharge the failure to correct the violation(s) nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city; or

     2.     Contest the administrative citation and request an administrative hearing within thirty days from the correction date of the administration citation. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.070 Appeal of citation.
     A.    Recipient of an administrative citation may contest that there was a violation of any ordinance, regulation, permit, entitlement, or agreement covered by this chapter, or that he or she is the responsible person by completing a request for hearing form and returning it to the city within thirty days from the correction date of the administration citation.

     B.     The request for hearing form must be accompanied by either an advanced deposit of the fine or a request for hardship waiver. Any administrative citation fine which has been deposited shall be refunded if it is determined, after a hearing, that there was no violation(s) as charged in the administrative citation. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.080 Hardship waiver.
     A.    A person who files a request for an administrative hearing may also request at the same time a hardship waiver of the fine deposit. To seek such a waiver and obtain a separate hearing on the request, the responsible person must check the box indicating this request on the form contained on the reverse side of the citation and attach a statement of the grounds for the request. To be effective, this form requesting the waiver and the administrative hearing must be received by the city manager’s office within fifteen days of the date the citation is issued.

     B.     The waiver request will be decided by the city manager and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the responsible party submits to the city manager a sworn affidavit, together with any supporting documents or materials, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager the person’s actual financial inability to deposit with the city the full amount of the fine in advance of the hearing.

     C.     The city manager shall inform the responsible party in writing of whether the waiver was approved, by serving the party personally or by mail at the addressed provided in the waiver application. The city manager’s determination is final and is not subject to appeal or judicial review.

     D.    If the waiver is denied, the responsible party shall pay the fine amount within ten days. Failure to make the deposit by the time required shall be deemed an abandonment of the contest and renders the fine delinquent. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.090 Hearing officer.
     A.    The city manager shall select a fair and impartial hearing officer from a panel of hearing officers selected by city council for the administrative citation hearing. The hearing officer shall not be a Lemon Grove city employee.

     B.     The employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits of the hearing officer, if any, shall not be directly or indirectly conditioned upon the amount of administrative citation fines upheld by the hearing officer. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.100 Hearing procedure.
     A.    No hearing to contest an administrative citation before a hearing officer shall be held unless and until a request for hearing form has been completed and submitted, and, the fine has been deposited in advance, or a an advance deposit hardship waiver has been issued.

     B.     A hearing before the hearing officer shall be set for a date that is not less than fifteen and not more than sixty days from the date that the request for hearing is filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The responsible party requesting the hearing shall be notified of the time and place set for the hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing.

     C.     At least ten days prior to the hearing, the recipient of an administrative citation shall be provided with copies of the citations, reports and other documents submitted or relied upon by the enforcement officer. If, after copies of documents have been provided to the responsible party, the city determines to submit to the hearing officer additional documents then, whenever possible, a copy of such documents shall be provided to party prior to the hearing. No other discovery is permitted. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply.

     D.    The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to whether the violation(s) occurred and whether the responsible person has caused or maintained the violation(s). Courtroom rules of evidence shall not apply. Relevant hearsay evidence and written reports may be admitted whether or not the speaker or author is present to testify if the hearing officer determines that the evidence is reliable. Admission of evidence and the conduct of the hearing shall be controlled by the hearing officer in accordance with the fundamentals of due process. The hearing officer may limit the total length of the hearing to one hour, and shall allow the responsible party at least as much time to present its case as is allowed the city.

     E.     At the hearing, the responsible party requesting the hearing shall be given the opportunity to present, either themself or through a representative, evidence and testimony concerning the administrative citation. The city’s case shall be presented by an enforcement officer or by any other authorized agent of the city.

     F.     The failure of the responsible party, either personally or through counsel, of an administrative citation to appear at the administrative citation hearing shall constitute a forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies.

     G.    The hearing officer may consolidate administrative citations issued to the same responsible person.

     H.    The hearing officer may continue the hearing and request additional information from the enforcement officer or the recipient of the administrative citation prior to issuing a written decision. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.110 Hearing officer’s decision.
     A.    After considering all of the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer may announce a decision orally, but in any event, shall prepare a written decision. The decision shall be provided to the parties within ten days of the hearing and shall either affirm the issuance of the citation as issued or dismiss the citation. The decision shall briefly state the reasons for the conclusion of the hearing officer. The city may serve the notice of decision for the administrative hearing to the responsible person personally or through certified and first class United States mail. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. If the hearing officer determines that First Amendment rights are involved, the decision shall be issued orally at the conclusion of the hearing and shall be effective immediately. A written decision shall thereafter be issued as provided hereinbelow.

     B.     If the hearing officer affirms the issuance of the administrative citation, then the deposit with the city shall be retained by the city. If a hardship waiver was granted, the decision shall set forth a payment schedule for the fine.

     C.     If the hearing officer determines that the administrative citation should be canceled and the fine was deposited with the city, then the city shall refund the deposit within ten days of the hearing officer’s decision.

     D.    The hearing officer shall not have the power to reduce the fine. The hearing officer may impose conditions and deadlines to correct any violations or require payment of any outstanding penalties. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.120 Administrative costs.
     The hearing officer is authorized to assess any reasonable costs. Administrative costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.130 Failure to pay fines.
     A.    The failure of any person to pay the civil fines imposed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the filing of a claim with the Small Claims Court or the Superior Court for recovery of the fine. The only issue to be adjudicated by the court shall be whether or not the fines were paid. A person cited may only obtain judicial review of the validity of the citation by writ of mandate after exhausting their administrative remedies by requesting and participating in an administrative hearing before a hearing officer. In the court action, the city may also recover its collection costs, including the cost of the hearing officer, and any court fees, according to proof.

     B.     In lieu of or in addition to the filing of a court action, the city may impose a code enforcement lien, in the amount of the fine plus interest and late charges, on the real property upon which the violation occurs. Any lien imposed pursuant to this chapter shall attach upon the recordation of a notice of code enforcement lien in the office of the county recorder.

 

     C.     The city at its discretion may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines, interest and penalties. The use of one recovery method does not preclude the use of any other recovery method. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.140 Reduction of cumulative fines.
     If the violation is corrected within a reasonable time after the decision of the hearing officer, the city manager shall have the discretion to reduce any cumulative fines to a total of not less than one thousand dollars upon good cause shown by the responsible person. The determination of the city manager shall be final and shall not be subject to appeal or judicial review. Fines shall not otherwise be reduced. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.150 Late payment charges.
     Any responsible party who fails to pay a fine imposed by this chapter on or before the date that payment is due, shall also be liable for the payment of a late payment charge of twenty-five percent of the fine. In addition, delinquent fines shall accrue interest at the rate of ten percent per month, excluding penalties, from the due date. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.160 Judicial review.
     Either the city or the appellant aggrieved by a decision of a hearing officer on an administrative citation may obtain review of the administrative decision by filing a petition for review with the San Diego Superior Court in accordance with the timelines and provisions as set forth in California Government Code Section 53069.4. Such procedure shall be available under this chapter, notwithstanding that the term or condition being enforced pursuant to this chapter may not be a matter covered by Section 53069.4(a). Judicial review of a citation shall not be available without first exhausting all available administrative remedies and participating in a hearing as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

 

1.24.170 Procedural compliance.
     Failure to comply with any procedural requirement of this chapter, to receive any notice or decision specified in this chapter, or to receive any copy required to be provided by this chapter shall not affect the validity of proceedings conducted hereunder unless the responsible person is denied constitutional due process thereby. (Ord. 356 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 1.28 CLAIMS PROCEDURE
1.28.010 Authority.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 935 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

 

1.28.020 Claims required.
     All claims against the city for money or damages not otherwise governed by the Tort Claims Act, California Government Code Sections 900 et seq., or another state law (hereinafter in this chapter, “claims”) shall be presented within the time, and in the manner, prescribed by Part 3 of Division 3.6 of Title 1 of the California Government Code (commencing with Section 900 thereof) for the claims to which that part applies by its own terms, as those provisions now exist or shall hereafter be amended, and as further provided by this chapter. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

 

1.28.030 Form of claim.
     All claims shall be made in writing and verified by the claimant or by his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class of persons unless verified by every member of that class as required by this section. In addition, all claims shall contain the information required by California Government Code Section 910. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

 

1.28.040 Claim prerequisite to suit.
     In accordance with California Government Code Sections 935(b) and 945.6, all claims shall be presented as provided in this section and acted upon by the city council prior to the filing of any action on such claims and no such action may be maintained by a person who has not complied with the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

 

1.28.050 Suit.
     Any action brought against the city of Lemon Grove upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 940 through 949 of the California Government Code. Any action brought against any employee of the city of Lemon Grove shall conform with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

 

1.28.060 Limitation on liability.
     It is the intent of the city council of the city that any ordinance establishing performance standards or establishing an obligation to act upon a city officer or employee, shall not be construed as creating a mandatory duty for purposes of tort liability, if the officer or employee fails to perform the act. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, the obligations imposed upon city officers or employees for implementation and enforcement of this code are directory in nature. Nothing in the code shall be construed as limiting or eliminating any defense or immunity from liability for the city or its officers or employees, established by the provisions of Title 1, Division 3.6 of the California Government Code, or by any other provision of law. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, the manner and timing of enforcement and implementation of this code shall be within the discretion of the city manager or other designated city officers or employees. Except when otherwise specifically indicated, this code shall not be construed to hold the city or any officer or employee of the city responsible for any damage to persons or property by reason of a failure to enforce, implement or execute any of the provisions of this code. Nothing in this code shall be construed to hold the city or any officer or employee of the city responsible for any damage resulting to persons or property by reason of any interpretation of this code by any city officer or employee. (Ord. 388 § 1, 2010)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 COMMUNITY ADVISORY COMMISSION
Chapter 2.12 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.14 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
Chapter 2.16 COUNCIL SALARIES
Chapter 2.20 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
Chapter 2.24 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
Chapter 2.30 PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.32 EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION

Chapter 2.04 CITY MANAGER
2.04.010 Office created.
     The office of the city manager of the city is created and established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council wholly on the basis of his or her administrative and executive ability and qualifications and shall hold office for and during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 10 § 1, 1977)

 

2.04.020 Eligibility.
     No member of the city council shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such councilmember has ceased to be a member of the city council. (Ord. 10 § 3, 1977)

 

2.04.030 Bond.
     The city manager and acting city manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond to be approved by the city council in such sum as may be determined by the city council, and shall be conditioned upon the faithful performance of the duties imposed upon the city manager and acting city manager as prescribed in this chapter. Any premium for such bond shall be a proper charge against the city. (Ord. 10 § 4, 1977)

 

2.04.040 Acting city manager.
     The assistant city manager shall serve as manager pro tempore during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event there is no assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the city clerk, may designate a qualified city employee to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during his or her temporary absence or disability. In the event the city manager’s absence or disability extends over a two-month period, the city council may, after the two-month period, appoint an acting city manager. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

2.04.050 Compensation.
     A.    The city manager shall receive such compensation as the city council shall from time to time determine.

     B.     In addition, the city manager shall be reimbursed for all actual and necessary expenses incurred by him or her in the performance of his or her official duties.

     C.     On termination of employment of the city manager by reason of involuntary removal from service, other than for wilful misconduct in office, the city manager shall receive cash severance pay in a lump sum in an amount to be determined by the city council, if any. (Ord. 10 § 6, 1977)

 

2.04.060 Powers and duties.
     The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He or she shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city, which are under his or her control. In addition to his or her general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his or her duty and he or she shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections:

     A.    Law Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.

     B.     Authority Over Employees. It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he or she shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his or her jurisdiction through their department heads.

     C.     Power of Appointment and Removal. It shall be the duty of the city manager to, and he or she shall appoint, remove, promote and demote any and all officers and employees of the city, subject to all applicable personnel ordinances, rules and regulations except for the city attorney or who shall serve at the pleasure of the city council.

     D.    Administrative Reorganization of Offices. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his or her direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.

     E.     Ordinances. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he or she deems necessary.

     F.     Attendance at Council Meetings. It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his or her request he or she is excused therefrom by the mayor individually or the city council.

     G.    Financial Reports. It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. The city manager shall retain the services of a finance director or person who has responsibility over city finances who shall also serve as the city’s treasurer.

     H.    Budget. It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.

     I.      Expenditure Control and Purchasing. It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no expenditures shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or authorized representative. The city manager, or authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or divisions of the city.

     J.      Investigations and Complaints. It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city.

     K.    Public Buildings. It shall be the duty of the city manager and he or she shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property, which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

     L.     Contractors. It shall be the duty of the city manager, or designee, to exercise management and control over contractors providing city services.

     M.    Additional Duties. It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other official action of the city council. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2016; Ord. 10 § 7, 1977)

 

2.04.070 Internal relations and coordination of intergovernmental services.
     A.    Council-Manager Relations. The city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city only through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders or instructions to any subordinates of the city manager. The city manager shall take his or her orders and instructions from the city council only when sitting in a duly convened council meeting. No council member shall give any orders or instructions to the city manager.

     B.     Departmental Cooperation. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers and the city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously.

     C.     Subject to the direction and control of the city council, the city manager, or designee, shall manage all intergovernmental contracts, grant agreements and joint powers agreements on behalf of the city of Lemon Grove, or its subsidiary agencies, with other governmental agencies. The city manager, or designee, shall manage contracts with agencies including, but not limited to, the state of California, county of San Diego, Heartland Communications Authority, Heartland Fire and Rescue, San Diego County sheriff’s department, San Diego Metropolitan Wastewater Authority, and the San Diego Association of Governments. For the purposes of providing public safety services to the citizens of Lemon Grove, the city manager shall supervise the appointed fire chief of Heartland Fire and Rescue as to all matters involving the city of Lemon Grove. The city manager shall work with the commanding officer of the Lemon Grove substation of the county of San Diego sheriff’s department in the implementation of the contract providing police services to the city of Lemon Grove. All references to “police” services in this municipal code shall mean the services provided by the San Diego sheriff’s department to the city of Lemon Grove. The city manager, or designee, shall also provide support and assistance to council-appointed members of joint powers authorities and intergovernmental agencies in the performance of their duties.

     D.    Attendance at Commission Meetings. The city manager may attend any and all meetings of any commission, board, task force, focus group or committee (collectively “advisory body”) created by the city council, upon the manager’s own volition or upon direction of the city council. At such meetings, which the city manager attends, he or she shall be heard by the advisory body as to all matters upon which the city manager wishes to address the members thereof, and shall inform said members as to the status of any matter being considered by the city council. The city manager shall cooperate fully with the members of all advisory bodies created by the city council. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2016; Ord. 433 § 1, 2015; Ord. 10 § 8, 1977)

2.04.080 Limitation on removal.
     A.    Notwithstanding the provisions set forth in Section 2.04.060, the city manager shall not be removed from office, other than for misconduct in office, during or within a period of ninety days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city, at which election a member of the city council is elected or when a new city councilmember is appointed. The purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected or appointed member of the city council or a reorganized city council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the powers and duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety-day period mentioned in this section, the provisions of Section 2.04.060 as to the removal of the city manager shall apply and be effective. (Ord. 10 § 9, 1977)

 

2.04.090 Agreements on employment.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the power or authority of the city council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10 § 10, 1977)

Chapter 2.08 COMMUNITY ADVISORY COMMISSION
2.08.010 Creation.
     The community advisory commission (“commission”) is created to advise the city council on issues of community importance, under the terms and conditions established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 1, 1980; Ord. 23 § 1, 1978)

 

2.08.020 Membership.
     The community advisory commission shall consist of three permanent members who shall be residents of the city. By resolution, the city council shall appoint additional members that serve for a limited duration (temporary) to assist the permanent members in the study of issues assigned to the community advisory commission by the city council. Limited duration members shall be residents, business owners and/or property owners within the city. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

2.08.030 Votes.
     Each member of the commission, temporary and permanent, shall have one vote. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 3, 1980; Ord. 23 § 3, 1978)

 

2.08.040 Terms.
     Permanent members of the commission shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve for a period of three years, or until reappointment or appointment of a successor. Temporary members of the commission shall be appointed for a limited duration by resolution of the city council that establishes the task to be studied by the commission or by subsequent resolution. The temporary commission members shall serve for the length of time designated in the resolution of the city council establishing the matter to be studied or as amended by subsequent resolution of the city council. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 294, 1999; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

2.08.050 Vacancies.
     Vacancies in the permanent members of the commission occurring other than by expiration of the term shall be filled by appointment by the council upon recommendation by the mayor. Vacancies of temporary members may be filled by subsequent resolution of the city council. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 7, 1980; Ord. 23 § 7, 1978)

 

2.08.060 Resignation upon unexcused absence.
     Absence from three consecutive regular meetings of the commission shall be deemed to constitute a resignation of such member unless excused by the city council. Unless an absence is excused, the position shall be vacant. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 8, 1980; Ord. 23 § 8, 1978)

 

2.08.070 Quorum.
     A majority of voting members shall constitute a quorum at any meeting. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 9, 1980; Ord. 23 § 9, 1978)

 

2.08.080 Compensation.
     Members may be compensated at a rate established by the city council. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

2.08.090 Powers and duties.
     The commission shall have all of the powers and duties established by state law, ordinances and resolutions, which the council may enact. The city council, acting as the planning body under state law, may delegate to the commission advisory functions on a case-by-case basis by resolution. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 11, 1980; Ord. 23 § 10, 1978)

 

2.08.100 Rules and regulations.
     In absence of rules and regulations adopted by the city council by resolution, the commission may prepare and adopt rules and regulations for the internal government of its business and designate the time and place for holding meetings. (Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 12, 1980; Ord. 23 § 11, 1978)

 

2.08.110 Plans.
     It is the duty of the commission to advise the city council upon the amendment or revision of the general plan when requested by the city council.

(Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 52 § 13, 1980; Ord. 23 § 12, 1978)

Chapter 2.12 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Article I. Emergency Services
2.12.010 Purposes.
     The declared purposes of this article are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within the city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of the city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations, and affected private persons. (Ord. 33 § 1, 1978)

 

2.12.020 Definitions.
     As used in this article, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot, or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and facilities of the city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 33 § 2, 1978)

 

2.12.030 Disaster council—Membership.
     The city disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

     A.    The mayor, who shall be chair;

     B.     The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chair;

     C.     The assistant director of emergency services;

     D.    Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of the city, adopted pursuant to this article;

 

     E.     Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsiblity, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 33 § 3, 1978)

 

2.12.040 Disaster council—Powers and duties.
     It shall be the duty of the city disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or, in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. (Ord. 33 § 4, 1978)

 

2.12.050 Director and assistant director—Offices created.
     A.    There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services.

     B.     There is created the office of assistant director of emergency services who shall be appointed by the director. (Ord. 33 § 5, 1978)

 

2.12.060 Director and assistant director—Powers and duties.
     A.    The director is hereby empowered to:

     1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. (Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect.);

     2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a state of emergency when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this article;

     4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of the city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

     5.     Represent the city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this article;

     6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection, the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a state of war emergency, the director is empowered:

     a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as effected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council;

     b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use;

     c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a state of emergency in the county in which this city is located, or the existence of a state of war emergency, to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; (such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers.);

     d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of a city department or agency; and

     e.     To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this article or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council and all powers conferred upon him or her by any

statute, by an agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

     B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council.

     C.     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of the city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 33 § 6, 1978)

 

2.12.070 Emergency organizations.
     All officers and employees of the city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.16.060 (A) (6) (c) of this article, charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in the city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 33 § 7, 1978)

 

2.12.080 Emergency plan.
     The city disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of the city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 33 § 8, 1978)

 

2.12.090 Expenditures.
     Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 33 § 9, 1978)

 

2.12.100 Violation—Penalty.
     It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency to:

     A.    Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rules or regulation issued pursuant to this article, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this article.

     B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give, assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of the city, or to prevent, hinder, or delay the defense or protection thereof.

     C.     Wear, carry, or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 33 § 10, 1978)

 

Article II. Curfew
2.12.110 Disaster emergency powers of sheriff.
     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, or the proclamation of a state of emergency by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or in the event no such proclamation has been made and there exists within any part of the city conditions of extreme peril as defined in Section 2.12.020 to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions except as a result of war caused disaster, the sheriff may impose a curfew, as set forth in Section 2.12.150, for not more than forty-eight hours, said curfew to be limited to that area within the city wherein said conditions are found by the sheriff to exist. Said curfew may be extended only by a resolution of the city council, in which event said curfew shall be imposed for a length of time not to exceed the existence of the condition of extreme peril as set forth and defined in Section 2.12.020. (Prior code § 31.301)

 

2.12.120 Curfew.
     In the event a curfew is imposed or extended as set forth in Section 2.12.140, it is unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in or upon the public streets, highways, avenues, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places within the city upon which the curfew has been imposed, between such hours as designated by the sheriff as curfew hours during the duration of such curfew, unless authorized by the sheriff. (Prior code § 31.302)

Chapter 2.14 CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS
2.14.010 Applicability.
     This chapter establishes city council procedures. It applies to all regular and special meetings of the city council. In addition, Sections 2.14.020, 2.14.030, 2.14.050, and 2.14.070 through 2.14.160 apply to all meetings and public hearings before all city boards and commissions.

     The meanings of the terms “mayor,” “city council,” “councilmember,” and “city clerk,” include the corresponding positions of other boards and commissions when this chapter applies to them. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.020 Meeting defined.
     A.    For purposes of this chapter, “meeting” means the gathering together of three or more members of the city council, or a majority of the total members of a board or commission, at the time and place established by ordinance, resolution, or motion for regular or adjourned meetings, or at such other time and place authorized by law for special meetings, so that the members may act in their official capacities to make decisions, commitments, or promises. The term also includes all meanings given to it by legislative or final appellate court definitions.

     B.     All meetings must be open and public, with the exception that the city council may hold closed sessions from which the public may be excluded when specifically authorized by the laws of the State of California.

     C.     “Quorum” means three or more members of the city council or a majority of the total members of a board or commission. If a quorum is present, regular business may be transacted.

     D.    Councilmembers are expected to attend all city council meetings. If, without permission, a councilmember fails to attend all regular city council meetings for sixty consecutive days after the last regular meeting the councilmember attended, that office becomes vacant and will be filled as any other vacancy.

     E.     If less than a quorum is gathered at the time and place and for the purpose of conducting a meeting, the councilmembers who are present must adjourn under Section 2.14.050.

     F.     A Councilmember who is present at a meeting but abstains from one or more votes will be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum.

     G.    A Councilmember who is disqualified from voting by law will not be counted for purposes of constituting a quorum. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.030 Effect of nonobservance of chapter.
     The failure to observe the procedures in this chapter does not invalidate any action that is otherwise lawful and is defective only for failure to follow the procedure. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.040 Time and place of meetings.
     A.    Unless otherwise specified by resolution, the city council must hold regular meetings on the first and third Tuesday of each month at an hour to be set by resolution. Regular meetings will be held in the council chambers at the Lemon Grove Community Center, 3146 School Lane, Lemon Grove, California or at another place within the city limits to which the meeting may be adjourned.

     B.     When the day for any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, no meeting will be held that day.

     C.     The mayor or any two members of the city council may call a special meeting at any time by delivering written notice to each councilmember and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio, and television station that requests notice. The delivery must be made at least twenty-four hours before the meeting time specified in the notice. The notice must be posted at least twenty-four hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public.

     1.     The notice must specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted.

     2.     No business other than the business specified in the notice may be considered at the special meeting.

     3.     Written notice to any councilmember may be dispensed with if, at or prior to the time the meeting convenes, the councilmember files with the city clerk a written waiver of notice.

4.  Proper notice is deemed received by any councilmember who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.050 Adjournment.
     A.    A meeting may be terminated or continued to another time, place, or date by adjournment, regardless of whether or not all matters on the agenda or under discussion have been acted on or concluded. No meeting may be terminated before all public hearings for that meeting are closed or continued to another time, place, and date. A motion to adjourn is always in order and must be decided without debate.

     B.     No meeting may be adjourned to a date beyond the next regular meeting. When a meeting is continued to a future date, if either the time or place is not stated in the order of adjournment, it is deemed to be at the time or place specified for regular meetings of the council.

     C.     If less than a quorum appears at a regular meeting, the present councilmembers must adjourn the meeting to a stated day and time. If no councilmembers are present, the city clerk must adjourn the meeting to a stated day and time. The city clerk must deliver written notice of an adjournment personally, or by any other means, to each councilmember at least three hours before the adjourned meeting is held and must post the notice within twenty-four hours after the adjournment.

     D.    Once adjourned, a meeting may not be reconvened. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.060 Agenda—Order of business.
     A.    All agenda items must be filed with the city clerk by noon on the Tuesday preceding the regular meeting. All reports, communications, ordinances, contract documents, and other matters to be submitted to the city council must be delivered to the city clerk by five o’clock p.m. on the Tuesday preceding the regular meeting. Whenever feasible, each item on the agenda must contain a staff recommendation and the specific action requested of the city council. The agenda must be made available to the public when it is made available to the city council.

     B.     No matters other than those listed on the agenda may be finally acted upon by the city council. However, matters not on the agenda may be submitted for city council consideration and action pursuant to state law or under any of the following conditions:

     1.     Upon a determination by a majority vote of the city council that an emergency situation exists, as defined in Government Code Section 54956.5;

     2.     Upon a determination by a two-thirds vote of the city council, or if less than two-thirds of the councilmembers are present, a unanimous vote of those councilmembers present, that there is an immediate need to take action and that the need to take action came to the city’s attention after the agenda was posted; or

     3.     The item was posted for a prior meeting of the city council, which occurred not more than five calendar days before, and at that prior meeting, the item was continued to the meeting at which action is being taken.

     C.     The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in the following order:

     1.     Call to order;

     2.     Pledge of Allegiance;

     3.     Presentations;

     4.     Changes to the agenda;

     5.     Public comment;

     6.     Consent calendar;

     7.     Council remarks and announcements (Non-action items);

     8.     New and continued public hearings and ordinance readings;

     9.     Continued public comment;

     10.   City manager/department director reports (non-action items);

     11.   Closed session;

     12.   Adjournment.

     The regular order of business may be changed or suspended for any purpose at any particular meeting by the Mayor with the consent of the majority of the

councilmembers present. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.070 Minutes.
     A.    The minutes are a clear and concise statement of each and every city council action, including the motions made and the votes on them. The reasons for a motion, voting, council debate, and audience comments and reactions are generally irrelevant for purposes of the minutes. The city clerk determines the scope and format for the minutes of all meetings, including those of boards and commissions, and has exclusive responsibility for preparing the minutes. Changes in the minutes may be made only by action of the city council.

     B.     Minutes may be approved without a reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each councilmember with a copy.

     C.     Records of each closed session of the city council must be kept as required by state law. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.080 Presiding officer.
     A.    The mayor is the presiding officer at all city council meetings. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem is the presiding officer. In the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tem, the city clerk will call the council to order, and the councilmembers who are present will elect a temporary presiding officer, who will serve until the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore or until adjournment.

     B.     The mayor or the mayor’s designee must sign all ordinances, resolutions, and other documents requiring a signature. The mayor must preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. The mayor must state, or call upon the clerk to state, every question before the city council, call for the vote, and announce the decision of the city council on all subjects. The mayor decides all questions of order; however, if any councilmember appeals a decision, a majority vote of the city council will govern and conclusively determine that question of order.

     C.     The mayor has the power, authority, and discretion to do the following without a vote of the city council:

     1.     Set time limits on city council discussions of any matter;

     2.     Set time limits on communications from members of the public to the city council. No member of the public may address the city council for more than three minutes on any agenda item without the consent of the mayor;

     3.     Declare the opening of public hearings;

     4.     Rule that any motion on a subject not on the agenda is out of order, in which case the motion becomes void;

     5.     Table any motion on any matter until the next regular or special city council meeting, whenever the city attorney advises that there is a question as to the validity or constitutionality of a proposed course of action;

     6.     Require that any witness testifying to facts at any public hearing be sworn before proceeding further with testimony;

     7.     Rule any speaker out of order, terminate any person’s communication with the city council, or declare a recess in order to establish order at any meeting;

     8.     Move, second, and debate, subject only to the limitations of debate that are imposed on all councilmembers.

     D.    The mayor may not be deprived of any of the rights and privileges of a councilmember by reason of being mayor or acting as the presiding officer.

     E.     The mayor has and may exercise all other powers and duties as are authorized by law. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.090 Hearings.
     A.    The term “hearing” includes all public hearings required by state or local law, employee disciplinary proceedings, and proceedings for the revo-cation, suspension, or reinstatement of permits, licenses, and franchises.

     B.     Public hearings are conducted in the following order:

     1.     Hearing opened by the mayor;

     2.     Staff reports presented;

     3.     Public comments received;

     4.     Hearing closed by majority vote;

     5.     Deliberation by the city council; and

     6.     Action taken by majority vote.

     C.     At the time and place designated in the notice, the city council must afford any interested person or that person’s authorized representative, or both, the opportunity to present witnesses, documentary evidence, statements, arguments, or contentions, orally or in writing, subject to the rules in this chapter.

     D.    All statements, documents, exhibits, communications, petitions, maps, and other items submitted at the hearing may be considered by the city council as evidence and, in that event, retained as part of the record. Whenever practical, a written staff report must be prepared and presented as part of the staff presentation. Evidence may not be taken outside the council chambers and may not be considered by the city council, except when, during the hearing, the meeting is adjourned to a particular place and time for the purpose of taking visual or demonstrative evidence.

     E.     If a councilmember is absent for a hearing that is continued to a subsequent meeting, that councilmember may participate in the matter at the subsequent meeting, if otherwise qualified, upon stating for the record that the councilmember has listened to the tape recording of the prior portions of the hearing and is prepared to participate.

     F.     Any hearing may, by minute action, be continued to any subsequent regular or adjourned meeting of the city council in compliance with the laws of the State of California. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.100 Voting.
     A.    When a motion is made, a vote on the motion must be taken by voice, roll call, or voting device and entered in full upon the record.

     B.     A councilmember’s vote may be changed only upon a timely request to do so immediately following the announcement of the vote by the city clerk and before the next item in the order of business is taken up.

     C.     Ordinances, resolutions, and other matters submitted to the city council must be adopted by a majority vote, unless a greater number of votes is required by law. When a majority vote cannot be obtained and one or more councilmembers is absent, that matter will automatically be added to a future agenda so that it can be considered at least once by the city council with all councilmembers present.

     D.    The term “majority vote” means three votes. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.110 Speaking rights of members.
     A.    Every councilmember desiring to speak must address the mayor and, upon recognition by the mayor, must confine comments to the question under debate and avoid personal and indecorous language.

     B.     A councilmember, once recognized, may not be interrupted when speaking, except for a call to order. If called to order while speaking, a councilmember must cease speaking until the question of order is determined. If the councilmember is determined to be in order, the councilmember may proceed.

     C.     The councilmember moving the adoption of an ordinance, resolution, or council action has the privilege of closing the debate. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.120 Motions.
     A.    No motion may be debated or voted upon unless it has received a second. Only one motion may be considered by the city council at any time.

     B.     A motion to reconsider an action by the city council may only be made at the meeting at which that action was taken. Such a motion must be made by a councilmember on the prevailing side. The motion may be made whenever no other motion is pending. The motion takes precedence over all other motions and is subject to debate. If the action to be reconsidered was a public hearing item, it must be re-noticed as originally required and considered at a future meeting, unless a finding is made by a majority vote that all of the interested members of the public who were present are still present in the council chambers.

     C.     Any councilmember may make or remake a motion at a city council meeting, except when the subject matter of the motion has been tabled.

     D.    A motion to table takes precedence over all other motions and is subject to debate. When a motion to table is passed, the matter may not be considered by the city council again unless the matter is removed from the table by a majority vote.

     E.     Once tabled, a mailer may not be placed on the agenda or discussed unless a councilmember who voted to table the matter requests that the matter be removed from the table or requests the city clerk to place the matter on the agenda for the purpose of determining whether or not the matter should be removed from the table. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.130 Reasons for dissent.
     Any councilmember may have the reasons for that councilmember’s dissent from or protest against any action of the city council entered in the record and the minutes. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.140 Rules of order.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, proceedings of the city council are governed by common sense and good taste. If a dispute concerning procedural mailers is not specifically covered in this chapter, the majority vote prevails.

     B.     Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of the city council’s business in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only, and the failure to strictly observe those rules does not affect the jurisdiction of the city council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with the law. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.150 Addressing the council.
     A.    Any person desiring to address the city council must first obtain permission from the mayor. Unless the mayor rules otherwise, any person may address the city council upon obtaining permission from the mayor, subject to the following:

     1.     Public Hearings. Interested persons and their authorized representatives may address the city council orally or in writing regarding matters which are then subject to a public hearing under Section 2.12.090.

     2.     Non-Hearing Matters. Interested parties and their authorized representatives may address the city council orally or in writing regarding matters with which they are concerned and which are then the subject of city council discussion. When copies of written communications are furnished to each councilmember present, the communications will not be read aloud at the meeting unless so ordered by a majority vote. Written communications from the administrative staff will not be read aloud unless requested by a councilmember.

     3.     Public Comment. A person may address the city council during public comment regarding any matter with which the person is concerned. Except for brief comments, the city council may not discuss any matter not on the agenda or take any action except to refer that matter to a future agenda.

     4.     Written Notice. All speakers must give written notice to the city clerk, in a form approved by the city council. The speaker’s name will be entered in the meeting minutes.

     5.     Addressing the council. Each person addressing the city council must speak into the microphone at the speaker’s podium, state his or her name in an audible tone for the record, and, unless further time is granted by the mayor, limit the address to three minutes. All remarks must be addressed to the city council as a body and not to any individual councilmember. No person other than the city council and the person having the floor may enter into any discussion, either directly or through a councilmember, without the permission of the mayor.

     6.     Limitation to Agenda Item. Except during public comment, the mayor may not permit any communication, written or oral, to be made or submitted unless the communication addresses the agenda item then under discussion.

     7.     Consent Required. No person may address or question a councilmember, the staff, or any other person without the prior consent of the mayor.

     8.     Anonymous Communications. Anonymous communications may not be considered or placed on the agenda.

     9.     Group Communications. When an identifiable group of persons, as opposed to the public at large, wishes to address the city council on the same agenda item, the mayor may request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the city council. If additional issues are to be presented at the hearing by any other member of the group, the mayor may limit the number of persons and the speaking time, so as to avoid the unnecessary repetition of issues.

     10.   Time Limits. The mayor may limit a person’s speaking time to a reasonable period so that the business of the city council is performed expeditiously and unnecessary repetition is avoided.

     11.   Additional Opportunity to Address the Council. Subject to the needs of the city council to expeditiously perform its business and to avoid repetitive testimony, a person may be permitted by the mayor to address the city council more than once on any particular item. No person may address the city council more than once on an item until all persons present and wishing to address the city council have been provided the opportunity to do so. The mayor may limit a person’s additional speaking time and may not permit repetitive testimony from any person. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.160 Rules of decorum—Enforcement.
     A.    While the city council is in session, all persons must preserve the order and decorum of the session. A councilmember may not delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the city council, disturb any councilmember while speaking, or refuse to obey the orders of the city council or the mayor, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

     B.     Any person who disrupts or impedes the orderly conduct of a city council meeting by making personal, impertinent, or slanderous remarks, by becoming boisterous while addressing the city council, or by engaging in any other disorderly conduct will be immediately barred from further audience before that session of the city council by the mayor, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote.

     C.     Any person who disrupts or impedes the orderly conduct of a city council meeting by acting in a disorderly, contemptuous, or insolent manner

toward, or by becoming boisterous while addressing the city council, a councilmember, or a staff member is subject to the criminal penalties of this code. Any person who fails, on demand of the mayor, to comply with any lawful order is subject to the criminal penalties of this code.

     D.    The city manager may designate one or more appropriate persons to act as sergeants at arms to carry out all orders and instructions given by the mayor for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the city council meeting. Upon instruction from the mayor, it is the duty of the sergeant at arms to place any person who violates the order and decorum of the meeting under arrest and cause that person to be prosecuted under this code. The complaint must be signed by the mayor or another appropriate person who is present. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

 

2.14.170 Attendance may be compelled by subpoena.
     If less than a quorum is present at a meeting, the attendance of absent councilmembers may be compelled by a subpoena that is signed by the councilmember presiding over the councilmembers constituting less than a quorum. A subpoena may be issued only upon a majority vote of the councilmembers convening for the purpose of issuing the subpoena. A councilmember must obey a subpoena and participate in good faith in the meeting to which the councilmember is subpoenaed, so that the essential business of the city council may be conducted. A councilmember who fails to obey a subpoena or to participate in the meeting is subject to the criminal penalties of this code. (Ord. 335 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 2.16 COUNCIL SALARIES
2.16.010 Established.
     A.    Salaries for members of the city council are established pursuant to the provisions of the Government Code in the sum of eight hundred three dollars per month.

     B.     Effective Date. Payment of compensation at said established level shall commence upon certification of the results of the Lemon Grove municipal election in the year 2016. (Ord. 429 § 1, 2015; Ord. 365, 2007; Ord. 290, 1999; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

2.16.020 Expenses.
     Members of the city council shall be reimbursed for their reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the discharge of their duties as members of the city council. (Ord. 7, 1977)

 

2.16.030 Additional compensation for elected mayor.
     A.    The mayor, elected pursuant to Government Code Sections 34900 to 34904, shall be paid, in addition to the compensation paid as a member of the city council, seventy-five percent of said council compensation.

     B.     Effective Date. Payment of additional compensation shall commence upon certification of the results of the election in the year 2000. (Ord. 291, 1999)

Chapter 2.20 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
2.20.010 Position established.
     Pursuant to Resolution No. 851 of the city, there is established the position of code enforcement officer. (Ord. 126, 1986)

 

2.20.020 Powers and duties.
     The code enforcement officer is charged with the responsibility of enforcing provisions and regulations of the city zoning code, and other city regulatory ordinances. (Ord. 126, 1986)

 

2.20.030 Authority.
     The code enforcement officer is authorized to issue citations, written notices to appear in court, as necessary to ensure compliance with the city zoning code and other regulatory ordinances of the city. (Ord. 126, 1986)

Chapter 2.24 COMMUNITY REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY
2.24.010 Determination.
     The city council determines and declares that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function within the city pursuant to the community redevelopment law. (Ord. 102 § 1, 1983)

 

2.24.020 Established—Powers and duties.
     The city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city and finds that such notion will serve the public interest and promote the public safety and welfare in an effective manner. All of the rights, powers, duties, privileges, and immunities vested in such an agency by the community redevelopment law are vested in the city council. (Ord. 102 § 2, 1983)

 

2.24.030 Designation.
     The redevelopment agency of the city shall be known as the “community development agency of the city of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 102 § 3, 1983)

Chapter 2.30 PERSONNEL
2.30.010 Adoption of personnel system.
     In order to establish an equitable and uniform system for dealing with personnel matters, the following personnel system is adopted as set out in this chapter. (Ord. 283, 1998)

 

2.30.020 Definitions.
     The terms in this chapter, and personnel rules adopted under this chapter, shall be defined in the personnel rules, and are the same as adopted from time to time. (Ord. 283, 1998)

 

2.30.030 Personnel officer.
     A.    The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of his or her powers and duties as personnel officer to any other officer or employee of the city. Specific du-

ties of the personnel officer may be performed by others under contract to the city.

     B.     The personnel officer or delegate shall:

     1.     Administer all provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

     2.     Prepare, or cause to be prepared in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, personnel rules and any revisions to the rules which shall establish regulations for personnel in the city’s employ. Such rules and revisions thereof shall become effective upon approval of the city council;

     3.     Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a position classification plan, including class specifications. The personnel officer is empowered to revise and amend the class specifications without council approval;

     4.     Provide for the publication, posting, or other dissemination of notices of vacant positions; the conducting and grading of competitive examinations; the establishment of eligibility lists, and the certification of such lists for consideration and possible appointment to vacant positions. (Ord. 283, 1998)

 

2.30.040 Adoption and amendment of personnel rules.
     Personnel rules shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish regulations governing the personnel system, including:

     A.    Preparation, installation, revision, and maintenance of a position classification plan covering all positions, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

     B.     Appropriate announcement of the selection and acceptance of applications for employment;

     C.     Preparation and conduct of tests and the establishment and use of resulting employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment;

     D.    Certification and appointment of persons from employment lists, and the making of provisional appointments;

     E.     Establishment of probationary testing periods;

     F.     Evaluation of employees during the probationary testing period and thereafter;

     G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the competitive service;

     H.    Separation of employees from the city service;

     I.      The establishment and maintenance of adequate personnel for purposes of accounting and legal requirements;

     J.      The establishment of any necessary appeal procedures. (Ord. 283, 1998)

 

2.30.050 Deletion of positions.
     The city council may abolish any position in the city’s employ and the employee holding such position may be laid off, demoted or transferred without right of appeal. (Ord. 283, 1998)

Chapter 2.32 EMPLOYEE RELATIONS
2.32.010 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Employer-Employee Relations Ordinance” of the city. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.020 Statement of purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to implement Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code of the state (Section 3500, et seq.), captioned “Public Employee Organizations,” by providing orderly procedures for the administration of employer-employee relations between the city and its employee organizations and for resolving disputes regarding wages, hours, and other terms and conditions of employment. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:

     “Appropriate unit” means a unit established pursuant to Section 2.32.100.

     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove, California, a municipal corporation, and where appropriate herein, “city” refers to the city council, the governing body of the city, or any duly authorized management employee as herein defined.

     “Consult or consultation in good faith” means to communicate orally or in writing for the purpose of presenting and obtaining views or advising of intended actions.

     “Day” means calendar day.

     “Employee” means any person regularly employed by the city excluding persons elected by popular vote.

     “Employee, confidential” means an employee who is privy to decisions of city management affecting employer-employee relations.

     “Employee, management” means any employee having significant responsibility for formulating and administering city policies and programs, including, but not limited to, the following positions:

     1.     City manager;

     2.     Development services director;

     3.     Public works director;

     4.     Finance director;

     5.     City clerk; and

     6.     City attorney.

     “Employer-employee relations” means the relationship between the city and its employees and their employee organization, or when used in a general sense, the relationship between city management and employees or employee organizations.

     “Employee organization” means any organization which includes employees of the city and which has as one of its primary purposes representing such employees in their employment relations with the city.

     “Employee, professional” means employees engaged in work requiring specialized knowledge and skills attained through completion of a recognized course of instruction, including but not limited to attorneys, physicians, registered nurses engineers, architects, teachers and various types of physical, chemical and biological scientists.

     “Firefighter” means a uniformed employee of the fire department.

     “Impasse” means:

     1.     A deadlock in the annual or periodic discussions between a majority representative and the city over any matters concerning which they are required to meet and confer in good faith, or over the scope of such subject matter; or

     2.     Any unresolved complaint by an affected employee organization, advanced in good faith, concerning a decision of the municipal employee relations officer made pursuant to Section 2.32.090, 2.32.100 or 2.32.110.

     “Majority representative” means an employee organization, or its duly authorized representative, that has been granted formal recognition by the municipal employee relations officer as representing the majority of employees in an appropriate unit.

     “Mediation or conciliation” means the efforts of an impartial third person, or persons, functioning as intermediaries, to assist the parties in reaching a voluntary resolution to an impasse, through interpretation, suggestion and advice. Mediation and conciliation are interchangeable terms.

     “Meet and confer in good faith” (sometimes referred to in this chapter as “meet and confer” or “meeting and conferring”) means performance by duly authorized city representatives and duly authorized representatives of an employee organization recognized as the majority representative of their mutual obligation to meet at reasonable times and to confer in good faith regarding matters within the scope of representation, including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment, in an effort to:

     1.     Reach agreement on those matters within the authority of such representatives;

     2.     Reach agreement on what will be recommended to the city council on those matters within the decision-making authority of the city council.

     This does not require either party to agree to a proposal or to make a concession.

     “Municipal employee relations officer” means the city’s principal representative in all matters of employer-employee relations designated pursuant to Section 2.32.120, or duly authorized representative.

     “Peace officer,” as this term is defined in Section 830 of the California Penal Code.

     “Recognized employee organization” means an employee organization which has been acknowledged in writing by the municipal employee relations officer as an employee organization that represents employees of the city. The rights accompanying recognition are either:

     1.     “Formal recognition,” which is the right to meet and confer in good faith as the majority representative in an appropriate unit; or

     2.     “Informal recognition,” which is the right to consultation in good faith by all recognized employee organizations.

     “Scope of representation” means all matters relating to employment conditions and employer-employee relations, including, but not limited to wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. City rights (Section 2.32.050) are excluded from the scope of representation. (Ord. 442 § 1, 2016; Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.040 Employee rights.
     Employees of the city shall have the right to form, join and participate in the activities of employee organizations of their own choosing for the purpose of representation on all matters of employer-employee relations, including, but not limited to, wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. Employees of the city also shall have the right to refuse to join or participate in the activities of employee organizations and shall have the right to represent themselves individually in their employment relations with the city. No employee shall be interfered with, intimidated, restrained, coerced or discriminated against by the city or by any employee organization because of his or her exercise of these rights. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.050 City rights.
     The rights of the city include but are not limited to the exclusive right to determine the mission of its constituent departments, commissions and boards; set standards of service; determine the procedures and standards of selection for employment and promotion; direct its employees; take disciplinary action; relieve its employees from duty because of lack of work or for other legitimate reasons; maintain the efficiency of governmental operations; determine the methods, means and personnel by which government operations are to be conducted; determine the content of job classifications; take all necessary actions to carry out its mission in emergencies; and exercise complete control and discretion over its organization and the technology of performing its work. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.060 Meet and confer in good faith—Scope.
     A.    The city, through its representatives, shall meet and confer in good faith with representatives of formally recognized employee organizations with majority representation rights regarding matters within the scope of representation, including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment within the appropriate unit.

     B.     The city shall not be required to meet and confer, in good faith on any subject preempted by federal or state law, nor shall it be required to meet and confer in good faith on employee or city rights as defined in Sections 2.32.040 and 2.32.050. Proposed amendments to this chapter are excluded from the scope of meeting and conferring. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.070 Consultation in good faith—Scope.
     All matters affecting employer-employee relations, including those that are not subject to meeting and conferring, are subject to consultation. The city, through its representatives, shall consult in good faith with representatives of all recognized employee organizations on employer-employee relation matters which affect them. Advance notice on matters subject to consultation, but outside the scope of representation, is desirable but not mandatory. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.080 Advance notice.
     Reasonable written notice shall be given to each recognized employee organization affected by any ordinance, resolution, rule or regulation directly relating to matters within the scope of representation proposed to be adopted by the city council or by any board or commission of the city, and each shall be given the opportunity to meet with such body prior to adoption. Emergency resolutions and ordinances are excepted, but employee representatives shall be notified of such resolutions and ordinances as soon as possible. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.090 Petition for recognition.
     There are two levels of employee organization recognition—Formal and informal. The recognition requirements of each are set forth below:

     A.    “Formal recognition” means the right to meet and confer in good faith as majority representative. An employee organization that seeks formal recognition for purposes of meeting and conferring in good faith as the majority representative of employees in an appropriate unit shall file a petition with the municipal employee relations officer containing the following information and documentation:

     1.     Name and address of the employee organization;

     2.     Names and titles of its officers;

     3.     Names of employee organization representatives who are authorized to speak on behalf of its members;

     4.     A statement that the employee organization has as one of its primary purposes representing employees in their employment relations with the city;

     5.     A statement whether the employee organization is a chapter or local of, or affiliated directly or indirectly in any manner with, a regional or state or national or international organization, and, if so, the name and address of each such regional, state or international organization;

     6.     Certified copies of the employee organization’s constitution and bylaws;

     7.     A designation of those persons, not exceeding two in number, and their addresses, to whom notice sent by regular United States mail will be deemed sufficient notice on the employee organization for any purpose;

     8.     A statement that the employee organization recognizes that the provisions of Section 923 of the Labor Code arc not applicable to city employees;

     9.     A statement that the employee organization has no restriction on membership based on race, color, age, creed, sex or national origin;

     10.   The job classifications or titles of employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate and the approximate number of member employees therein;

     11.   A statement that the employee organization has in its possession written proof, dated within six months of the date upon which the petition is filed, to establish that employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate have designated the employee organization to represent them in their employment relations with the city. Such written proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the municipal employee relations officer or to a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party; and

     12.   A request that the municipal employee relations officer recognize the employee organization as the majority representative of the employees in the unit claimed to be appropriate for the purpose of meeting and conferring in good faith on all matters within the scope of representation.

     B.     “Informal recognition” means the right to consult in good faith. An employee organization that seeks recognition for purposes of consultation in good faith shall file a petition with the municipal employee relations officer containing the following information and documentation:

     1.     All of the information enumerated in subdivisions 1 through 12 of subsection A of this section, inclusive;

     2.     A statement that the employee organization has in its possession written proof, dated within six months of the date upon which the petition is filed, to establish that employees have designated the employee organization to represent them in their employment relations with the city. Such written proof shall be submitted for confirmation to the municipal employee relations officer or to a mutually agreed upon disinterested third party;

     3.     A request that the municipal employee relations officer recognize the employee organization for the purpose of consultation in good faith.

     C.     The petition, including all accompanying documents, shall be verified, under oath, by the executive officer and secretary of the organization that the statements are true. All changes in such information shall be filed forthwith in like manner.

     D.    The municipal employee relations officer shall grant recognition, in writing, to all employee organizations which have complied with subsections A or B and C of this section for purposes of consultation in good faith for its members. An employee organization seeking formal recognition as majority representative must, in addition, establish to the satisfaction of the municipal employee relations officer that it represents a majority of the employees in the manner prescribed in Section 2.32.110(A). No employee may be represented by more than one recognized employee organization for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.100 Appropriate unit.
     A.    The municipal employee relations officer, after reviewing the petition filed by an employee organization seeking formal recognition as majority representative, shall determine whether the proposed unit is an appropriate unit. The principal criterion in making this determination is whether there is a community of interest among such employees. The following factors, among others, are to be considered in making such determination:

     1.     Which unit will assure employees the fullest freedom in the exercise of rights set forth under this chapter;

     2.     The history of employee relations:

     a.     In the unit,

     b.     Among other employees of the city, and

     c.     In similar public employment;

     3.     The effect of the unit on the efficient operation of the city and sound employer-employee relations;

     4.     The extent to which employees have common skills, working conditions, job duties or similar educational requirements; and

     5.     The effect on the existing classification structures of dividing a single classification among two or more units.

Provided, however, no unit shall be established solely on the basis of the extent to which employees in the proposed unit have organized.

     B.     In the establishment of appropriate units:

     1.     Professional employees shall not be denied the right to be represented separately from nonprofessional employees; and

     2.     Management and confidential employees who are included in the same unit with nonmanagement or nonconfidential employees may not represent such employees on matters within the scope of representation. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.110 Recognition of employee organization as majority representative—Formal recognition.
     A.    The municipal employee relations officer may:

     1.     Determine the majority representative of city employees in an appropriate unit by arranging for a secret ballot election or by any other reasonable method which is based upon written proof, and is designed to ascertain the free choice of a majority of such employees. The employee organization found to represent a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit shall be granted formal recognition and is the only employee organization entitled to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the scope of representation for employees in such unit. This shall not preclude other recognized employee organizations, or individual employees, from consulting with management representatives on employer-employee relations matters of concern to them;

     2.     Revoke the recognition rights of a majority representative, which has been found by secret ballot election no longer to be the majority representative.

     B.     The recognition rights of the majority representative designated in accordance with this section shall not be subject to challenge for a period of twelve months following the date of such recognition.

     C.     The city council shall have the authority by resolution to recognize the majority representative of an appropriate unit without the necessity of the recognition process established herein where the unit represents employees who are returning to a reorganized department of the city performing functions that had been previously contracted to another public agency. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.120 Designation of municipal employee relations officer.
     The city manager shall be the municipal employee relations officer who shall be the city’s principal representative in all matters of employer-employee relations, with authority to meet and confer in good faith on matters within the scope of representation, including wages, hours and other terms and conditions of employment. The city manager is authorized to delegate these duties and responsibilities. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.130 Resolution of impasses.
     A.    The procedures of this section may be invoked only after the possibility of settlement by direct discussion, by all parties concerned, has been exhausted. The impasse procedures are as follows:

     1.     Mediation or conciliation as defined in Section 2.32.030. All mediation proceedings shall be private. The mediator shall make no public recommendations nor take any public position concerning the issues;

     2.     A determination by the city council after a hearing on the merits of the dispute;

     3.     Any other dispute-resolving procedures to which the parties mutually agree or which the city council may order.

     B.     Any party may initiate the impasse procedure by filing with the other party or parties affected a written request for an impasse meeting together with a statement of its position on all disputed issues. An impasse meeting may then be scheduled by the municipal employee relations officer forthwith after the date of filing of the written request for such meeting, with written notice to all parties affected. The purpose of such impasse meeting is to permit a review of the position of all parties in a final effort to reach agreement on the disputed issues, and if agreement is not concluded, to mutually select the specific impasse procedure to which the dispute may be submitted in the absence of agreement between the parties on the selection of an impasse procedure, the matter may be referred to the city council.

     C.     The fees and expenses, if any, of mediators or of any other impasse procedure shall be payable one-half by the city and one-half by the employee organization or employee organizations. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.140 Memorandum of understanding.
     When the meeting and conferring process is concluded between the city and a formally recognized employee organization representing a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit, all agreed upon matters shall be incorporated in a written memorandum of understanding signed by the duly authorized city and majority representatives. The memorandum of understanding shall be submitted to the city council for determination. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.150 Rules and regulations.
     The city council may adopt such rules and regulations necessary or convenient to implement the provisions of this chapter and Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code of the state (Section 3500, et seq.). (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

 

2.32.160 Construction.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to deny any person or employee the rights granted by federal or state laws.

     B.     The rights, powers and authority of the city council in all matters, including the right to maintain any legal action, shall not be modified or restricted by this chapter.

     C.     The provisions of this chapter are not intended to conflict with the provisions of Chapter 10, Division 4, Title 1 of the Government Code of the state (Section 3500, et seq.).

     D.    The provisions of this chapter recognize the right of a recognized bargaining group to negotiate and “agency shop” agreement with the city pursuant to the procedures established under Government Code Sections 3502 and 3502.5. No agency shop arrangement shall apply to management, confidential, or supervisory employees. (Ord. 327 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 2.36 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.36.010 Creation—Members—Vote.
     Pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 65101, as amended, the Lemon Grove planning commission (“planning commission”) is hereby created and established to consist of five members. All members shall be resident electors of the city. Each member shall be entitled to vote on matters before the commission. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.020 Appointment.
     The members of the planning commission shall be appointed by the city council. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.030 Terms of office.
     The term of office for each member shall be four years, which term shall commence on July 1 and terminate on June 30, four years thereafter. Members’ terms shall be maintained so that no more than two terms shall expire in any given year.

The initial five members shall assume office when they are appointed and qualified for office. The initial appointments shall be of two members for full terms of four years. The other three initial appointments will be made for partial terms of one, two and three years respectively allowing for staggered terms. The council shall lengthen or shorten the initial terms so that each term expires on June 30. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.040 Filling vacancies.
     Each vacancy on the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired portion of the term vacated in the manner set forth in Sections 2.36.020 and 2.36.030. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.050 Expiration of term.
     In the event the reappointment in the manner set forth in Section 2.36.020 is not made upon the expiration of a term of office, a member shall continue in office until reappointment or until his or her successor is appointed and qualified. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.060 Ethics and statement of economic interests.
     Each appointee shall comply with the provisions of the Conflict of Interest Code of the city of Lemon Grove and the California Political Reform Act of 1974, as amended. Planning commissioners shall abstain from any participation in matters in which they have a conflict of interest as determined by law. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.070 Powers and duties.
     The planning commission shall have and is hereby vested with all the powers and duties provided by this chapter and amendments thereto, and such other powers and duties as may be conferred upon the planning commission by all laws of the state of California and the city council. The planning commission shall follow the Ralph M. Brown Act Open Meeting Law when holding its meetings. It shall draft and administer the Lemon Grove general plan in a manner consistent with state planning laws and regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, the planning commission shall be the initial appeal body for all appealable staff decisions under Lemon Grove Municipal Code Titles 15 (Buildings and Construction), 16 (Subdivisions), 17 (Zoning) and 18 (Citywide Regulations). The city council shall hear appeals from planning commission decisions. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.080 Compensation, travel and training expenses.
     Members will be compensated at a rate established by the city council. All members shall be paid such allowance for travel and training expenses incurred in their attendance if the city council has authorized travel and training. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.090 Organization—Rules and procedures.
     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 65103, the planning commission shall establish such rules, regulations, and procedures not inconsistent with this chapter for the transaction of business and shall keep a public record of its resolutions, transactions, findings and determinations. The commission may adopt its own procedures in a manner that does not conflict with the Lemon Grove Municipal Code or applicable California laws and regulations. In the absence of any adopted procedures, the planning commission shall follow the procedures established for the city council under Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 2.14, as applicable. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.100 Absence from meetings.
     If any member of the planning commission absents himself or herself from three consecutive regular meetings of the planning commission without permission secured before the third meeting or absence granted by the vote of not less than three members of the commission, his or her office shall become vacant, and shall be filled as any other vacancy as provided for herein. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.110 Decorum at meetings.
     Members of the commission and persons in attendance at meetings of the commission shall conduct themselves in an orderly manner and in compliance with the commission’s rules or, in the absence of such rules, with the rulings of the presiding officer respecting applause, noise making, and conduct shall apply in a manner consistent with law. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

 

2.36.120 Lemon Grove relocation appeals board.
     The planning commission shall also act as the “Lemon Grove relocation appeals board” and shall have the power when it acts in that capacity as provided by the by-laws for the relocation appeals board and shall carry out its duties and obligations pursuant to said by-laws. Said by-laws shall be adopted at the first meeting of the planning commission acting as the relocation appeals board and shall not thereafter be amended without the prior approval of the city council. (Ord. 448 § 2, 2018)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION TO COUNTY
Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.24 PURCHASING

Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF ASSESSMENT AND TAX COLLECTION TO COUNTY
3.04.010 Assessor and tax collector.
     Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county. (Ord. 5 § 1, 1977)

Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.08.010 Created.
     To comply with the provisions of Streets and Highways Code, Section 2113, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “Special Gas Tax Street Improvement Fund.” (Ord. 4 § 1, 1977)

 

3.08.020 Moneys received.
     All moneys received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for, or for engineering, or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 4 § 2, 1977)

 

3.08.030 Moneys expended.
     All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by and subject to the provisions of Chapter 3, Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 4 § 3, 1977)

Chapter 3.12 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.12.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance” of the city. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 2 § 1, 1977)

 

3.12.020 Imposition of tax.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements, or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 2 § 2, 1977)

 

3.12.030 Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.12.030 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 2 § 3, 1977)

 

3.12.040 Exemption—Security.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. (Ord. 2 § 4, 1977)

 

3.12.050 Exemption—Governmental agencies.
     The United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, or the District of Columbia shall not be liable for any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to which it is a party, and when it is acquiring title, but the tax may be collected by assessment from any other party liable therefor. (Ord. 2 § 5, 1977)

 

3.12.060 Exemption—Miscellaneous proceedings.
     A.    Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filing of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment:

     1.     Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended;

     2.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended;

     3.     Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or

     4.     Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected.

     B.     Subdivisions 1 and 2, inclusive, of subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. (Ord. 2 § 6, 1977)

 

3.12.070 Exemption—Securities and Exchange Commission.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in Subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; but only if:

     A.    The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935;

     B.     Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed;

     C.     Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. (Ord. 2 § 7, 1977)

 

3.12.080 Exemptions—Foreclosures.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. Consideration, unpaid debt amount and identification of grantee as beneficiary or mortgagee shall be noted on said deed, instrument or writing or stated in an affidavit or declaration under penalty of perjury for tax purposes.

 

3.12.090 Partnerships.
     A.    In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if:

     1.     Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and

     2.     Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned.

     B.     If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination.

     C.     Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. (Ord. 2 § 8, 1977)

 

3.12.100 Administration by county recorder.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 2 § 9, 1977)

 

3.12.110 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. (Ord. 2 § 10, 1977)

 

3.12.120 Exemption—Dissolution of marriage.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing which purports to transfer, divide, or allocate community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effective a division of community, quasi-community, or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division of the Civil Code or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any such judgment or order whether or not the written agreement is incorporated as part of any of those judgments or orders. In order to qualify for the exemption provided in this section, the deed, instrument, or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument or other writing is entitled to the exemption. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

3.12.130 Exemption—Reconveyance.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which realty is conveyed by the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, pursuant to an agreement whereby the purchaser agrees to immediately reconvey the realty to the exempt agency. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

3.12.140 Exemption—Nonprofit corporation.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to this part shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument, or other writing by which the state of California, any political subdivision thereof, or agency or instrumentality of either thereof, conveys to a nonprofit corporation realty the acquisition, construction, or improvement of which was financed or refinanced by obligations issued by the nonprofit corporation on behalf of a government unit, within the meaning of Section 1.103-1(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations. (Ord. 190, 1991)

Chapter 3.16 SALES AND USE TAX
3.16.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance.” (Ord. 3 § 1, 1977)

 

3.16.020 Purpose.
     The city council declares that this ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes, namely:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes;

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 3 § 4, 1977)

 

3.16.030 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this ordinance shall be one percent. (Ord. 3 § 2, 1977)

 

3.16.040 Operative date.
     This chapter shall be operative on October 1, 1977. (Ord. 3 § 3, 1977)

 

3.16.050 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date, the city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 3 § 5, 1977)

 

3.16.060 Sales tax.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.16.030 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 3 § 6, 1977)

 

3.16.070 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 3 § 7, 1977)

 

3.16.080 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city the rate stated in Section 3.16.030 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 3 § 8, 1977)

 

3.16.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 3 § 9, 1977)

 

3.16.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of the city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code, the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 3 § 10, 1977)

 

3.16.110 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 3 § 11, 1977)

 

3.16.120 Exclusions and exemptions—Operators of aircraft.
     A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city, in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section.

     C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

     D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 104 § 1, 1984)

 

3.16.130 Exclusions and exemptions—Operators of waterborne vessels.
     A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer.

     B.     The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this section.

     C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax and the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes.

     D.    The storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property of such vessels for commercial purposes is exempted from the use tax.

     E.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government.

     F.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code in the storage, use, or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 104 § 2, 1984)

 

3.16.140 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 3 § 13, 1977)

 

3.16.150 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or the city, or against any officer of the state or the city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 3 § 14, 1977)

 

3.16.160 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 3 § 15, 1977)

Chapter 3.20 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.20.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “uniform transient occupancy tax ordinance” of the city. (Prior code § 22.201)

 

3.20.020 Definitions.
     Except where the content otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

     A.    “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, motel, bed and breakfast inn, or home-sharing in accordance with Chapter 18.48, or other similar structure or portion thereof. “Hotel” does not mean any of the following: any hospital, convalescent home, sanitarium, medical clinic, rest home, home for aged people, foster home, or other similar facility operated for the care or treatment of human beings; any asylum, jail, prison, orphanage or other facility in which human beings are detained and housed under legal restraint; any housing owned or controlled by any educational institution and used exclusively to house students, faculty or other employees, and any fraternity or sorority house or similar facility occupied exclusively by students and employees of such educational institutions, and officially recognized or approved by it; any housing operated or used exclusively for religious, charitable or educational purposes by any organization having qualifications for exemption from property taxes under the laws of the state; any housing owned by a governmental agency and used to house its employees or for governmental purposes; any camp as defined in the Labor Code or other housing furnished by an employer exclusively for employees, any camp as defined in the Insurance Code, whether profit or nonprofit, offering recreational activities and operated exclusively for minors under the age of sixteen.

     B.     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging, or sleeping purposes.

     C.     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee, or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or by the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

     D.    “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, religious group, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     E.     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash credits, and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

     F.     “Tax collector” means the city treasurer.

     G.    “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy, or is entitled to occupancy, by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any person who in fact exercises occupancy or in fact is entitled to occupancy for a period of thirty-one days or more, counting portions of calendar days as full days, shall be deemed not to have been a transient with respect to the first thirty days of occupancy or entitlement to occupancy. (Ord. 452 § 4, 2019; Ord. 190, 1991; prior code § 22.202)

 

3.20.030 Tax imposed.
     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. Said tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy a space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax collector may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax collector. (Prior code § 22.203)

 

3.20.040 Exemptions.
     No tax shall be imposed:

     A.    Upon any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax provided in this chapter;

     B.     Upon any federal or state officer or employee when on official business;

     C.     Upon any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty;

     D.    Where the rent is at the rate of four dollars per day or less;

     E.     Upon any person who receives a free or complimentary room where the only consideration provided within the definition of rent in Section 3.20.020(E) is publicity value for the hotel;

     F.     Upon the privilege of renting any mobile home when the tenant is an employee of the owner or operator of the mobile home. (Prior code § 22.204)

 

3.20.050 Operator’s duties.
     Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by

this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in Section 3.20.120. (Prior code § 22.205)

 

3.20.060 Registration certificate.
     Within thirty days after the effective date of this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register said hotel with the tax collector and obtain from him or her a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Said certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

     A.    The name of the operator;

     B.     The address of the hotel;

     C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

     D.    “This Transient Occupancy Registration Certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the Tax Collector for the purpose of collecting from transients the Transient Occupancy Tax and remitting said tax to the Tax Collector. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any lawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit.” (Prior code § 22.206)

 

3.20.070 Reporting and remitting.
     A.    Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax collector, make a return to the tax collector, on forms provided by him or her, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax collector.

     B.     Returns filed or taxes remitted and actually received by the tax collector on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter shall be deemed timely filed or remitted. Returns filed or taxes remitted by mail shall be deemed timely filed only if the envelope or similar container enclosing the returns or taxes is addressed to the tax collector, has sufficient postage and bears a United States postmark or a postage meter imprint prior to midnight on the last day for reporting or remitting without penalty. If such envelope or other container bears a postage meter imprint as well as a United States post office cancellation mark, the latter shall govern in determining whether the filing or remittance is timely. The tax collector may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax collector. (Prior code § 22.207)

 

3.20.080 Penalties and interest.
     A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

     B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before the first day of the next calendar month following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the five percent penalty first imposed.

     C.     Fraud. If the tax collector determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

     D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

     E.     Penalties Merged with Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid in this chapter.

     F.     Audit Deficiency. If, upon audit by the county, an operator is found to be deficient in his return or his remittance or both, the tax collector shall immediately notify the operator of the net deficiency and any delinquency penalties if applicable. If the operator fails or refuses to pay the deficient amount and applicable penalties within fourteen days after the date of the tax collector’s notice, the penalties prescribed in subsection B of this section shall apply, using the fifteenth day after the date of the tax collector’s notice as the date when the continued delinquency penalty first applies. (Prior code § 22.208)

 

3.20.090 Failure to collect and report tax—Determination of tax by tax collector.
     A.    If any operator fails or refuses to collect said tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of said tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter or if such operator maintains records which are inadequate to show the amount of tax due the tax collector shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due.

     B.     As soon as the tax collector procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In the case such determination is made, the tax collector shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within fourteen days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax collector for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax collector shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax collector shall give not less then five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in said notice why said amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax collector shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fourteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.20.100. (Prior code § 22.209)

 

3.20.100 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax collector with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fourteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The city council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the city council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed in Section 3.20.090 (A) for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Prior code § 22.210)

 

3.20.110 Records.
     A.    It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city including but not limited to all business records, bank statements and copies of federal and state income tax returns filed by the operator with the state or the United States of America, which records the auditor and tax collector shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

     B.     All returns and payments submitted by each operator shall be treated as confidential by the tax collector and shall not be released by him or her except upon order of a court of competent jurisdiction or to an officer or agent of the United States, the state, the county or the city for official use only. (Prior code § 22.211)

 

3.20.120 Refunds.
     A.    Erroneously or Illegally Collected Taxes, etc. Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections A and B of this section provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax collector within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax collector.

     B.     Credit Against Taxes. An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax collector that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the person from whom the tax was collected or credited to rent subsequently payable by that person to the operator.

     C.     Repayment to Transient. A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in the subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax collector, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax collector that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     E.     Records Required. No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Prior code § 22.212)

 

3.20.130 Actions to collect.
     A.    Responsibility. Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount.

     B.     Recording Certificate: Lien. If any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter is not paid when due, the tax collector may within three years after the amount is due file for record in the office of the county recorder a certificate specifying the amount of tax, penalties and interest due, the name and address as it appears on the records of the tax collector of the operator liable for the same and the fact that the tax collector has complied with all provisions of this chapter in the determination of the amount required to be paid. From the time of the filing for record, the amount required to be paid together with penalties and interest constitutes a lien upon all real property in the city owned by the operator or afterwards and before the lien expires acquired by him or her. The lien has the force, effect and priority of a judgment lien and shall continue for ten years from the time of filing of the certificate unless sooner released or otherwise discharged.

     C.     Priority and Lien of Tax. The amounts required to be paid by any operator under this chapter with penalties and interest shall be satisfied first in any of the following cases:

     1.     Whenever the person is insolvent;

     2.     Whenever the person makes a voluntary assignment of his assets;

     3.     Whenever the estate of the person in the hands of executors, administrators, or heirs is insufficient to pay all debts due from the deceased;

     4.     Whenever the estate and effects of an absconding, concealed or absent person required to pay any amount under this chapter are levied upon by process of law. This chapter does not give the county a preference over any recorded lien which attached prior to the date when the amounts required to be paid became a lien.

     The preference given to the city by this section shall be subordinate to the preference given to claims for personal services by Sections 1204 and 1206 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     D.    Warrant for Collection of Tax. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount required in this chapter to be paid or within three years after the last recording of a certificate of lien under subsection B of this section, the tax collector may issue a warrant for the enforcement of any liens and for the collection of any amount required to be paid to the city under this chapter. The warrant shall be directed to any sheriff, marshal or constable and shall have the same effect as a writ of execution. The warrant shall be levied and sale made pursuant to it in the same manner and with the same effect as a levy of and a sale pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax collector may pay or advance to the sheriff, marshal or constable, the same fees, commissions and expenses for his services as are provided by law for similar services pursuant to a writ of execution. The tax collector, and not the court, shall approve the fees for publication in a newspaper.

     E.     Seizure and Sale. At any time within three years after any operator is delinquent in the payment of any amount, the tax collector may forthwith collect the amount in the following manner: The tax collector shall seize any property, real or personal, of the operator and sell the property, or a sufficient part of it, at public auction to pay the amount due together with any penalties and interest imposed for the delinquency and any costs incurred on account of the seizure and sale. Any seizure made to collect occupancy taxes due shall be only of property of the operator not exempt from execution under the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     F.     Successor’s Liability: Withholding by Purchaser. If any operator liable for any amount under this chapter sells out his business or quits the business, his successor or assignee shall withhold sufficient of the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces a receipt from the tax collector showing that it has been paid or a certificate stating that no amount is due.

     G.    Liability of Purchaser: Release. If the purchaser of a hotel fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall become personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him or her to the extent of the purchase price, valued in money. Within thirty days after receiving a written request from the purchaser for a certificate, or within thirty days from the date the former owner’s records are made available for audit, whichever period expires the later, but in any event not later than sixty days after receiving the request, the tax collector shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the purchaser at his address as it appears on the records of the tax collector of the amount that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. Failure of the tax collector to mail the notice will release the purchaser from any further

obligation to withhold from the purchase price as above provided. The time within which the obligation of the successor may be enforced shall start to run at the time the operator sells his or her business or at the time that the determination against the operator becomes final, whichever event occurs the later. (Prior code § 22.213)

 

3.20.140 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable there for by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax collector, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as subsection A of this section. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 22.214)

Chapter 3.24 PURCHASING
3.24.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Purchasing Ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.020 Purpose.
     The purposes of this chapter are to define the centralized system of the city for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to provide for the fair and equitable treatment of all persons involved in the purchasing process, to obtain the highest possible value in exchange for public funds and to safeguard the quality and integrity of the purchasing system. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     “Best value” means the best value to the city based on all factors, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Cost;

     2.     The ability, capacity and skill of a contractor to perform a contract or provide the supplies, services or equipment required;

     3.     The ability of a contractor to provide the supplies, services or equipment promptly or within the time specified without delay or interferences;

     4.     The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience and efficiency of a contractor;

     5.     The quality of a contractor’s performance on previous purchases by the city; and

 

     6.     The ability of a contractor to provide future maintenance, repairs, parts and services for the use of the supplies purchased.

     “Bid, contract or proposal documents” mean the documents, including their attachments and addenda, which set forth instructions to bidders or proposers and which are disseminated for the purpose of soliciting bids or proposals.

     “Capital outlay item” means equipment (fixed assets) with a monetary value established by the finance director.

     “CMAS” means the California Multiple Award Schedule which has a wide variety of commodity and information technology products and services at prices which have been assessed to be fair, reasonable and competitive by the state of California.

     “Competitive bidding exemptions/sole source” means goods, services or equipment that can be obtained from only a single source. Items that have specific requirements by law or are required to match or be compatible with other furnishings, materials or equipment presently on hand, or when a particular type or make of commodity, furnishings, type of material or equipment has been standardized for the city by the city manager or the city council (see Section 3.24.100, Exemptions).

     “Construction projects” means construction, reconstruction, alteration, renovation, demolition, erection, improvement, painting or repainting and repair work involving any publicly owned, leased or operated facility.

     “Contract” means agreements, regardless of what they may be labeled, between the city and one or more other parties for the purchase or disposition of goods and/or services or construction.

     “Contractor” means any party (business) who has entered into a contract with the city for the provision or disposition of goods and/or services.

     “District” means the Lemon Grove School District located in Lemon Grove, California.

     “End user” means the city of Lemon Grove or any city department/division requesting goods and/or services.

     “E-procurement” means the use of electronic technology for the acquisition or disposition of supplies, services, equipment or construction.

     “Goods” means articles that are moveable at the time of sale, including, but not limited to, equipment, supplies and/or materials.

     “Gratuity” means a gift, payment, loan, advance, deposit of money, or service, presented or promised in return for or in anticipation of favorable consideration in the procurement process.

     “Maintenance services” means services intended to preserve and/or restore a public facility to a clean, safe, efficient and/or continually usable condition. Maintenance may include, but is not limited to: carpentry, electrical, minor repainting, plumbing, glazing and other craftwork to preserve a facility in the condition for which it was intended; cleaning and other operations on machinery and other equipment attached to a facility as fixtures; the mowing, pruning and trimming of lawns, grass, trees, shrubs, bushes and hedges; servicing of irrigation and sprinkler systems; and the regular removal or relocation of by-products or waste products accumulated at city facilities.

     “Procurement” means the acquisition of supplies, services, equipment or construction by the city, including, but not limited to, purchasing, renting or leasing, and all functions and procedures pertaining to such acquisitions.

     “Professional services” means services that involve the exercise of professional discretion, independent judgment, and recommendations based on advanced or specialized knowledge, expertise or training gained by formal study or experience. Such services include, but are not limited to, those provided by appraisers, architects, attorneys, engineers, instructors, insurance advisors, physicians and/or other specialized consultants.

     “Purchasing officer” means the person responsible for the procurement of goods and/or services in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The person designated by the city manager as the purchasing officer of the city can designate department representative(s) to procure goods and/or services for the city.

     “Qualified products” means an approved list of supplies, services, or construction items described by model or catalog numbers that, prior to competitive solicitation, the city has determined will meet the specification requirements.

     “Responsible bidder” means a bidder determined by the awarding authority:

     1.     To have the ability, capacity, experience and skill to provide the goods and/or services in accordance with bid specifications, and if applicable;

     2.     To have the ability to provide the goods and/or services promptly, or within the time specified, and if applicable;

     3.     To have equipment, facilities and resources of such capacity and location to enable the bidder to provide the required goods and/or services, and if applicable;

     4.     To be able to provide future maintenance, repair, parts and service for the use of the goods purchased, and if applicable;

     5.     To have a record of satisfactory performance under prior contracts with the city or other purchasers where such bidder has previously been awarded such contract.

     “Responsive bidder” means a bidder determined by the city to have submitted a bid or proposal that conforms in all material respects to the requirements of the bid, contract, or proposal documents.

     “Sealed bid” means a bid which has been submitted in a sealed envelope or sealed electronically to prevent its contents from being revealed or known prior to the deadline for the submission of all bids; required on formal bids.

     “Services” means work performed, or labor, time and effort expended, by an independent contractor.

     “Specifications” means a description of the physical and/or functional characteristics or of the nature of the required goods and/or services.

     “Subcontractors” means a contractor undertaking part of the work of a contract under the control of the principal contractor.

     “Surplus personal property” means goods owned by the city which are no longer needed or which are obsolete or unserviceable, or property that is a by-product (scrap metal, used tires and oil etc.). (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.040 Procurement and disposition responsibilities.
     A.    End User. The end user shall:

     1.     Identify its procurement needs and the availability of funding;

     2.     Submit to the purchasing officer specifications for the required goods and/or services;

     3.     Participate in the evaluation of bids and proposals; and

     4.     Inspect goods delivered and services performed to determine conformity with the requirements set forth in the bid or proposal documents and with contractual obligations, and authorize payments for conforming goods and/or services.

     B.     Purchasing Officer. The purchasing officer shall be appointed by the city manager. The purchasing officer shall be responsible for the procurement of goods and/or services for the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No procurement of goods and/or services shall be made contrary to the provisions of this chapter. Any agreement or contract for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment made contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be void and any claim or demand against the city based thereon shall be invalid. The purchasing officer shall:

     1.     Prepare and recommend to the city manager operational procedures and forms for the procurement of goods and/or services in cooperation with the end users and for the disposal of surplus personal property;

     2.     Procure or supervise the procurement of all goods and/or services needed in coordination with end users;

     3.     Process the contracts awarded administratively and/or by city council;

     4.     Whenever possible, establish standardized specifications and consolidation of requirements for goods and/or services required by two or more end users; and

     5.     Sell or otherwise dispose of surplus personal property, and lost and unclaimed property held by the sheriffs department.

     C.     City Manager. The city manager shall be the awarding authority for:

     1.     All procurement of goods and/or services for which the cost to the city is fifteen thousand dollars or less;

     2.     All capital outlay items approved by the city council during the budgeting process in an amount of fifty thousand dollars or less;

     3.     All contracts for professional services of thirty thousand dollars or less;

     4.     All change orders, amendments or extensions to existing agreements within the authority granted in subsections (C)(1) and (2) of this section;

     5.     All public works change orders equal to the contingency amount set when the underlying contract was awarded to a nonpublic works contract;

     6.     All change orders or amendments to non-public works contracts awarded by the city council in an amount up to twenty-five percent of the original contract amount, including the total of all amendments, up to a limit of fifteen thousand dollars;

     7.     The city manager shall approve alternate procurement methods, if appropriate, for use on an experimental basis, and recommend to the city council additions, deletions or modifications to the city’s procurement methods; and

     8.     The city manager shall have the authority to delegate the awarding of contracts, amendments and change orders for goods and services as set forth in this chapter by memorandum or by administrative order.

     D.    City Council. The city council shall be the awarding authority for:

     1.     All procurement of goods and/or services costing more than fifteen thousand dollars;

     2.     All public works contracts that are five thousand dollars or more; and

     3.     All contracts for professional services that exceed the city manager’s authority as set forth in this chapter and contracts greater than thirty thousand dollars. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.050 Methods of procurement.
     A.    Small Procurements. Procurements of supplies, services and equipment, the cost of which are five thousand dollars or less in any one transaction, shall be made using simplified and cost effective operational procedures without the use of formal bids. Procurement requirements shall not be unnecessarily divided so as to constitute several small procurements under this subsection.

     B.     Informal Bidding for Supplies, Services and Equipment. The purchasing officer may purchase supplies, services and equipment using the informal bidding procedures established in this section. Informal bidding procedure may be utilized:

     1.     When the anticipated cost of the supplies, services and equipment to be purchased is less than the dollar amount established for formal bidding in subsection (C)(1) of this section;

     2.     When no bids are received pursuant to the formal bid procedures established for supplies, services and equipment;

     3.     When all bids received substantially exceed the city’s estimated costs;

     4.     Further, the city council may designate types or classes of supplies, services and equipment costing more than the dollar amount established for formal bidding in subsection (C)(1); which may be purchased through the use of informal bidding procedures whenever the city council finds that use of the informal bidding procedure is advantageous to the city consistent with applicable law; and

     5.     The informal bidding procedure shall be as follows:

     a.     The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written or oral request. Responses shall be in writing, and may be transmittable to the purchasing officer by facsimile, by mail, orally, electronically over the Internet, or by any other means of delivery. When possible, a minimum of three bidders

should be solicited and the award shall be based on best value and shall be awarded by the city manager.

     C.     Formal Bidding for Supplies, Services and Equipment.

     1.     The purchasing officer shall purchase supplies, services and equipment using the formal bidding procedures established in this section. Formal bidding procedures shall be utilized when the anticipated cost of the supplies, services and equipment is greater than fifteen thousand dollars. The bid limit shall be reviewed annually by the purchasing officer and automatically adjusted in response to the San Diego – All Urban Consumer Price Index. The purchasing officer shall calculate the effect of the cumulative change in the index to twenty-five thousand dollars beginning in 2003. Adjustment to the bid limit will be made in five thousand dollar increments whenever the calculated value exceeds a previously set bid limit by more than two thousand five hundred dollars. The bid limit adjustment will be made effective at the beginning of a fiscal year by memorandum from the purchasing officer; and

     2.     Procurement requirements shall not be divided so as to avoid the formal bidding requirements.

     D.    The formal bidding procedures shall be as follows:

     1.     The purchasing officer shall issue a notice inviting bids using one or more methods designed to provide reasonable public notice in a manner that will permit current information to be disseminated widely. The notice shall include:

     a.     Instruction to bidders,

     b.     Specifications describing the required supplies, goods or equipment,

     c.     Bid forms and schedules,

     d.     Any required bond and/or security forms,

     e.     General provisions,

     f.      The time on or before which bids will be received,

     g.     Where and with whom bids shall be filed, and

     h.     The date, time, and place where and when the bids will be publicly opened;

     2.     At the bidders’ request and/or when the city deems feasible, bid documents may be transmitted and/or reviewed over the Internet. The purchasing officer shall receive the sealed formal bids at a time, date and place designated in the bid documents. The purchasing officer will publicly open formal bids, timely received, and the aggregate bid pricing shall be read aloud;

     3.     Any person with whom the city has contracted to prepare or assist in the preparation of bid or proposal documents is ineligible to submit a bid or proposal for the provision of the goods or the performance of the services so specified in the notice inviting bids or proposals;

     4.     Formal bids received after the deadline for receipt of bids shall not be accepted by the city and shall be returned to the bidder unopened, unless opening is necessary for identification purposes. The purchasing officer shall submit written notification to the bidder whose bid was received after the deadline stating what the deadline was, when the bid was actually received and that the bid is being returned because it was received after the deadline;

     5.     If no bids are received or if no bids meet the requirements as specified in the solicitation documents, the purchasing officer may reissue the solicitation using the informal bidding procedures or the city may cease the procurement;

     6.     If two or more bids are received with the same total amount or unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of advertising again for bids, the purchasing officer shall enter negotiations to determine if a low bid can be negotiated;

     7.     In considering formal bids for supplies, services and equipment, the awarding authority may waive minor defects or irregularities, provided that the irregularities do not affect the bid amount or give a particular bidder an advantage over others;

     8.     All bids shall be deemed rejected if no city council action is taken on the bids or proposals

within ninety days after the bids have been received and opened, unless bidders agree to extend a bid’s effective date upon request by the city;

     9.     The city shall have the authority to require a performance bond in such amount as it finds reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city consistent with applicable law. If the city requires a performance bond, the amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids;

     10.   All contracts for supplies, services and equipment shall be awarded based on the best value for the city; and

     11.   The city manager shall send to the city council a report of all contracts that have been awarded administratively.

     E.     Petty Cash. The high cost of payment processing makes it imperative that small-dollar purchases be made by cash. Each department, with city manager approval, may have a petty cash fund of five hundred dollars and should use it for minor purchases up to fifty dollars per item when buying from uncommon sources or vendors unwilling to establish a credit account with the city. Each department should submit their petty cash expenditures for reimbursement as needed. The finance department shall periodically audit each department’s petty cash fund. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.060 Competitive negotiations.
     The purchasing officer may authorize the solicitation of professional services other than those listed in Section 3.24.070, and the purchase of technical supplies or equipment by competitive negotiations when:

     A.    The cost of the supplies, services, or equipment is greater than five thousand dollars;

     B.     The supplies or equipment are such that suitable technical or performance specifications are not readily available;

     C.     The city is not able to develop descriptive specifications;

     D.    Requesting proposals for the particular service or purchase would be more advantageous to the city; and

     E.     Whenever possible, at least three proposals shall be received and the award will be based on the proposal that is determined to be most advantageous to the city, taking into consideration price and the evaluation criteria set forth in the request for proposal. Competitive negotiations are not intended to be used for the purpose of avoiding the bidding procedure set forth in this chapter. The city manager shall award contracts for goods, services or equipment less than fifteen thousand dollars. The city manager shall send to the city council a report of all competitively negotiated contracts that have been awarded administratively. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.065 Local vendor preference.
     For the purpose of this section, a local vendor is a business that is located in and licensed to provide goods and/or services within the city limits of Lemon Grove, and reports sales taxes to the state of California.

     The purchase of taxable goods by the city of Lemon Grove in any solicitation of bids or quotes for goods or services and any solicitation for work involving the supply of materials or goods as a part of the bid or quote is subject to the application of a local vendor preference. When calculating bids or quotes based on the lowest responsible bid, and which involves the purchase of taxable goods in whole or in part, the preference to be granted to the price bid or quoted by a local vendor shall be two percent.

     If the bid or quote is a mixture of taxable and nontaxable items, the two percent preference will only apply to the taxable portion of the bid or quote. If the bid or quoted price after the preference is granted makes the local vendor the lowest responsible bidder, the city shall make the purchase from the local vendor at the bid or quoted price. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012)

 

3.24.070 Professional services.
     A.    Request for proposal shall be used when the services of professionals are needed. The selection of specialized professional services, including, but not limited to, architectural, landscape architectural, engineering, appraisals, environmental, land surveying or construction project management firms is based on the professional qualifications necessary for the satisfactory performance of the service required, on demonstrated competence, and on a fair and reasonable price consistent with Government Code Section 4526. Whenever possible at least three proposals shall be received for the professional service needed. The purchasing officer may waive the requirements for solicitation of multiple proposals if only one individual or firm can provide the professional services. The city manager shall send to the city council a report of all professional service contracts that have been awarded administratively.

     B.     The city’s professional services procurement practice prohibits unlawful activity including, but not limited to, rebates, kickbacks, or other unlawful consideration. No city employee shall participate in the selection process if that employee has a relationship with a person or business entity seeking a contract with the city that would subject that employee to the prohibition of Government Code Section 87100 (Conflicts of Interest). (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.080 Execution of change orders and amendments.
     No change in an agreement or contract shall be made without the issuance of a written change order or amendment, and no payment for any such change shall be made unless a written change order or amendment has first been approved and executed in accordance with this section designating in advance the work to be done and the amount of additional compensation to be paid. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.090 Cooperative purchasing.
     The purchasing officer shall have the authority to join with other public or quasi-public agencies such as the district and CMAS in cooperative purchasing plans or programs for the purchase of supplies, services and/or equipment by contract, arrangement or agreement as allowed by law and as determined by the purchasing officer to be in the city’s best interest. The purchasing officer may buy directly from a vendor at a price established by another public agency when the other agency has made their purchase in a competitive manner. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.100 Exemptions.
     The following procurements, contracts or transactions are exempted from the provisions of Chapter 3.24:

     A.    Emergency procurements for construction, equipment or repairs;

     B.     Sole source goods or services;

     C.     Items required to match or be compatible with other furnishings, materials or equipment previously purchased by the city;

     D.    Commodities, furnishings, types of materials or equipment that have been standardized for the city by the city manager or by the city council;

     E.     Utility services and related charges;

     F.     Goods or services obtained from or through agreement with any governmental, public or quasi-public agency;

     G.    Real property leases or purchases and related title and escrow fees;

     H.    Insurance and bonds;

     I.      Advertising in magazines, newspapers or other media;

     J.      Works of art, specialty signage, entertainment or performers;

     K.    Library collection materials or services or other books or periodicals;

     L.     Membership dues, conventions, training, travel arrangements including hotels, car rentals and airfare; and

     M.    Surplus personal property owned by another government, public or quasi-public entity. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.110 Disposal of surplus property.
     A.    The purchasing officer shall have the authority to sell or dispose of surplus property. All surplus property is for sale “as is” and “where is,” with no warranty, guarantee, or representation of any kind, expressed or implied, as to the condition, utility or usability of the property offered for sale. Appropriate methods of sale are as follows:

     1.     Public Auction. Surplus property may be sold at public auction. Public auction may be conducted by the city staff, county of San Diego, or the city may contract with a professional auctioneer including professional auction services.

     2.     Sealed Bids. Sealed bids may be solicited for the sale of surplus property. Surplus property disposed of in this manner shall be sold to the highest responsible bidder.

     3.     Selling for Scrap. Surplus property may be sold as scrap if the purchasing officer deems that the raw materials exceed the value of the property as a whole.

     4.     Negotiated Sale. Surplus property may be sold outright if the purchasing officer determines that only one buyer is available or interested in acquiring the property.

     5.     No Value Sale. When the purchasing officer determines the specific supplies or equipment are surplus and of minimum value to the city due to obsolescence, other cause, or where the purchasing officer determines that the cost of disposal of such supplies or equipment would exceed the recovery value, the purchasing officer shall dispose of the same in such a manner as deemed appropriate and in the best interest of the city.

     B.     All proceeds from the sale of surplus property shall be deposited in the city’s general fund. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.120 Construction projects.
     Contracts for public projects in the city shall be governed by applicable state laws including the California Public Contract Code, Division 2, Part I, and Division 2, Part 3, the Local Agency Public Construction Act. Contracts for public projects shall also be governed by the adopted edition of the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction and the adopted supplement thereto, adopted by the Greenbook Committee of the Public Works Standards, Inc. and other documents as deemed appropriate by the city manager, except as otherwise provided by the city council or the city manager if the contract is within their authority (Division 2, Part 3, Chapter I, Article 4, Sections 20160-20174). Further, the city of Lemon Grove has, by resolution, chosen to be governed by the Uniform Construction Accounting Procedures Act (Public Contracts Code Sections 22010 et seq.), as amended, under the procedures set forth herein and by implementing resolutions established by the city council. All procedures set forth herein shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with state law.

     A.    Public projects equal to or less than the amount specified in Section 22032(a) of the California Public Contract Code may be performed by city employees by force account, by negotiated contract or by purchase order.

     B.     Public projects equal to or less than the amount specified in Section 22032(b) of the California Public Contract Code may be let to contract by informal procedures. The informal bidding procedures for construction projects shall include the following:

     1.     The purchasing officer or designee shall maintain a list of qualified contractors established by this chapter;

     2.     The purchasing officer or designee shall send a notice inviting informal bids to all contractors on the list of qualified contractors or to the designated construction trade journals and/or both not less than ten calendar days before bids are due;

     3.     The notice inviting informal bids shall describe the project in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, the time, date and place for the submission of bids;

     4.     Bid documents may be transmitted and/or received over the Internet, by facsimile and/or electronic mail;

     5.     The city council may, in its sole discretion, reject any or all bids presented and waive any minor irregularity or informality in such bids. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city council may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received through the informal procedure, the project may be performed by city employees, by force account or negotiated contract without further complying with this section;

     6.     If all bids received are in excess of the amount specified in this subsection, the city council may, by adoption of a resolution by a four-fifths vote, award the contract, at the amount specified in Section 3.24.130(F); and

     7.     The city council shall award all informal contracts in a form approved by the city attorney.

     C.     Public projects of more than the amount specified in Section 22032(c) of the California Public Contract Code shall, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, be let to contract by the city council through the formal bidding procedure. The formal bidding procedures for construction projects shall include the following:

     1.     The purchasing officer or designee shall maintain a list of qualified contractors established by this chapter;

     2.     The notice inviting formal bids for public projects shall be published at least fourteen calendar days before the bid opening date in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The notice shall distinctly state the project to be done, how to obtain more detailed information about the project, and state the time and place for submission of bids. The purchasing officer or designee shall send a notice inviting informal bids to all contractors on the list of qualified contractors and to the designated construction trade journals at least ten calendar days before bids are due. In addition to the newspaper and use of publication methods required under the California Uniform Construction Cost Accounting Commission, the notice inviting bids may be advertised in any manner which will permit the information to be widely disseminated, including additional contractors and/or construction trade journals;

     3.     Bid documents may be transmitted and/or received over the Internet, by facsimile and/or electronic mail;

     4.     The city council may, in its sole discretion, reject any or all bids presented and waive any minor irregularity or informality in such bids. The contract shall be awarded to the lowest responsive, responsible bidder. If two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city council may accept the one it chooses. If no bids are received, the city council may have the project done without further complying with this chapter;

     5.     If no bids are received through the formal procedure, the project may be performed by city employees, by force account or negotiated contract without complying with this section. (Ord. 415 § 2, 2013; Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.130 Execution of change orders.
     The city council may by resolution authorize the city manager to approve change orders on a project to an amount it determines appropriate for a large, complex project. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

 

3.24.140 Emergencies.
     In cases of emergency, as determined by the city council, including, but not limited to, states of emergency defined in Government Code Section 8558, as may be amended from time to time, when repair or replacements are necessary to permit the continued conduct of the operation or services of a public agency or to avoid danger to life or property, the city manager may then proceed at once to replace or repair any public facility and/or procure the necessary equipment, services and supplies, without giving notice of bids to let contracts. Emergency work may be completed by day labor under the direction of the city manager, or by contractor, or a combination of the two. The city manager is delegated the power to declare a public emergency subject to ratification by the city council within seven days thereafter. (Ord. 413 § 1, 2012; Ord. 407 § 3, 2011)

Title 4 (RESERVED)

Title 5 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES, PERMITS AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS PERMITS IN GENERAL
Chapter 5.08 UNIFORM PERMIT PROCEDURES
Chapter 5.12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 5.16 DANCES AND DANCEHALLS
Chapter 5.20 ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT
Chapter 5.24 SOLICITORS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Chapter 5.28 TAXICABS
Chapter 5.32 BINGO
Chapter 5.36 FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
Chapter 5.40 AMBULANCES

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS PERMITS IN GENERAL
Article I. General
5.04.010 Specific provisions to control.
     All specific provisions of this chapter shall control over general provisions. (Ord. 25 § 4(k), 1978)

 

5.04.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Business” includes every pursuit, trade, occupation, avocation, employment, business or calling.

     B.     “Employee” means any person acting within the scope of the employer’s business within the limits of the city.

     C.     Employees, Average Number of. For the purpose of determining the average number of employees employed during the year, the number of full-time and/or equivalent part-time persons employed at or near the fifteenth day of each month during the year in which the business is transacted within the city shall be added together and the sum total shall be divided by the number of months or fractions of months said business is in operation, fractions omitted. Equivalent part-time persons employed means the cumulative hourly total of part-time employees converted to equivalent full-time employees (example: two half-time employees equal one full-time employee).

     D.    “Established place of business” means the place actually occupied either continuously or at regular periods by any person required to be permitted pursuant to this chapter and where such persons, books and records are kept and a large share of his business transacted.

     E.     “Peddler” includes any person, whether principal or agent, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or in any park or public place in the city, conveying goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals or other publications, regularly published newspapers excepted, or any coupon certificate, ticket or card which is redeemable in goods, wares, merchandise, or services, or offering the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers. It does not include vendors of milk, bakery products, produce, groceries, ice cream or ice, who distribute their products to regular customers on established routes.

     F.     “Person” includes person, corporation, firm, agency, copartnership or association, and also includes the singular and plural, masculine, feminine and neuter.

     G.    “Retail business” or “retail sales” includes all sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services to a consumer.

     H.    “Solicitor” includes any person, whether principal or agent, whether a resident of the city or not, who goes from house to house, or to only one house, or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, or in any park or public place in the city, soliciting or taking orders for sales of goods, wares, merchandise, magazines, periodicals, or other publications, regularly published newspapers excepted, or personal property of any nature whatsoever, or any coupon, certificate, ticket or card which is redeemable in goods, wares, merchandise or services, for future delivery, or for service to be performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such order or whether he is collecting advance payments on such orders, or who solicits, takes or attempts to take public opinion polls, consumer surveys or by such contacts attempts to secure familiar information. Such definition includes any person who uses any building, motor vehicle or other place within the city for the primary purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery, or one who, as an invitee of a purchaser or prospective purchaser or otherwise, solicits a sale or who exhibits any sample or gives a demonstration or makes a delivery within the city after a purchaser or prospective purchaser has been solicited or contacted by telephone, correspondence or other method of communication from within the city. Such definition includes the term “canvasser.”

     I.      “Transient merchant” includes any person, whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the city, and who, in furtherance of such purpose, leases, uses or occupies any building, motor vehicle, public room in a hotel or shop or other place within the city for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or at public auction; provided, that such definition shall not be construed to include any person, firm or corporation who, while occupying such temporary location, does not sell from stock, but exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders for future delivery only. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, merchant, or auctioneer or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, merchant or auctioneer.

     J.      “Wholesale business” or “wholesale sales” includes all sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services to a retailer. (Ord. 25 § 4(a--j), 1978)

 

5.04.030 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person, or for any person as agent, clerk or employee, either for him or herself or for any other person, within the corporate limits of the city to transact, engage in, or carry on any business, show, exhibition, or game, specified in this chapter without first having procured a permit therefor, as in this chapter required. (Ord. 25 § 1, 1978)

 

5.04.040 Amount of permit deemed a debt to city.
     The amount of any permit imposed by this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person, or any person as agent, clerk, or employee, either for him or herself or for any other person transacting, engaging in, or carrying on any business, show, exhibition, or game, specified in this chapter without having a permit from the city to do so, shall be liable to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of permit imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 3, 1978)

 

5.04.050 Application.
     Before any permit is issued to any person, such person shall make written application therefor to the city treasurer. Such application shall:

     A.    State the nature or kind of business or enterprise for which the permit is required;

     B.     State the place where such business or enterprise will be transacted or carried on;

     C.     State the name of the owner of the business or enterprise;

     D.    Be signed by the applicant. (Ord. 25 § 5(A--D), 1978)

 

5.04.060 State regulatory permit required--Certain categories designated.
     A.    Before any permit is issued to any person doing business in the following categories, application for a business permit must be made to and a permit issued by the city treasurer:

     1.     Amusement establishment and devices;

     2.     Bingo;

     3.     Dances and dancehalls;

     4.     Entertainment and entertainers;

     5.     Massage establishments and technicians;

     6.     Solicitations;

     7.     Taxicabs and taxidrivers.

(Ord. 160 § 1, 1989; Ord. 124 § 2, 1985; Ord. 105 § 1, 1984; Ord. 37 § 1, 1978; Ord. 25 § 5(E), 1978)

 

Note
*     Editor’s Note: For the provisions governing the issuance of permits in these categories, see Ch. 5.08.

 

5.04.070 Issuance.
     A.    Upon application therefore as provided in this chapter, it shall be the duty of the city treasurer to prepare and issue a permit under this chapter.

     B.     No permit shall be issued unless a full compliance is had with all ordinances of the city, and where laws of the state require a person to be permitted under and by virtue of its laws, the same shall be a condition precedent to the granting of a permit by the city, and if the applicant so required to be permitted by the state has failed to comply with the laws of the state, no permit shall be issued by the city.

     C.     If any permit has been issued through error, the same shall be void and of no force and effect.

     D.    In no event shall any mistake or error made by the city treasurer in stating the amount of a permit provided in this chapter, prevent the collection by the city of an amount that shall be actually due from any person transacting or carrying on a business subject to a permit under this chapter. (Ord. 160 § 1, 1989)

 

5.04.080 Change of location--Fee--Duplicates.
     A.    Each permit granted or issued under the provisions of this chapter shall authorize the permittee to transact or carry on the business or calling therein designated and at no other place, and the said permit shall not be assignable or transferable. However, a change of location shall be allowed to the owner of the permit upon the payment to the city treasurer of the sum of two dollars.

     B.     The city treasurer shall make a charge of two dollars for each duplicate of a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter which has been lost or destroyed. (Ord. 25 § 7, 1978)

 

5.04.090 Posting.
     All permits must be kept and posted in the following manner:

     A.    Subject to other provisions of this code, any permittee engaged in business at a fixed place of business shall keep the permit issued posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted.

     B.     Any person engaged in business in the city, but not operating from a fixed place of business, shall keep the permit issued to him or her upon his person at all times while engaging in such business.

     C.     Each permittee shall at all times, when requested, exhibit said permit to any police officer or other official of the city. (Ord. 25 § 8, 1978)

 

5.04.100 Payment--Delinquency.
     All permits shall be paid in advance in the lawful money of the United States at the office of the city treasurer; provided, however, that the permits required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable from and after the first day of July, 1978. All permits charged on an annual basis shall be prorated for the year 1978 and shall be due and payable on July 1, 1978 and the first day of each January thereafter. Said permits shall be delinquent thirty days after the same are due and payable, except monthly and quarterly permits which shall be delinquent ten days after the same becomes due and payable. (Ord. 25 § 10, 1978)

 

5.04.110 Payment--Due and payable when.
     A.    The monthly permit provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of each month, in advance, unless otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, from all persons who have for the previous month been permitted to carry on the same business, show, exhibition or game (and from all persons who have not been permitted for the previous month for the same business, show, exhibition or game).

     B.     The quarterly permit provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first days of January, April, July and October, in advance, and all such permits shall expire with the last days of March, June, September and December of each year; provided, however, that any person desiring to do so may pay for and procure all four quarterly permits at the time the first quarterly permit becomes due and payable under the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     The daily and weekly permits provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city in advance.

     D.    The annual permits provided in this chapter shall be due and payable to the city on the first day of January of each year, in advance.

     E.     No greater or less amount of money shall be charged or received for any permit than is provided in this chapter, and no permit shall be sold or issued for any part of time other than is provided in this chapter, and there shall be no rebate given for any unused portion of the term except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 12, 1978)

 

5.04.120 Separate permits for separate businesses.
     A separate permit shall be obtained for each separate business, or each branch establishment, or separate place of business in which a business, show, exhibition, or game is transacted, conducted, or carried on, only that business, show, exhibition or game described in such permit, and which is indicated thereby; provided further, that where a permit is imposed in this chapter upon any business, show, exhibition, or game in which the average number of employees of such business or the number of business transactions is made the basis for ascertaining the amount of such permit, a separate permit tax shall be paid for each branch establishment or place of business in which the business, show, game, or exhibition is transacted, conducted, or carried on, based upon the average number of employees or

number of business transactions of each such branch establishment or separate place of business. Any person conducting more than one business in the same storeroom shall not be required to pay more than one permit tax; provided, however, such additional business is so conducted by him or her shall be one that is ordinarily and customarily conducted in connection with such other business. (Ord. 25 § 11, 1978)

 

5.04.130 Moneys collected.
     All moneys collected under this chapter shall be deposited in the general fund of the city by the city treasurer. (Ord. 25 § 13, 1978)

 

5.04.140 Waiver of payment by city council in certain cases.
     A.    The city council may at its option and good cause appearing therefor, waive the payment of any concert, exhibition, lecture or entertainment, the nature of which in view of public morals and well-being, meets with the approval of the city council and where the major portion of the receipts, if any, derived therefrom are to be used solely for charitable or benevolent purposes within the city and not for the purpose of private gain.

     B.     The city council may at its option and good cause appearing therefor, waive the payment of any permit fee required by this chapter to be paid by any religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county, or municipal organization for the conducting or staging of any entertainment, dance, concert, exhibition or lecture, the nature of which in view of public morals and well-being, meets with the approval of the city council, and where the major portion of the receipts, if any, derived from any of the same are to be used wholly for the benefit of such organization and not for the purpose of private gain of any individual. (Ord. 25 § 37, 1978)

 

5.04.150 Interstate commerce.
     None of the permit fees provided for by this chapter shall be so applied as to occasion an undue burden upon the interstate commerce. (Ord. 25 § 39, 1978)

 

5.04.160 Unlawful activities prohibited.
     This chapter shall never be construed, or held as licensing or permitting the carrying on of any unlawful trade, calling, occupation, game or amusement and every such trade, calling, occupation, game or amusement is prohibited, and no permit shall be granted or issued therefor. (Ord. 25 § 40, 1978)

 

5.04.170 Penalties.
     If the permits in this chapter provided shall not be paid on or before the 31st day of the month following the date when it shall become due, as provided in this section, then a penalty in the amount equal to twenty-five percent of the permit tax due and payable shall be added thereto. If the permits in this chapter shall not be paid on or before sixty days following the date when it shall become due, then a penalty in the amount of one hundred percent of the permit tax due and payable shall be added thereto. No permit shall be issued until such penalty shall have been paid, and in addition thereto, such delinquent permittee shall be liable for prosecution and the penalty provided in this section for failure to pay his permit as required by this chapter. (Ord. 72, 1981; Ord. 25 § 41, 1978)

 

5.04.180 False statement.
     No person shall wilfully make a false statement or fail to report any material fact in any application for any permit under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 42, 1978)

 

5.04.190 Failure to display permit or receipt.
     Failure to display a permit or receipt as provided in this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 36, 1978)

 

Article II. Fees
5.04.200 Amounts designated.
     The amount or rate of permit fees to be paid to the city by any person for transacting, engaging in, conducting or carrying on any business, show, exhibition or game as specified in this chapter shall be as provided in the sections set forth in this article. (Ord. 25 § 14, 1978)

 

5.04.215 Business permit processing fees.
     Every person who applies for a business permit in the city of Lemon Grove shall pay an annual business permit processing fee. Said fee shall be due and payable upon filing of the initial business permit application, and each subsequent year at the same time as the annual business permit renewal. Said fee shall be non-refundable and shall be separate from and in addition to the annual business permit tax provided for in this chapter.

     The amount of the business permit processing fee shall be established in the master fee schedule and adjusted as needed for the cost recovery of processing each business permit, in accordance with the annual update process of the master fee schedule. (Ord. 384 § 1, 2009; Ord. 198, 1991)

 

5.04.220 Business permit tax.
     Every person transacting, engaging in, conducting or carrying on any business within the city, and said business has a fixed location in and is upon the tax rolls of the city, shall pay a business permit tax as follows:

     A.    Base Fee. Except as otherwise provided in this article and specifically enumerated, the tax shall be an amount per year equal to a base fee of fifteen dollars plus two dollars per person, to and including a maximum of fifty persons, for the average number of persons employed in the scope of the employer’s business in the city during the year for which said permit is issued.

     B.     Out-of-Town Business-With Vehicles. Every person not having a fixed place of business within the city of Lemon Grove who delivers goods, wares, or merchandise of any kind by vehicle or who provides any service for the use of vehicles in the city shall pay a permit fee of forty dollars per vehicle, except wholesale delivery vehicles for which the permit fee shall be fifteen dollars per vehicle per year.

     C.     Out-of-Town Business-Other. Except as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection, every person not having a fixed place of business within the city who engages in business within the city and is not subject to the provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall pay a permit fee of forty dollars plus two dollars per employee per year.

     1.     Any contractor permitted pursuant to Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 7000) of Division 3 of the California Business and Professions Code shall pay a permit fee of fifteen dollars plus two dollars per employee per year, to and including a maximum of fifty employees.

     D.    Notwithstanding any other provision to the contrary, a medical marijuana dispensary, as defined in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 17.32.050, regardless of its corporate or association structure, shall be subject to the following license permit fees and charges:

     1.     A per member charge for an annual business license shall be fifteen dollars per year based on the number of members of the dispensary, as determined on a quarterly basis established by the tax collector (director of the department of finance).

     2.     Payments under subsection (D)(1), shall be made on a quarterly basis to the finance department of the city of Lemon Grove. The city shall have the right to audit the records of any dispensary in the same manner and under the same procedures found in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 3.20 (Transient Occupancy Tax). (Ord. 443 § 2, 2016; Ord. 96 § 1, 1983; Ord. 25 § 15, 1978)

 

5.04.230 Governing conditions.
     In each and every instance where a permit fee is required, the following conditions shall govern:

     A.    All permits shall be payable in advance.

 

     B.     If any person commences a new business during the calendar year, his or her permit shall be prorated on a quarterly pro rata basis for the balance of said calendar year.

     C.     For any business, classified under Section 5.04.240, which is applying for a renewal of permit, said permittee shall when applying pay a permit fee based upon the average number of persons employed during the previous year. (Ord. 25 § 16, 1978)

 

5.04.240 Inspection of books and records may be required—Failure to comply.
     A.    In each and every instance where the amount of permit fee to be paid by any person is based upon the number of employees or the amount or number of admissions, the permittee therein named shall and will on the request of the city treasurer then and there submit for inspection to the city treasurer any and all books, papers, accounts, and records including state and federal income tax returns, social security returns and state sales tax returns pertaining to the business. The permit as required in this chapter may be based upon the amounts indicated in said books, papers, accounts and records.

     B.     In the event a permittee fails to comply with the provisions of this section, such permittee shall then be liable to the penal provisions of this chapter and shall be liable for and shall pay an additional

sum in an amount equal to one hundred percent of the correct permit fee, together with the correct amount of said permit fee as based upon the actual number of employees for said business during the calendar year for which said permit was issued. (Ord. 25 § 17, 1978)

 

5.04.250 Professional persons.
     A.    Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or engaged in any business enumerated as follows shall pay a permit fee of twenty-five dollars per year, plus two dollars for the average number of employees acting within the scope of the employer’s business in the city during the calendar year for which said permit is issued:

     1.     Accountant;

     2.     Architect;

     3.     Assayer;

     4.     Attorney at law;

     5.     Auditor;

     6.     Bonds (fidelity, indemnity, faithful performance or bail);

     7.     Chemist;

     8.     Chiropodist;

     9.     Chiropractor;

     10.   Dentist;

     11.   Engineer (civil, electrical, chemical or mechanical);

     12.   Insurance salesman or broker;

     13.   Optometrist;

     14.   Oculist;

     15.   Optician;

     16.   Osteopath and osteopathist;

     17.   Physician;

     18.   Stocks and bonds (federal, state, county or municipal stocks or bonds, or stocks or bonds of incorporated companies or evidences of indebtedness of private persons or of incorporated companies);

     19.   Surgeon;

     20.   Veterinarian.

     B.     Each professional person mentioned above who is required to be permitted as such on his profession shall, each individually, whether or not operating as an individual, partnership or associate, pay said permit fee. (Ord. 25 § 18, 1978)

 

5.04.260 Real estate broker.
     Every person carrying on or engaged in or conducting the business of real estate broker shall pay the sum of fifteen dollars per year, plus an additional sum of ten dollars per year for every salesman or broker acting as salesman employed in or acting in any capacity as part of said business. (Ord. 25 § 19, 1978)

 

5.04.270 Auction room and auctioneer.
     A.    Every person carrying on the business of conducting an auction room or store where auctions are held shall pay a permit fee of one hundred fifty dollars per year. Every person carrying on the business of an auctioneer shall pay a permit fee of seventy-five dollars per month or any fraction thereof.

     B.     The auctioneer permit fee shall not be applicable if the auctioneer is associated with and carrying on his trade in an auction room or store permitted under this section. (Ord. 25 § 20, 1978)

 

5.04.280 Vehicles.
     Every person conducting, managing or operating a business in which ice cream carts, wagons or vending vehicles are used, shall pay a permit fee of two hundred dollars per year per cart, wagon or vending vehicle, payable quarterly. (Ord. 25 § 2l, 1978)

 

5.04.290 For-hire vehicles--Business in city.
     Every person conducting, managing or operating a business in which taxi cabs or for-hire vehicles are used, whose principal place of business is in the city, shall pay a permit fee of fifty dollars for each such taxi cab or for-hire vehicle. (Ord. 25 § 22, 1978)

 

5.04.300 For-hire vehicles--Business outside city.
     Every person conducting, managing, or operating a business in which taxi cabs or for-hire vehi

cles are used, whose principal place of business is outside the city, shall pay a permit fee of one hundred dollars for each such taxi cab or for-hire vehicle. (Ord. 25 § 23, 1978)

 

5.04.310 Peddler, solicitor and transient merchant.
     A.    Every peddler, solicitor or transient merchant as defined in this chapter who owns real or personal property located within the city used primarily for the business for which permit application is made and which property is on the tax rolls of the city, or is subject to such taxation, or who is an agent or representative of a person, firm or corporation who owns property lacated within the city used primarily for the business for which the permit application is made and which property is on the tax rolls of the city, or is subject to such taxation, shall pay a permit fee of ten dollars per year.

     B.     Every applicant for a permit under this chapter who does not own real or personal property located within the city used primarily for the business for which permit application is made and which property is not on the tax rolls of the city, or subject to such taxation, or who is an agent or representative of a person, firm or corporation who does not own property located within the city used primarily for the business for which permit application is made and which property is not on the tax rolls of the city, or subject to such taxation, shall pay a permit fee of fifty dollars per year.

     C.     Each peddler, solicitor, or transient merchant must secure a personal permit. No permit shall be used at any time by any person other than the one to whom it is issued. (Ord. 25 § 24, 1978)

 

5.04.320 Trailer parks.
     Every person conducting, managing or operating any trailer court or mobile home park shall pay a permit fee as follows: fifteen dollars per year plus two dollars for each trailer space or unit. (Ord. 25 § 25, 1978)

 

5.04.330 Pool hall.
     Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a pool hall or billiard hall shall pay a permit fee of fifteen dollars per year, and in addition thereto, shall pay the sum of ten dollars per year for each and every pool table or billiard table. (Ord. 25 § 26, 1978)

 

5.04.340 Bowling alley.
     Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of a bowling alley shall pay a permit fee of fifteen dollars per year, and in addition thereto, shall pay the sum of ten dollars per year for each and every alley therein. (Ord. 25 § 27, 1978)

 

5.04.350 Billboard.
     Every person conducting, carrying on or operating the business of billposting or sign advertising by means of billboards or advertising signboards, or advertising by means of posting, hanging or otherwise affixing or displaying bills, signs or other advertisements in the city, shall pay a fee of one hundred dollars per year, plus ten dollars for each additional billboard exceeding two in number, located within the city; provided, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to owners of real estate, or other agents in advertising the property for sale or lease by means of billboards or advertising signboards located upon the property advertised for sale or lease by such billboards or advertising signboards. (Ord. 25 § 28, 1978)

 

5.04.360 Pawnbroker.
     A.    Every person conducting, managing, or carrying on the business of pawnbroker shall pay the sum of one hundred dollars per year. For the purpose of this section the term pawnbroker shall be construed to mean and include every person conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money, either for him or herself or for any other person, upon any personal property or personal security or purchasing personal property and reselling, or agreeing to resell, such articles to the vendor or other assignees at prices previously agreed upon.

     B.     Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to apply to the loaning of money on personal property or personal security by any bank authorized to do so under the law of the state. (Ord. 25 § 29, 1978)

 

5.04.370 Shooting gallery or arcade.
     A.    Every person conducting, managing or carrying on the businesses of shooting galleries or arcades shall pay the sum of one hundred dollars per year.

     B.     For the purpose of this section, the term “arcade” means one general enclosure in which is conducted the business of operating or exhibiting any phonograph, gramaphone, marble and pinball games, talking machine, kinetoscope, biograph, projectoscope, or any other instrument or machine of like character, for the use of which a compensation or fee is charged, and exhibiting, showing, or letting the use of any microscope lung tester, muscle tester, galvanic battery, weighing machine, or machine of like character, for a money consideration. (Ord. 25 § 30, 1978)

 

5.04.380 Circus.
     A.    Every person conducting, managing, carrying on or operating a circus or other similar exhibition shall pay a permit fee of two hundred fifty dollars per day.

     B.     The permit fee provided in this section shall be in addition to all other permits due and payable to the city. (Ord. 25 § 31, 1978)

 

5.04.390 Vending machines.
     Every person owning, operating, managing, or controlling any vending machine, not in conjunction with any business, the property of which is on the tax rolls of the city, and which is coin-operated or slug-operated, shall pay a permit fee of twenty-five dollars per year, plus two dollars for each machine (machine is defined as a single apparatus receiving a coin and dispensing a product) located in the city. (Ord. 25 § 32, 1978)

 

5.04.400 Music machine.
     Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any music device, operated by coin or slug, shall pay twenty-five dollars per year for each such device. (Ord. 25 § 33, 1978)

 

5.04.410 Amusement machine.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, managing or controlling any mechanical play or amusement machine which is used, or permitted to be used, by the deposit of a coin in any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the deposit of any plate, disk or slug therein, which said slug, disk or plate may be acquired or purchased from any source whatsoever, shall pay twenty five dollars per year for each such amusement machine.

     B.     The city treasurer shall issue a separate receipt for each such amusement machine, which shall be attached and maintained thereon for the full term for which the receipt is issued. (Ord. 25 § 34, 1978)

 

5.04.420 Apartment rental.
     Any person conducting the business of apartment rental shall pay a permit fee of three dollars per unit. “Apartment” means any multiple housing rental property containing three or more housing units. The minimum fee under this section is ten dollars. (Ord. 25 § 35, 1978)

 

Article III. Enforcement and Penalty
5.04.430 Enforcement--Duties of city treasurer.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer, and she is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter and the chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the city treasurer.

     B.     The city treasurer, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon her, and acting through her deputies or duly authorized employees, shall examine all places of business in the city to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.

     C.     The city treasurer and her deputies and duly authorized employees shall have the power to examine all necessary books and records of the person doing business in the city required to be permitted by the terms of this chapter for the purpose of ascertaining the amount of permit fee required to be paid by the provisions of this chapter. The city treasurer and each and all of her deputies and duly authorized employees shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge, at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be permitted by the provisions of this chapter, and to demand an exhibition of such permit. Any person having any such permit theretofore issued in his possession or under his control who fails to exhibit the same on demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to the penalty provided for by the provisions of this chapter.

     D.    It shall be the duty of the city treasurer and each of her deputies to cause a complaint to be filed against any and all persons found to be a violator of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 25 § 9, 1978)

Chapter 5.08 UNIFORM PERMIT PROCEDURES
Note
*     Prior ordinance history: Ord. 38, 1979; Ord. 105, 1984; Ord. 124, 1985.

 

5.08.010 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in, conduct, manage, or carry on any of the following businesses, practices, professions, or occupations within the city without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with the uniform permit procedure:

     A.    Amusement establishment and devices;

     B.     Bingo;

     C.     Dances and dancehalls;

     D.    Entertainment;

     E.     Entertainers;

     F.     Massage establishments;

     G.    Massage technicians and trainees;

     H.    Solicitations;

     1.     Solicitors:

     a.     Permit,

     b.     Identification card;

     2.     Charitable solicitations:

     a.     Permit,

     b.     Information card;

     I.      Taxicabs and taxicab drivers;

     J.      Tattoo parlors and mobile tattoo vehicles. (Ord. 299, 2000; Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.020 Issuing officer.
     All permits issued shall be issued by the issuing officer, who, unless otherwise specified, shall be the city treasurer. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.030 Permit procedure--Application.
     Application for a permit shall be made to the issuing officer on forms provided by the issuing officer. The application shall contain a provision by which the applicant consents to having all required notices, unless otherwise specified, sent by mail to applicant’s address on the application by depositing the same in the United States mail, postage prepaid. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.040 Permit not transferable.
     Such permit shall not be transferable from person to person nor place to place. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.050 Permit fee.
     The fee established for any permit shall defray the cost of investigation and issuance of the permit. In the event the permit is for any reason whatsoever denied or in any event not obtained by the applicant, the fee paid shall not be refunded to the applicant. Fees shall be reviewed periodically so as not to be excessive. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.060 Permit renewal.
     A permit issued shall expire a year from the date of issue and may be renewed by filing a renewal application not less than thirty days prior to expiration date. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.070 Posting requirements.
     All permits issued for business establishments must be posted in a conspicuous place on the permitted premises. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.080 Application investigation.
     A.    Upon receipt of an application for a permit, the issuing officer may send copies of such application to any office or department which the issuing officer may deem appropriate in order to carry out a proper investigation of the application of his proposed business.

     B.     Every officer or department to which an application for a permit is referred may request from the issuing officer that additional information be obtained from the applicant relating to the proposed permit as such officer or department deems necessary.

     C.     The issuing officer and every officer or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant as it relates to doing business under said permit and may examine the premises proposed to be used for said business.

     D.    Upon receipt of an application, the issuing officer shall post for a period of ten days the name and business address of the applicant, the type of permit applied for, whether the application is for a new permit or for the renewal of an existing permit, and the fact that any interested member of the general public can submit information regarding the issuance of the permit. Such information shall be delivered to the office of the issuing officer within five days of the last day of posting. The names and business addresses of applicants shall be posted in the office of the issuing officer. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.090 Application denial--Notice and hearing.
     A.    The issuing officer may deny an application for a permit, if he finds the applicant or any agent or representative thereof has:

     1.     Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement or a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter; or

     2.     Violated any of the provisions of this chapter or any provisions of any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating said business or occupations; or

     3.     Been convicted of a crime, the nature of which indicated the applicant’s unfitness to operate the proposed business. A plea or verdict of guilty, a finding of guilty by a court in trial without a jury, a plea of nolo contendere, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed a conviction.

     B.     If after investigation the issuing officer determines that the application should be denied he shall prepare a notice of denial of application setting forth the reasons for such denial of application. Such notice shall be either sent by mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. Any person who has had a permit denied may request a hearing from the issuing officer. Such request must be made in writing and filed with the issuing officer within ten days of personal delivery of the notice of denial. If the notice of denial is mailed, applicant has an additional five days to request a hearing. The issuing officer shall notify the applicant of the time and place of such hearing and the hearing shall be conducted in manner prescribed in this chapter. The applicant shall also be entitled to appeal provisions of this chapter following the hearing before the issuing officer.

     C.     If the permit is granted, the name and business address of the permittee shall be available to any interested member of the general public for the duration of the permit. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.100 Permit suspension or revocation.
     A.    In the event that any person holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter violates, or causes or permits to be violated, any of the provisions of this chapter, or any provisions of any other ordinance or law relating to or regulating said business or occupation in an unlawful manner, the issuing officer, may, in addition to other penalties provided by ordinance, suspend or revoke the permit after the permit has been given the opportunity for a hearing as provided for in this chapter.

     B.     The issuing officer shall post for a period of ten days the name and business address of any person receiving a notice of suspension or revocation along with the fact that any interested member of the general public can submit information regarding the proposed suspension or revocation. Such information shall be submitted in writing and shall be delivered to the office of the issuing officer within five days of the last day of posting. The names and business addresses shall be posted in the office of the issuing officer. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.110 Hearings--Procedure.
     A.    In any case where the issuing officer determines that a permit issued pursuant to this chapter should be suspended or revoked, the issuing officer shall prepare a written notice of suspension or revocation, which includes a statement of the proposed action, a concise explanation of the reasons for the proposed action, the statutory basis relied upon for such proposed action, and an explanation of the permittee’s right to request a hearing from the issuing officer. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered, at least ten days prior to the effective date of such action. If within five days after receipt of such mailing or delivery the permittee or an authorized representative requests in writing a hearing from the issuing officer, the issuing officer shall immediately set a hearing and shall set forth in writing and send to the permittee by means of the mail or hand delivery, notice of the time, date and place of such hearing. The hearing shall be held not more than thirty days from the date of receipt of request for hearing. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer designated by the issuing officer. The person designated as hearing officer shall not have been connected in any manner in the decision to take the proposed action which is the subject of such hearing. No hearings shall be continued except upon a showing of good cause.

     B.     The hearing shall be conducted to determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit. The permittee may have the assistance of counsel or may appear by counsel and shall have the right to present evidence. In the event that the permittee, fails to appear at the hearing, the evidence of the existence of facts which constitute grounds for the suspension or revocation of the permit shall be considered unrebutted. The decision of the hearing officer shall be based solely on the evidence presented at the hearing. Upon conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer will give a verbal decision; provided, however, that in the discretion of the hearing officer, the decision may be delayed and given in writing in two days. In any case where a verbal decision is given at the close of the hearing, the hearing officer shall confirm that decision in writing within two days. The written decision shall set forth the findings of fact and reasons for the decision and a copy mailed to the permittee or an authorized representative. The decision of the hearing officer shall be posted in the office of the issuing officer for a period of five days along with the available procedures for appeal. A hearing held under this section or the failure or the permittee to request such a hearing or to appear at the scheduled time for such hearing in no way deprives the permittee to the right to appeal as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.120 Stay of suspension or revocation.
     The effect of a decision of the hearing officer to suspend or revoke a permit shall be stayed while an appeal to the city council is pending or until the time for filing such appeal has expired. If the city council, on appeal, determines that a permit issued under Chapter 5.20 (entertainment permit) is to be suspended or revoked, the effect of the decision shall be stayed for thirty days after any decision of the city council in order to allow the permittee to obtain judicial review of that suspension or revocation. There shall be no stay of the effect of the decision of the hearing officer upholding the denial of any permit. (Ord. 256 §2, 1996; Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.130 Exception to hearing procedure.
     A.    When, in the opinion of the issuing officer, there is an immediate threat to the public health, welfare or safety, the officer may suspend a permit without a hearing. The issuing officer shall prepare a written notice of suspension, which includes a statement of the action, a concise explanation of the reasons for the action, the statutory basis relied upon for such action, and an explanation of the permittee’s right to request a hearing from the issuing officer. Such notice shall be either sent by certified mail to the permittee’s last address provided in the application or be personally delivered. The permittee may request a hearing from the issuing officer within five days of receipt of notification that the permit has been suspended. The issuing officer shall notify the permittee of the time and place of such hearing and the hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in this chapter.

     B.     The hearing shall be held not more than thirty days from the date of receipt of said request or hearing. Following the hearing the person affected may appeal the decision in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The decision shall not be stayed during pendency of such hearing or appeal. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

 

5.08.140 Appeal.
     Within ten days after receipt of the decision of the hearing officer, any party affected by the decision may appeal such a decision by filing with the city council a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such a denial, suspension, revocation, or other decision is not proper, the city council will render a decision on said appeal not more than thirty days from the date of the filing. (Ord. 169 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 5.12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES AND ESTABLISHMENTS
5.12.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Amusement device,” includes any machine, device or apparatus, the operation or use of which is permitted, controlled, allowed or made possible by the deposit or placing of any coin, plate, disk, slug or key into any slot, crevice or other opening or by the payment of any fee or fees, for the use as a game, contest or amusement of any description, or which may be used for any such game, contest or amusement, and the use or possession of which is not prohibited by any law of the state.

     B.     “Amusement establishment” is any commercially operated establishment having five or more amusement devices. (Prior code §§ 21.101, 21.102)

 

5.12.020 Permit fee.
     The permit fee shall be one hundred twenty dollars, plus seventy dollars per amusement device per year. (Ord. 51 § 1, 1980; prior code § 21.108)

 

5.12.030 Permit procedure--Denial suspension, revocation.
     Except as provided herein, the procedure to follow in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform permit procedure, Chapter 5.08.

     A.    No amusement establishment shall be permitted unless a special use permit is secured as required in Article XXI, Section 320(5) of the Lemon Grove Zoning Code.

     B.     In addition to the reasons for denial listed in the uniform permit procedure, the issuing officer may deny an application or suspend or revoke a permit for the following reasons:

     1.     If the applicant is not a fit or proper person to conduct an amusement establishment;

     2.     If the premises is not a suitable or proper place therefor;

     3.     If the health, welfare or public morals of the community warrant such denial.

     The issuing officer may issue the permit upon such conditions as he determines would eliminate the situations which would otherwise result in denial of such permit. (Ord. 95, 1983; prior code § 21.103)

 

5.12.040 Alcoholic beverages prohibited.
     Except as herein provided, it is unlawful for the proprietor, manager, or employee of any amusement establishment to permit the consumption of any alcoholic beverage in an amusement establishment.

     A.    Any permittee holding an Alcoholic Beverage Control on-sale permit issued for public premises, as defined in Section 23039 of the Business and Professions Code of the state of California, may serve alcoholic beverages in an amusement establishment, so long as that amusement establishment has no more than eight amusement devices. Said establishment may operate more than eight amusement devices if application is made and a greater number of devices is allowed by a special use permit.

     B.     Any permittee holding an alcoholic beverage control on-sale permit issued for an eating place, as defined in the Business Professions Code of the state of California, may serve alcoholic beverages in an amusement establishment provided:

     1.     That the amusement devices are located in a room separated, by a wall, from the area where alcoholic beverages are sold;

     2.     That no alcoholic beverages are allowed in the room in which the amusement devices are located;

     3.     That the adult attendant shall be on duty at all times in the room in which the amusement devices are located. (Ord. 95, 1983; Ord. 87, 1982; prior code § 21.104)

 

5.12.050 Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence of any drug to be in any establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter. A person who conducts or assists in conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person or persons under the influence of any drug to be or remain at such place. (Prior code § 21.105)

 

5.12.060 Gambling prohibited.
     It is unlawful for the proprietor, manager or employer of any amusement establishment to permit any gambling of any kind, or permit any betting or wagering with money or anything of value upon the result of any game. (Prior code § 21.106)

 

5.12.070 Operation of establishment.
     The proprietor, manager or employee of any permitted amusement establishment shall insure that the operation of amusement devices is orderly and quiet and shall not permit any boisterous, offensive, indecent, vulgar, abusive or obscene language within the premises. (Prior code § 21.107)

Chapter 5.16 DANCES AND DANCEHALLS
5.16.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Alcoholic beverage” means alcoholic beverage, or beverages, as that term is defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act (California Statutes of 1935, page 1123, as amended)

     B.     “Public dance” is any such dance held or given in any place not a private residence or home.

     C.     “Public dancehall” is any room, place, or space, except a private residence or home, where dancing is carried on or permitted.

     D.    “Teenage dance” means a dance attended by any person fourteen or more years of age but under nineteen years of age unaccompanied by his parent or guardian. (Ord. 161 § 1, 1989; prior code § 21.201)

 

5.16.020 Exception to application of chapter.
     The requirements of this chapter are not applicable to any city park, as defined in Section 12.28.010, which closes at or before nine p.m. (Prior code § 21.201.5)

 

5.16.030 Permit--Procedure.
     The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the Uniform Permit Procedure, Chapter 5.08. (Prior code § 21.202)

 

5.16.040 Permit--Required for each location.
     No permit issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall authorize the conducting, operating or carrying on of the permitted business save at a single location and upon individual premises in said permit described. (Prior code § 21.203)

 

5.16.050 Permit--Classifications.
     For the licensing purposes of this chapter, premises or establishments whereon or wherein any public dancehall or public dance is maintained, conducted, carried on or permitted, are hereby classified and required to be permitted as follows:

     A.    A class A permit shall be required where there is daily or nightly dancing.

     B.     A class B permit shall be required where there is dancing not to exceed three days or nights in any calendar week.

     C.     A class C permit shall be required when dancing is conducted one night or one day only.

     D.    A class D permit shall be required where dancing is conducted in a bona fide club. The term “club,” as used in this chapter, means and includes only corporations or associations created by competent authority, which are the owners, lessees or occupants of premises operated solely for objects of national, social, fraternal, patriotic, political, or athletic nature, membership in which is by application, and for which regular dues are charged, and the advantages of which said club belong to all members, and the operation of which is not primarily for pecuniary gain. (Prior code § 21.204)

 

5.16.060 Permit--Fees.
     The fees for permits issued pursuant to the terms of this chapter shall be payable in advance; and for the several types or classes of permit provided in Section 5.16.050 the fees shall be as follows:

     A.    For a class A permit, one hundred ten dollars per year;

     B.     For a class B permit, one hundred ten dollars per year;

     C.     For a class C permit, fifty dollars;

     D.    For a class D permit, one hundred ten dollars per year. (Ord. 51 § 2, 1980; prior code § 21.212)

 

5.16.070 Expiration of permit.
     All class C permits shall expire at two a.m. of the calendar day following the date of issue. Applicants may state in their applications the date on which they desire to have the permit issued. Such permit shall not be renewed, but a new application must be filed with the issuing officer to obtain a new permit. (Prior code § 21.211)

 

5.16.080 Size of dance floor.
     It is unlawful for any person to carry on, or conduct, or assist in carrying on, maintaining or conducting any public dancehall or dance in connection with any business or place where alcoholic beverages are sold or served, in any room, place or space which does not contain a floor space allocated to dancing. (Prior code § 21.215)

 

5.16.090 Management change reported.
     In the event that any permittee shall desire to change the individual designated in the permit as the person to have direct management of the permitted premises he shall forthwith notify the sheriff, proposing the name of the person to be substituted in the management and control of the permitted premises. The person so proposed shall be investigated by the sheriff. If such a person is of satisfactory character, the sheriff may consent to such changes. In the event that such person is not of satisfactory character, the permit may be suspended by the sheriff, in his discretion, pending the proposal of some other person of satisfactory character. (Prior code § 21.216)

 

5.16.100 Teenage dances.
     In addition to all other provisions of this chapter, the following regulations shall apply to teenage dances as defined in this chapter:

     A.    All teenage dances shall be adequately supervised, and the permittee shall provide one adult chaperone for each ten teenage participants;

     B.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, consumed or be available on the premises, in or about which any teenage dance is held. Admission to a teenage dance shall be denied to any person who is or has been drinking any alcoholic beverage on his person;

     C.     The permittee shall employ, and there shall be on duty at all times during any teenage dance, at least one security officer for every one hundred participants, with a minimum of one security officer for every exit and entrance. (Ord. 162 § 2, 1989)

 

5.16.110 Certain persons to be excluded from premises.
     A.    It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or person in charge of any place permitted under the provisions of this chapter, or for any employee of such place, to harbor, admit, receive, or permit to be on or remain in or about such place, any intoxicated or boisterous person, or any person whose presence or conduct tends to corrupt the morals of any other persons present, or whose conduct or presence tends to create a violation of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     It is unlawful for any of the following persons to be or remain in or about any place permitted under the provisions of this chapter: Any lewd or dissolute person of either sex; any drunken or boisterous person or any person whose conduct while present in said place tends to create a violation of any of the provisions of this code, or of any law of the state, or which tends in any way to corrupt the good morals of any person or persons attending said dancehall, or in any way interferes with the proper management and control of the dancehall. (Prior code § 21.219)

 

5.16.120 Restricted hours.
     It is unlawful to provide or permit any music, dancing, or entertainment in or about any premises permitted under the provisions of this chapter between the hours of two a.m. and eleven a.m. (Prior code § 21.222)

 

5.16.130 Sanitation requirements.
     No permit shall be granted under the provisions of this chapter unless the hall or place in which said dance is to be held complies with this code and regulations of the city. The holder of such permit shall keep such dancehall, hallways leading thereto, and the immediate vicinity in a clean and sanitary condition at all times, and have all stairways, hallways, other passages, and rooms connected with such dancehall at all times open, adequately lighted and properly ventilated. (Prior code § 21.223)

 

5.16.140 Revocation.
     For any violation of the provisions of this chapter or for any cause by it deemed sufficient, the city council may at any time, by resolution, suspend or revoke any permit issued under the terms of this chapter. (Prior code § 21.226)

 

5.16.150 Enforcing agent required on premises.
     It shall be the duty of every owner, lessee, proprietor, manager or occupant of any hall, room, building or place permitted under the provisions of this chapter to have present at all times, when dancing is carried on in such hall, room, building or place, a qualified person or persons whose duty it shall be to see that the provisions of this chapter are lawfully carried out; provided, that the foregoing shall not apply where dancing is carried on or permitted under a class D permit as defined in this chapter, and where no alcoholic beverage is sold, served or consumed on the premises so permitted. (Prior code § 21.224)

 

5.16.160 Admittance of peace officers.
     Any peace officer of the city, or of the county or of the state, or any officer of the United States Government charged with the duty of enforcing the public laws of the United States Government, shall have free access at all times to any dancehall permitted under the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 21.225)

Chapter 5.20 ENTERTAINMENT PERMIT
5.20.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    Entertainment.

     1.     “Entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance, act, song and dance act, or poetry recitation, conducted or participated in by any professional entertainer in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted.

     2.     “Entertainment” also includes a fashion or style show, except when conducted by a bona fide nonprofit club organization as a part of the social activities of such club or organization, and when conducted solely as a fund raising activity for charitable purposes.

     3.     “Entertainment” does not include:

     a.     Mechanical music alone;

     b.     Instrumental music alone, except between the hours of two a.m. and six-thirty a.m. when the provisions of Section 5.20.100 shall apply; or

     c.     Dancing participated in only by customers; however, this paragraph does not exempt exhibition dancing by a person receiving compensation for such exhibition dancing.

     4.     “Entertainment” also includes the act of any person, while visible to any customer, exposing any portion of specified anatomical areas which are defined as follows:

     a.     Less than completely and opaquely covered:

     i.      Human genitals or pubic region;

     ii.     Buttock; and

     iii.    Female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or

     b.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

     B.     “Informal entertainment” means any act, play, review, pantomime, scene, song, dance act, song and dance act, or poetry recitation, conducted or participated in by any nonprofessional person or persons in or upon any premises to which the public is admitted.

     C.     “Professional entertainer” means a person or persons who engage for livelihood or gain in the presentation of entertainment.

     D.    As used in this chapter, “working day” means a day on which the administrative office of the city is open to the public for conduct of business. (Ord. 257 § 2, 1996; Ord. 93, 1983; prior code §§ 21.280.1, 21.280.2, 21.280.3)

 

5.20.020 Permit--Procedure.
     The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a permit that is set forth in the Uniform Permit Procedure, Chapter 5.08. (Prior code § 21.280.9)

 

5.20.040 Class I entertainment permit.
     A Class I entertainment permit shall be issued for entertainment by a professional entertainer as defined in this code. The annual fee for a Class I entertainment permit shall be eighty dollars for the first year, and forty dollars for each annual renewal. (Ord. 179, 1990)

 

5.20.050 Class II entertainment permit.
     A.    A Class II entertainment permit shall be issued for entertainment as defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) of this code. The annual permit fee shall be:

     1.     The fees set forth in Section 5.20.040; and

     2.     An additional fee in the amount of fifteen dollars per year.

     B.     Where the fees for a Class II entertainment permit have been paid by an applicant, no additional fee is required of the same applicant for a Class I or Class III entertainment permit for the same location covered by the Class II entertainment permit. (Ord. 179, 1990)

 

5.20.060 Class III entertainment permit.
     A Class III entertainment permit shall be issued for “informal entertainment” as defined in this code. the annual permit fee shall be eighty dollars for the first year and forty dollars for each annual renewal. (Ord. 179, 1990)

 

5.20.062 Permit fee--Entertainer.
     The annual permit fee for any person conducting or participating in entertainment as defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) shall be thirty dollars. All permit fees shall be payable in advance and said fee shall be reduced by the sum of two dollars and fifty cents for each month subsequent to the month of April that the original application is made. The fee for each annual renewal shall be thirty dollars. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.064 Permit fee--Manager.
     The annual permit fee for a manager of an entertainment establishment shall be thirty dollars. All permit fees shall be payable in advance and the fee shall be reduced by the sum of two dollars and fifty cents for each month subsequent to the month of April that the original application is made. The fee for each annual renewal shall be thirty dollars. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.070 Permit fee--Exemption.
     No fee is required for a permit for:

     A.    No entertainment at which no alcoholic beverage is sold or consumed where such entertainment is conducted by a bona fide charitable, religious, benevolent, patriotic, or educational organization, or by the United Service Organization. Any determination as to the exempt status of any applicant shall be made by the sheriff. (Prior code § 21.280.8)

 

5.20.080 False statement.
     In any case where an applicant knowingly or deliberately makes and material false statement on an application for a permit, such application shall be denied. (Prior code § 21.281.9)

 

5.20.090 Noise abatement.
     Whenever, after a hearing, notice of which must be given ten days prior thereto, it is determined that noise from any establishment permitted under this chapter interferes with the right of persons dwelling in the vicinity of such establishment to the peaceful and quiet use and enjoyment of their property, the council may require that the premises be soundproofed in a manner that in the judgment of the council will be effective to eliminate the noise or reduce it to a reasonable level. In taking any action under this section, the council must balance all of the interests of the respective parties, as well as the hardship of the interests of the respective parties, as well as the hardship which result from any order. If the council finds that the noise complained of is of a minimum or inconsequential degree, no action shall be taken under this section. If a permittee fails, within a reasonable time and after having been ordered to do so pursuant to this section, to take such steps as were ordered to abate any noise, his permit shall be suspended after a second hearing, ten days notice of which may be given, until such time as he complies with the order. (Prior code § 21.282.3)

 

5.20.100 Hours.
     No entertainment other than mechanical music of any sort may be conducted in an establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter between the hours of two a.m. and six-thirty a.m. (Prior code § 21.282.4)

 

5.20.110 Private club.
     No establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter may allow the premises to be used for the purpose of conducting a private club between the hours of two a.m. and six-thirty a.m. (Prior code § 21- .282.5)

 

5.20.120 Minors.
     No person under eighteen years of age shall enter, be or remain in or on any premises on or in which any topless entertainment, as defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) is presented. A permittee shall not permit such a person to enter, be or remain in or on any such premises. (Ord. 250 § 2, 1996; Ord. 248 § 2, 1996; prior code § 21.282.6)

 

5.20.130 Persons intoxicated or under the influence of drugs.
     It is unlawful for any person who is intoxicated or under the influence of any drug to appear in or be in any establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter. A person who conducts or assists in conducting any such establishment shall not permit any intoxicated person or persons who is under the influence of any drug to appear, be, or remain at such place. (Prior code § 21.282.7)

 

5.20.140 Exits.
     No entertainment shall be permitted in any establishment where a permit is required which does not provide unlocked doors with free and easy egress while patrons are in the establishment. (Prior code § 21.282.8)

 

5.20.150 Visibility from street.
     There shall be no entertainment of any kind where an entertainment permit is required which is visible at any time from the street, sidewalk or highway. (Prior code § 21.282.9)

 

5.20.160 Solicitation of drinks.
     No entertainment may be conducted in establishments where a permit is required where employees solicit or accept drinks of alcoholic beverages from customers. (Prior code § 21.283.1)

 

5.20.170 Gambling.
     No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a permit is required in which gambling in any form is permitted or tolerated, or in which there is kept any machine or machines or other device designed or commonly used for the purpose of gambling in any form. (Prior code § 21.283.2)

 

5.20.180 Solicitation of trade.
     No entertainment may be conducted in any establishment where a permit is required at which solicitation of trade is made at or near the entrance, either by personal solicitation or otherwise, by means of any device whereby the voice of the person soliciting can be heard at or near such entrance. (Prior code § 21.283.3)

 

5.20.190 Lighting.
     Every establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter shall be lighted throughout to an intensity of not less than three foot-candles during all hours, of operation except while the floor show is in progress. (Prior code § 21.283.5)

 

5.20.200 Parking lot.
     Every person operating an establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter, who owns, operates, or controls any parking lot adjacent to such establishment and used in connection therewith, shall adequately and uniformly light such parking lot to an intensity of not less than two foot-candles. (Prior code § 21.283.6)

 

5.20.210 Number of employees.
     At every establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter having a capacity of not less than two hundred persons, not less than one employee for the first two hundred persons, and one additional employee for each additional one hundred persons who could be accommodated, whether actually present or not, shall be constantly in attendance during the entire time that any entertainment is in progress, and shall devote their entire time and attention to the keeping of order, the checking of the admission of minors, and seeing to it that all provisions of this chapter are complied with. The sheriff may require such additional employees or guards on an individual basis as the sheriff deems in the public interest. (Prior code § 21.283.7)

 

5.20.220 Miscellaneous rules.
     No professional entertainer or employee may dance, unnecessarily converse, or physically associate with any customer during any entertainment period, however, that a regularly scheduled audience participation type of entertainment may be presented during the time stated and in the manner described in an advertisement posted at the premises and appearing in a regularly printed program; provided further, that a copy of said advertisement shall be received by the sheriff twenty-four hours prior to the conducting of said audience participation entertainment. This section shall not apply to establishments having a Class III entertainment permit. (Ord. 105 § 1, 1984; prior code § 21.283.8)

 

5.20.230 Sheriff--Inspection.
     The deputy sheriffs of the county, in addition to their several other duties, shall inspect any and all establishments permitted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 21.283.9)

 

5.20.240 Sheriff--Admission.
     The sheriff and/or his deputies shall be permitted by every permittee to enter free of charge any establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of inspection. (Prior code § 21.284.1)

 

5.20.250 Applicability of Sections 5.20.260 through 5.20.380.
     The provisions of Sections 5.20.260 through 5.20.380, inclusive, shall apply only to those establishments required to have a Class II entertainment permit. (Prior code § 21.284.2)

 

5.20.260 Additional grounds for suspension or revocation.
     In addition to the grounds for the suspension or revocation of a permit set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the provisions of Section 24200 of the Business and Professions Code of the state are hereby made applicable to permits under this chapter. (Prior code § 21.284.3)

 

5.20.270 Signs--Size regulation.
     No sign or signs which in whole or in part advertise any topless entertainment, and exceed in area seven hundred twenty square inches, shall be maintained, erected, used, or placed upon, on, or adjacent to the outside of any building and in connection with any premises therein permitted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 21.284.4)

 

5.20.300 Entrance sign.
     Every establishment permitted pursuant to Section 5.20.010(A)(4) of this chapter shall place at or near the entrance to the permitted establishment a sign of not more than two hundred twenty-five square inches and not less than one hundred forty-four square inches upon which is written: “WARNING. This establishment offers ‘topless’ entertainment. If you would be offended, do not enter.” Such sign shall be illuminated to an intensity of not less than ten foot-candles, and shall be clearly visible to any person entering the permitted establishment before such person enters the area where entertainment is conducted. (Prior code § 21.284.7)

 

5.20.310 Attire.
     No person shall enter, be, or remain in any establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter or required to be permitted pursuant to this chapter, except when attired in such a manner that the pubic area, private parts and the crease of the buttocks are completely covered and are not visible to the human eye. (Prior code § 21.284.8)

 

5.20.320 Manager.
     All establishments permitted, or required to be permitted, under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times when entertainment is being conducted. Such manager shall be permitted with the city and approved by the sheriff as provided in Section 5.20.332. (Ord. 93, 1983; prior code § 21.284.9)

 

5.20.332 Manager--Permit required.
     No person shall be employed as a manager of an entertainment establishment as required in Section 5.20.330 unless and until such person has appeared in person at the city and completed the permit application form provided by the sheriff. Any person applying for a permit under this section shall specify:

     A.    Name and residence address;

     B.     Social security number and driver’s permit number, if any;

     C.     Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the name of the person so convicted, the date of the conviction, the specific charge under which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.334 Manager--Additional data.
     Any person applying for a permit under Section 5.20.332 shall, in addition to the information required thereby, provide the sheriff with a recent photograph, which photograph may be taken by the sheriff and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division, for search. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.336 Manager--Permit required before employment.
     No person shall employ any person as a manager of an entertainment establishment until such person has applied for and received a permit as provided in Sections 5.20.332 and 5.20.334, and until written notification has been received from the city that such manager applicant has been duly permitted. The city’s notices of permit shall be maintained by the employer at the place of business and shall be available for inspection at all times. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.340 Entertainers--Permit required.
     No person shall conduct or participate in any entertainment as defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) unless and until such person has appeared in person at the city and completed the permit form provided by the sheriff. Any person applying for a permit under this section shall specify:

     A.    Name and residence address;

     B.     Social security number and driver’s permit number, if any:

     C.     Whether such person has ever been convicted of any crime except misdemeanor traffic violations. If any person mentioned in this subsection has been so convicted, a statement must be made giving the name of the person so convicted, the place and court in which the conviction was obtained, and the sentence imposed as a result of such conviction. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.350 Entertainers--Additional data.
     Any person applying for a permit under Section 5.20.340 shall, in addition to the information required thereby, provide the sheriff with a recent photograph, which photograph may be taken by the sheriff and forwarded to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, Identification Division for search. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.360 Entertainers--Permit required before employment.
     No person shall employ any person to participate in or conduct any entertainment defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) unless and until such person has applied for or received a permit as provided in Sections 5.20.340 and 5.20.350, and until written notification has been received from the sheriff that such person has been duly permitted. The sheriff’s notices of licensing shall be maintained by the employer at the place of business, and shall be available for inspection at all times. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.361 Time for action on permits.
     Upon receipt of an application for an entertainment, manager’s or entertainer’s permit, the clerk shall determine whether the application is complete. If the clerk finds the application to be incomplete, she/he shall, within three working days, send a notice of deficiency to the applicant specifying the reasons why the application is incomplete. The clerk, within seven working days after receipt of a complete application, shall take one of the following actions:

     A.    Cause such permit to be issued; or

     B.     Send applicant a notice of denial of the permit stating the reasons therefor; or

     C.     Issue a temporary permit good for fourteen working days.

     In any event, the clerk shall, within twenty-one working days after a complete application is received, cause the permit to be issued or send applicant a notice of denial.

     The temporary permit shall be valid for fourteen working days. During the term of that temporary permit, applicant shall be treated as though he/she had been issued a regular permit pursuant to this chapter.

     If the permit is denied, the applicant shall have the right, but not the obligation, to appeal that decision pursuant to Chapter 5.08 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. If the applicant chooses not to appeal such a denial, the city shall not, in any court action regarding such denial, assert that applicant has failed to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. (Ord. 257 § 3, 1996; Ord. 254 § 2, 1996; Ord. 252 § 2, 1996)

 

5.20.362 Permit not transferable.
     Any permit issued pursuant to Sections 5.20.332/5.20.334 and 5.20.340/5.20.350 is not transferable from person to person or place to place of employment, and it shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly be in possession of a permit not duly issued to him or her and to use said permit as identification as an entertainer or manager. Every person, while conducting or participating in entertainment as defined in Section 5.20.010(A)(4) or serving as a manager of an entertainment establishment is required to carry their permit upon their person or within their immediate possession and shall produce it for inspection by any law enforcement agency upon request. (Ord 93, 1983)

 

5.20.364 Permit--Form.
     All permits issued pursuant to Sections 5.20.332/5.20.334 and 5.20.340/5.20.350 shall be in the form of an identification card on which shall be set forth the name of the person to whom the permit is issued, date of issuance, place of employment, physical description and date of birth. Affixed to the permit shall be a recent photograph of the permittee and the permittee’s thumb print. (Ord. 93, 1983)

 

5.20.370 Additional reasons for denial of registration.
     The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter in obtaining registration is that set forth in the Uniform Permit Procedure, Chapter 5.08. In addition to the reasons stated in the uniform permit procedure, the issuing officer may deny a registration when:

     A.    The applicant has been convicted of a crime involving lewd, lascivious or obscene conduct; including, but not limited to, Sections 311.6, 314, 315, 316, 318 or Subdivisions (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647 of the Penal Code;

     B.     The applicant has been convicted of a crime which required the applicant to register under the provisions of Section 290 of the Penal Code. (Prior code § 21.285.4)

 

5.20.380 Motion pictures prohibited.
     No person or persons permitted pursuant to this chapter or required to be permitted under this chapter shall show, project or permit to be shown or projected in any establishment permitted pursuant to this chapter or required to so permitted, any motion picture, still picture, or slide, the main subject of which is the depiction of the human body, or any portion thereof, whether clothed or unclothed, unless and until the permit or such establishment is specifically endorsed by the sheriff to permit such showing. (Prior code § 21.285.5)

 

5.20.390 Multiple permit waiver.
     In any case where a permittee is required to have both a Class II entertainment permit and Class I or Class III entertainment permit, the sheriff may waive the requirements of Section 5.20.300. Any such waiver must be endorsed upon the permit affected thereby. (Prior code § 21.285.6)

 

5.20.400 Separation requirement.
     In or on any business premise, where persons appear in a state of nudity, no performer, dancer or entertainer shall intentionally have, no owner, operator, licensee or manager of such premises shall intentionally permit, physical contact between customers and persons performing for compensation irrespective of their state of dress. A distance of six feet shall be always maintained between any customer and dancer or entertainer performing for compensation.

     For purposes of this section, a “state of nudity” is a state in which any of the following body parts is displayed less than completely and opaquely covered:

     A.    Human genitals or pubic region; or

     B.     A buttock; or

     C.     A female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola. (Ord. 259 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 5.24 SOLICITORS AND CHARITABLE SOLICITATIONS
Article I. Solicitors
5.24.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Established place of business” means a fixed place, location or building, owned or leased or rented on a yearly or monthly basis, by the person who uses such place, location or building as his permanent place of business. “Established place of business” does not include a residence unless such person possesses a state retail sales tax permit indicating the residence as the business address.

     B.     “Goods” means goods, wares, merchandise, products, chattels of any description, magazines, periodicals or other publications or subscriptions therefor, regularly published newspapers as defined in subsection G of this section excepted.

     C.     “House” means any structure, building, or dwelling which has walls on all sides and is covered by a roof. “House” includes the land area surrounding it.

     D.    “Identification card” means a solicitor’s identification card issued to a person who possesses a valid solicitor’s permit or who is employed or engaged to solicit by a person permitted to do business as a solicitor within the city.

     E.     “Interviewer” means any person who goes to a house or upon any public place for interviewing persons or soliciting answers to questions for marketing research, opinion, research, attitude surveys, or for any other pool or information gathering service, for compensation or other business enterprise.

“Interviewer” does not include persons representing governmental entities, political parties, newspapers, radio or television stations, or persons circulating petitions for initiative, referendum or other political purpose.

     F.     “Permit” means a permit which is issued to a person who is doing business as a solicitor in the city.

     G.    “Newspaper” means a publication appearing at regular intervals at short periods of time, as daily, weekly, bi-weekly, usually in sheet form, and containing news that is reports of recent occurrences, political, social, moral, sporting events and items of varied character, both local and foreign, intended for the information of the general reader and has reference to the natural, plain and ordinary significance of the word newspaper and does not refer to or comprehend magazines or periodicals. “Newspaper” does not refer to or comprehend magazines or periodicals. “Newspaper” does not include a regular or periodic advertising circulars, certificates, papers, coupons, books, or pamphlets.

     H.    “Public place” means any place to which anyone may have access without trespassing.

     I.      “Retail business” means sales of goods for any purpose other than resale in the regular course of business. “Retail business” includes retailer.

     J.      “Services” means any act performed for the benefit of another under some arrangement or agreement whereby such act was to have been performed.

     K.    “Solicitor” includes peddlers, hawkers, transient dealers, salespersons or other itinerant vendors, or an interviewer as defined in subsection E of this section, or any person who sets up a temporary stand or goes to a house or dwelling or upon any public place for the purpose of selling services, or offers to sell, or selling by sample, or take orders for, give away or otherwise dispose of any goods, or anything of value, or who offers to distribute or delivers any coupon, certificate, handbill, ticket, token card, paper, circulars, chance coupon, magazine or other items which in turn are redeemable for goods.

     L.     “Temporary stand” means any stand, table, handcart, motor vehicle or other portable or mobile device whereby goods are displayed or dispensed.

     M.    “Wholesale business” means the selling of goods in gross to retail businesses and not by the small quantity or parcels to consumers thereof. “Wholesale business” includes wholesaler. (Ord. 45 § 4, 1979; prior code § 21.501)

 

5.24.020 Employing or engaging solicitors.
     An individual permitted to do business as a solicitor within the city and who employs or engages others to function or perform as solicitors shall furnish the issuing officer with the name and address, temporary and permanent, of all such persons employed or engaged in solicitations. (Prior code § 21.502)

 

5.24.030 Permit and/or identification card--Terms--Fees.
     A.    The terms of a solicitor’s permit or identification card shall be one year. However, at the discretion of the issuing officer or at the request of the applicant, the term may be for a lesser period. Thereafter the permit or identification card may be renewed for a period of one year anytime within thirty days prior to the expiration date of said permit or identification card upon application therefor.

     B.     The fee for a new solicitor’s permit shall be thirty dollars for a new period of one year or less. The fee for a permit renewal shall be twenty dollars.

     C.     The fee for a new solicitor’s identification card shall be twenty dollars. The fee for an identification card shall be issued without charge to the applicant who has paid the fee for a solicitor’s permit.

     D.    The appropriate fee shall accompany each application and is nonrefundable. The fees stated in this section are not for revenue purposes but shall be used to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and enforcement of this article. (Ord. 51 § 8, 1980; Ord. 45 § 5, 1979; prior code § 21.503)

 

5.24.040 Permit and/or identification card--Application--Contents.
     A.    The applicant for a permit and/or identification card shall apply to the issuing officer on forms prescribed by the issuing officer and may be required to furnish the following information about him or herself and his proposed activity:

     1.     Name;

     2.     Physical description and three photographs;

     3.     Fingerprints;

     4.     Local address;

     5.     Permanent address;

     6.     Description of the nature of his business;

     7.     Description of the nature of his goods or services to be offered;

     8.     Name and address of employer and a description of the relationship between the applicant and such employer;

     9.     The length of time for which such permit is desired;

     10.   A statement of all convictions for all misdemeanors and felonies;

     11.   Such other information as the issuing officer shall deem necessary and relevant to a determination of whether a permit should be issued pursuant to this article;

     B.     Upon receipt of an application for a permit and/or identification card, the issuing officer may send copies of such application to any officer or department which the issuing officer deems essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant. The issuing officer may forward fingerprints to the California Bureau of Identification for research. (Ord. 45 § 6, 1979; prior code § 21.504)

 

5.24.050 Permit and/or identification card--Application--Procedure--Additional reasons for denial, suspension or revocation.
     A.    The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, in obtaining a permit or identification card is that set forth in the Uniform Permit Procedure, Chapter 5.08. In addition to the reasons stated, the issuing officer may deny, suspend or revoke any application if he finds that the applicant, his agent, representative or employee:

     1.     Is convicted of any misdemeanor involving violation of any statute or ordinance regulating or taxing any business; or

     2.     Is convicted of any crime involving any of the offenses described under California Penal Code Section 290; or

     3.     Is convicted of any crime, the nature of which indicated the applicant’s unfitness to act as a solicitor; or

     4.     Who has violated any of the provisions of this article; or

     5.     Who makes any false statement of misrepresentations in his application for such permit and/or identification card.

     B.     For purposes of this section a plea of nolo contendre, or a plea or verdict of guilty, or a finding of guilt by a court, or a forfeiture of bail is deemed to be a conviction whether probation is granted or not. (Prior code § 21.205)

 

5.24.060 Permit and/or identification card--Issuance.
     A.    After completing his investigation of the applicant and application, and within thirty days from receipt of such application, the issuing officer shall approve or deny the issuance of the permit and/or identification card pursuant to the provisions of the Uniform Permit Procedure, Chapter 5.08.

     B.     Upon approval by the issuing officer, the permit and/or identification card issued to the applicant shall show the physical description of the permittee, his name and address, both temporary and permanent, and with the name of his principal if other than the permittee, and the nature of the business for which the permit has been issued. The identification card shall show the expiration date of the permit and shall be signed in ink by the permittee, and shall contain a photograph of the permit.

     C.     The permit shall also contain a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city, or any of its employees, of the purpose of persons conducting the solicitations. (Ord. 45 § 7, 1979; prior code § 21.506)

 

5.24.070 Exceptions.
     This article shall not apply to:

     A.    Students from an elementary school or a junior high school, or a high school, or public junior or community college, or public college or public university or any private educational institution, but only while such students are engaged in activity associated with academic or scholastic functions sponsored by and authorized by such schools;

     B.     Wholesalers, their representatives, agents or employees calling upon retail businesses, nor to retail businesses when such sales are made in the regular course of business and at the established place of business;

     C.     Sales by a farmer or rancher for products produced within the county by such farmer or rancher at the established place of business of such farmer or rancher;

     D.    Persons who sell their goods at the rented stall of a lawfully operated swap meet, permitted pursuant to Chapter 5.60, and who comply with the admission records as required in Section 5.60.070 of the city code.

     E.     A newspaper as defined in Section 5.24.010(G) and its employees. (Ord. 190, 1991; Ord. 45 § 8, 1979; prior code § 21.507)

 

5.24.080 Exemptions from fees.
     Applicants for a solicitor’s permit or solicitor’s identification card as described in this section shall be exempt from the appropriate fees.

     A. Veterinarians of the Army, Navy, Marines, or Air Force as defined in Section 16102 of the Business and Professions Code of the state. Before any such veteran is permitted under this chapter, such veteran shall submit to the issuing officer proof of release from active duty under honorable conditions or his honorable discharge from the United States Service, or a certified copy thereof.

     B.     Solicitors who are engaged exclusively in soliciting orders as an agent or representative of any person or persons engaged in interstate commerce which have their place or places of business outside of the state. Before any such agent or representative shall be permitted under this chapter, he shall submit to the issuing officer satisfactory identification and interstate commerce credentials from the person represented, and also comply with the requirements of Section 5.24.040. (Ord. 45 § 9, 1979; prior code § 21.508)

 

5.24.090 Identification card exhibited at all times.
     Every person permitted under this chapter, while engaged in the business for which permitted, shall display on the front of his person his identification card in a manner and at a location allowing such identification card to be easily seen and read by any other person and, upon demand by any peace officer, shall exhibit such identification card. (Ord. 45 § 10, 1979; prior code § 21.509)

 

5.24.100 Hours of business.
     No person shall do business as a solicitor from eight p.m. until eight a.m. local time, except by appointment. (Prior code § 21.510)

 

5.24.110 Prohibited vending.
     A.    No solicitor shall contact, or attempt to contact, any occupant of any house or dwelling whereat the owner or occupant of the house or dwelling has posted at the front of the house or dwelling, printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at the normal entrance way to such house or dwelling, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting.

     B.     No solicitor shall contact, or attempt to contact, any member of the public on any private commercial property which is normally open to the general public whereat the owner or legal occupant thereof has posted at all entrances thereto, printed with letters not less than one inch in height, and at a location which is unobstructed and clearly visible by all persons entering such property, a sign or placard prohibiting such soliciting. (Prior code § 21.511)

 

Article II. Charitable Solicitations
5.24.120 Purpose.
     The city council declares that the purpose of the article is to safeguard the public against fraud, deceit and imposition, and to foster and encourage fair solicitations for charitable purposes, wherein the person being solicited will know that portion of the money will actually be utilized for charitable purposes. (Ord. 45, l979; prior code § 21.513)

 

5.24.130 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Sale” means and includes a gift made with the hope or expectation of monetary compensation.

     B.     “Solicitation for charitable purposes” means any request, plea, entreaty, demand, or invitation, or attempt thereof, to give money or property, in connection with which:

     1.     Any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or

     2.     The name of any charity, philanthropic or charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement for making any such gift; or

     3.     Any statement is made to the effect that such gift or any part thereof will go to or be used for any charitable purpose or organization.

     C.     “Sales solicitation for charitable purposes” means the sale of, offer to sell, or attempt to sell any advertisement, advertising space, book, card, chance, coupon device, magazine subscription, membership, merchandise, ticket of admission or any other thing or service in connection with which:

     1.     Any appeal is made for charitable purposes; or

     2.     The name of any charity, philanthropic or charitable organization is used or referred to in any such appeal as an inducement for making any such sale; or

     3.     Any statement is made to the effect that the whole or any part of the proceeds from such sale will go to or be used for any charitable purpose or organization.

     D.    “Charity” means and includes any nonprofit community organization, fraternal, benevolent, educational, philanthropic, or service organization, governmental employee organization, any person who solicits or obtains contributions solicited from the public for charitable purposes, and any person who holds any assets for charitable purposes

     E.     A solicitation for charitable purposes, or a sale, offer or attempt to sell for charitable purposes, shall include the making or disseminating or causing to be made or disseminated before the public in this state, in any newspaper or other publication, or any advertising device, or by public outcry or proclamation, or in any other manner or means whatsoever any such solicitation. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.140 Completed solicitation.
     A solicitation is completed whether or not the person making or receiving the solicitation receives or makes any contribution or makes any sale or purchase referred to in this article. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.150 Solicitation requirements.
     A.    Prior to any solicitation or sales solicitation for charitable purposes, the solicitor or seller shall exhibit to the prospective donor or purchasers a card entitled “Solicitation or Sale for Charitable Purposes Card.” The card shall be signed and dated under penalty of perjury by and individual who is a principal, staff member, or officer of the solicitation organization. The card shall give the name and address of the soliciting organization or the person who signed the card and the name and business address of the paid individual who is doing the actual soliciting. In lieu of exhibiting a card, the solicitor or seller may distribute during the course of the solicitation any printed material, such as a solicitation brochure, provided such material complies with the standards set forth below, and provided that the solicitor or seller informs the prospective donor or purchaser that such information as required below is contained in the printed material. Information on the card or printed material shall be presented in at least ten point type and shall include the following:

     1.     The name and address of the combined campaign, each organization, or fund on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes;

     2.     If there is no organization or fund, the manner in which the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes;

     3.     The amount, stated as a percentage of the total gift or purchase price, that will be used for direct fund raising expenses. If paid fund raisers are paid a set fee rather than a percentage of the total amount raised, the card shall show the total cost that is estimated will be used for direct fund raising expenses. If the solicitation is not a sale solicitation, the card may state, in place of the amount of fund raising expenses, that an audited financial statement of such expenses may be obtained by contacting any organization at the address disclosed;

     4.     The non-tax-exempt status of the organization or fund, if the organization or fund for which the money or funds are being solicited does not have a charitable tax exemption under both federal and state law. If no portion is so deductible, the card shall state “this contribution is not tax deductible.”

     B.     Knowing and willful noncompliance by any individual volunteer who receives no compensation of any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by any charitable organization shall subject the solicitor or seller to the penalties of this chapter.

     C.     When the solicitation is not a sales solicitation, any individual volunteer who receives no compensation of any type from, or in connection with, a solicitation by any charitable organization, may comply with the disclosure provisions by providing the name and address of the charitable organization on behalf of which all or any part of the money collected will be utilized for charitable purposes, by stating the charitable expenses for which the solicitation is made, and by stating to the person solicited that information about revenue and expenses of such organization, including its administration and fund raising costs, may be obtained by contacting the organization’s office at the address disclosed. Such organization shall provide such information to the person solicited within seven days after receipt of the request. If the volunteer is ten years of age or younger, he is not required to make any disclosure. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.160 Initial solicitation without direct personal contact.
     If the initial solicitation or sales solicitation is made by radio, television, letter, telephone or any other means not involving direct personal contact with the person solicited, this solicitation shall clearly disclose the information required by Section 5.24.150. This disclosure requirement shall not apply to any radio or television solicitation of sixty seconds or less. If the gift is subsequently made or the sale is subsequently consummated the solicitation or sale for charitable purposes card shall be mailed to or otherwise delivered to the donor, or to the buyer with the item or items purchased. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.170 Registration required.
     Any person or organization engaging in any regulated activity set forth in Sections 5.24.150 and 5.24.160 shall register with the city treasurer or his/her representative. Registration shall be done on a form prescribed by the treasurer and shall be deemed completed once the following information is provided:

     A.    The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the person or organization sponsoring, promoting or conducting the proposed solicitations;

     B.     The full name, mailing address and telephone number of the individual person or persons who will have supervision of and responsibility for the proposed solicitations;

     C.     The subject matter of the proposed solicitation, and the purpose thereof;

     D.    A description of the proposed solicitation indicating the type of communication to be involved; and

     E.     The dates and hours which the solicitations are proposed to begin, and the expected duration of the proposed solicitation. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.180 Financial records.
     The financial records of a soliciting organization shall be maintained on the basis of generally accepted accounting principles as defined by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants and the financial accounting standards board. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.190 Exceptions to provisions.
     The provisions of this article shall not apply to solicitations, sales, offers, or attempts to sell within the membership of a charitable organization or upon its regular occupied premises, nor shall it apply to funds raised as authorized in Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 103, 1983)

 

5.24.200 Violation--Penalty.
     Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 103, 1983)

Chapter 5.28 TAXICABS
5.28.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Doing business” means adopting or soliciting passengers for hire in the city. “Doing business” also includes discharging of a passenger for hire in the city if such passenger boarded the taxicab in a military installation lying wholly or partially in the city.

     B.     “Driver” means an individual who drives, or is in actual physical control of, a taxicab in which passengers are carried for hire within the city.

     C.     “Driver’s identification card” means the annual identification card issued to a taxicab driver pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    “Permit” means the operator’s annual permit for all of the taxicabs operated by an operator and issued pursuant to this chapter.

     E.     “Operator” means a person, firm, partnership or corporation engaged in the business of operating one or more taxicabs and carrying passengers in such taxicabs for hire within the city.

     G.    “Posted rate” means the rate charge registered with the sheriff and posted within the taxicab vehicle. The posted rate indicates the rate of charge at which the taximeter has been set and inspected by the sealer of weights and measures.

     H.    “Taxicab” means a motor-propelled passenger-carrying vehicle for hire which is used for the transportation of passengers over and along the public streets, not over a defined route, but as to the route and destination in accordance with and at the direction of the passenger or person hiring such vehicle. (Prior code § 21.301)

 

5.28.020 County operator permit required.
     No person shall engage in the business of operating a taxicab company in the city unless a taxicab operator permit has first been obtained from the county of San Diego, office of the sheriff. (Ord. 161 § 2, 1989)

 

5.28.030 Taxi driver’s identification card required.
     No person shall drive any taxicab in the city unless a taxi driver’s identification card has first been obtained from the county of San Diego, office of the sheriff. (Ord. 161 § 2, 1989)

Chapter 5.32 BINGO
5.32.010 Purpose.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, this chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution in order to make the game of bingo lawful under the terms and conditions set forth in this chapter. (Prior code § 37.305)

 

5.32.020 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Bingo” is a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols on a card which conform to the numbers or symbols selected at random. The game of bingo shall also include cards having numbers or symbols which are concealed and preprinted in a manner providing for distribution of prizes. The winning cards shall not be known prior to the game by any person participating in the playing or operation of the bingo game. All such preprinted cards shall bear the legend for sale or use only in a bingo game authorized under California law and pursuant to local ordinance.

     B.     “Minor” means any person under the age of eighteen years.

     C.     “Authorized organization” means an organization exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, or 23701l of the Revenue and Taxation Code. Authorized organization also includes a senior citizens organization and a mobilhome park association. (Ord. 85, 1982; prior code § 37.306)

 

5.32.030 Permit--Required.
     It is unlawful for any person to conduct any bingo games in the city unless such person is a member of a nonprofit, charitable organization acting on behalf of such nonprofit, charitable organization and has been issued a permit as provided by this chapter. (Prior code § 37.307)

 

5.32.040 Permit--Application--Contents.
     Application for permit shall be made to the sheriff on forms prescribed by the sheriff, and shall be filed not less than ten days prior to the proposed date of the bingo game or games. Such application form shall require from the applicant at least the following:

     A.    A list of all members who will operate the bingo game, including full names of each member, date of birth, place of birth, physical description and driver’s license number;

     B.     The date(s) and place(s) of the proposed bingo game or games;

     C.     Proof that the organization is a nonprofit, charitable organization as defined by this chapter. (Prior code § 37.308)

 

5.32.050 Permit--Application--Investigation--Issuance.
     A.    Upon receipt of an application for a permit the sheriff may send copies of such application to any office or department which the sheriff deems essential in order to carry out a proper investigation of the applicant.

     B.     The sheriff and every officer and/or department to which an application is referred shall investigate the truth of the matters set forth in the application, the character of the applicant, as may examine the premises to be used for a bingo game.

     C.     Upon approval of any application for a bingo permit, the sheriff shall issue the permit. (Prior code § 37.310)

 

5.32.060 Permit--Application--Denial, suspension and/or revocation.
     A.    The sheriff may deny an application for a bingo permit, or suspend or revoke a permit if he finds the applicant or permit or any agent or representative thereof has:

     1.     Knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of a material fact in the application or in any record or report required to be filed under this chapter;

     2.     Violated any of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     If after investigation the sheriff determines that a bingo permit should be suspended or revoked or an application for such permit denied, he shall prepare a notice of suspension, revocation or denial of application setting forth the reasons for such suspension, revocation or denial of application. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail to the applicant’s last address provided in the application, or be personally delivered. Any person who has had an application for a bingo permit denied by the sheriff, or who has had a bingo permit denied, suspended or revoked by the sheriff may appeal the sheriff’s decision in the manner provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 37.314)

 

5.32.070 Permit--Term--Fees.
     A.    The term of a bingo permit is one year.

     B.     The fee for a bingo permit shall be fifty dollars, twenty-five of which shall be refunded if the application for permit is denied. An additional fee of one percent of the monthly gross receipts over five thousand dollars derived from bingo games shall be collected monthly by the issuing officer. (Ord. 85, 1982)

 

5.32.080 Permit not transferable.
     Each permit issued under this chapter shall be issued to a specific person on behalf of a specific nonprofit, charitable organization to conduct a bingo game at a specific location and shall in no event be transferable from one person to another nor from one location to another. (Prior code § 37.311)

 

5.32.090 Appeal procedure.
     Whenever an appeal is provided for in this chapter, such appeal shall be filed and conducted as prescribed in this section:

     A.    Within fifteen days after the date of any denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the sheriff, an aggrieved party may appeal such action by filing with the city clerk a written appeal briefly setting forth the reasons why such denial, suspension, revocation or other decision is not proper.

     B.     Upon receipt of such written appeal, the city clerk shall assign the appeal to a hearing officer selected by the clerk on a rotating basis from a list of qualified hearing officer approved by the city council. The hearing officer so assigned shall schedule a hearing before him or her within ten days after the date of assignment of the appeal by the clerk. At least one week prior to the date of the hearing on appeal, the clerk shall notify the appellant and sheriff of the date of the hearing. The hearing officer is authorized to issue subpoenas, to administer oaths and to conduct the hearing on the appeal. At such hearing the sheriff and the appellant may present evidence relevant to the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the sheriff. The hearing officer shall receive evidence and shall rule on the admissibility of evidence and on questions of law. The formal rules of evidence applicable in a court of law shall not apply to such hearing.

     C.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer may uphold the denial, suspension, revocation or other decision of the sheriff, or the hearing officer may allow that which has been denied, reinstate that which has been suspended or revoked, or modify or reverse any other sheriff’s decision which is the subject of the appeal. The hearing officer shall within five days file with the city clerk written findings of fact and conclusions of law and his decision. The decision of the hearing officer is final. (Prior code § 37.315)

 

5.32.100 Limitations.
     A.    An authorized organization shall conduct a bingo game only on property that has been owned or leased by it for a period of not less than twelve months immediately preceding the filing of an application to conduct bingo, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for the performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. Nothing in this section shall be construed to require that the property owned or leased by the organization be used or leased exclusively by such organization.

     B.     No minors shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game.

     C.     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to members of the nonprofit, charitable organization.

     D.    A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the authorized organization. Such members shall be approved by the sheriff. If, after the permit has been issued, the authorized organization submits additional names to the sheriff for approval, the application for approval shall be accompanied by a fee of five dollars for each name, no part of which shall be refundable, and which shall be used to defray the cost of investigation. Such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any bingo game. Only the organization authorized to conduct a bingo game shall operate such game or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game.

     E.     No individual, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity except the organization authorized to conduct a game shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game.

     F.     With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes. With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

     1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

     2.     A portion of such proceeds not to exceed ten percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or one thousand dollars per month, whichever is less, may be used for the rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, and administrative costs;

     3.     Such proceeds may be used to pay permit fees.

     Within thirty days after the bingo game is held the applicant will file with the city treasurer a full and complete financial statement of all monies collected, disbursed and the amount remaining for charitable purposes.

     G.    No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted.

     H.    The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo game shall not exceed two hundred fifty dollars in cash or in kind, or both, for each separate game which is held.

     I.      No bingo game shall be conducted between the hours of midnight and eight a.m.

     J.      Except as provided in subdivision 1 of this subsection, the permittee may conduct bingo on not more than one day during any seven day period. Once during each year the issuing officer may permit a permittee to conduct bingo games for more than one day during any seven day period, provided that such permission shall be limited to bingo games which will be conducted in conjunction with an established annual event regularly held by the permittee.

     1.     Any permittee owning or leasing a facility which has a rated occupancy load of eighty or fewer persons as determined by the fire marshal, shall be entitled to conduct bingo on not more than two days during any seven day period. (Ord. 85, 1982)

 

5.32.110 Inspection.
     Any peace officer in the city shall have free access to any bingo game permitted under this chapter. The permittee shall have the bingo permit and lists of approved staff available for inspection at all times during any bingo game. (Prior code § 37.313)

 

5.32.120 Prohibited games.
     It is unlawful for any person to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any game, machine or enterprise wherein:

     A.    A consideration is paid by the player;

     B.     Prizes are awarded as determined by skill or by any combination of skill and chance; and

     C.     Said game, machine or enterprise is played concurrently with or alternately or in conjunction or connection with:

     1.     Any lottery,

     2.     Any game of chance, whether or not a consideration is paid for playing the game of chance. (Prior code § 37.301)

 

5.32.130 Free games as enticement prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to set up, manage, conduct or maintain any combination of games, machines or enterprises wherein games of chance and games of skill are alternated or played in sequence with each other so that free games are used to entice or allure players into the playing for a consideration of paid games of skill or paid games combining the element of chance with the element of skill. (Prior code § 37.303)

 

5.32.140 Specific games prohibited.
     This chapter is intended to prohibit the playing of bingo, tango, bridgo, skill ball or any game, or combination of games similar in operation to such games, and to apply to free as well as to paid playing of such games. (Prior code § 37.304)

 

5.32.150 Violation--Penalty.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to receive a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized by this chapter.

     B.     Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     C.     All sanctions provided in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive (Prior code § 37.316)

Chapter 5.36 FORTUNE TELLING AND RELATED OCCUPATIONS
5.36.010 Definitions.
     A.    “Fortune telling” shall mean and include telling of fortunes, forecasting of future events or furnishing of any information not otherwise obtainable by the ordinary process of knowledge, by means of any occult or psychic power, faculty or force, including, but not limited to clairvoyance, clairaudience, cartomancy, psychology, psychometry, phrenology, spirits, tea leaves or other such reading, mediumship, seership, prophecy, augury, astrology, palmistry, necromancy, mind-reading, telepathy, or other craft, art, science, cards, talisman, charm, potion, magnetism, magnetized article or substance, crystal gazing, oriental mysteries, or magic, of any kind or nature.

     B.     “For pay” means for a fee, reward, donation, loan or receipt of anything of value. (Ord. 124 § 4, 1985)

 

5.36.020 Bond required.
     The applicant, with his application, shall file a surety bond executed by such applicant as principal, with a surety company authorized to do business in this state in the sum of five thousand dollars conditioned for the faithful and honest conduct of business by the applicant and/or his employees or agent. Such bond as to form, execution and sufficiency shall be approved by the city attorney. The bond required by this section shall be taken in the name of the people of this state and every person injured by the wilful, malicious or wrongful act of the principal acting in the course or scope of his employment or agency, may bring an action on the bond in his own name to recover damages suffered by reason of the wilful, malicious or wrongful act. (Ord. 124 § 4, 1985)

 

5.36.030 Permit--Procedure--Fee.
     A.    The procedure to follow, except as otherwise provided in this chapter in obtaining a permit is that set forth in the uniform permit procedure, Chapter 5.08 of this code.

     B.     The fee for permit shall be five hundred dollars annually. (Ord. 124 § 4, 1985)

 

5.36.040 Permit application.
     Every person who, for pay, actively conducts, engages in, carries on, or practices fortune telling shall file a separate verified application for a permit with the city treasurer. The application shall contain:

     A.    The name, home and business address, and home and business telephone number of the applicant;

     B.     The record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations;

     C.     The fingerprints of the applicant on a form provided by the sheriff’s department;

     D.    The address, city and state, and the approximate dates where and when the applicant practices a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others. (Ord. 124 § 4, 1985)

 

5.36.050 Engaging in or advertising--Permit required.
     No person shall engage in, conduct, advertise, or carry on the occupation, business, science, or art of astrology, palmistry, phrenology, life reading, fortune telling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, necromancy or other occult art or science for pay without first having obtained a permit therefor in accordance with Chapters 5.08 and 5.36 of this code. (Ord. 124 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 5.40 AMBULANCES
5.40.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     “Ambulance” means any vehicle designed, equipped and used to carry or to transport sick, wounded or injured persons.

     “Ambulance driver” means any person employed to drive or actually engaged in the driving of an ambulance.

     “Ambulance operator” means any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of carrying or transporting sick, wounded or injured persons by means of an ambulance.

     “Ambulance service” means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit or otherwise, of being prepared for, responding to requests for, and/or transporting one or more persons by ambulance on or in any of the streets, roads, highways, alleys or on any public way or place in the city.

     “Person” shall mean individual, firm, partnership or corporation. (Ord. 219, 1994)

 

5.40.020 County certification required.
     No person shall engage in the business of operating an ambulance service in the city unless an ambulance provider’s and/or critical care transport provider’s permit has been obtained from the county of San Diego department of health services/emergency medical services. (Ord. 219, 1994)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 RABIES, ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION
Chapter 6.08 DEAD ANIMALS

Chapter 6.04 RABIES, ANIMAL CONTROL AND REGULATION
6.04.005 Construction of chapter.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be constructed as authorizing the keeping or maintaining of any animal that is otherwise prohibited or restricted by any law, regulation or permit requirement. (Ord. 227 § 6(part), 1994)

 

Article I. Definitions
6.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Altered” for a female means having had the ovaries and uterus surgically removed; an ovariohysterectomy. “Altered” for a male means having had the testicles surgically removed.

     “Ambient temperature” means the temperature surrounding the animal.

     “Animal” means and includes, but is not limited to birds, fishes, reptiles, and nonhuman mammals.

     “At large” means being on any private property without permission of the person who owns or has a right to possess or use the property; or unrestrained by a leash on either public property, unless expressly permitted by law, or private property open to the public; or in any place or manner which presents substantial risk of imminent interference with animal or public health, safety or welfare.

     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove.

     “City animal shelter” means a premises selected by the city as a suitable facility for the requirements of this chapter.

     “City attorney” means the city attorney of the city of Lemon Grove, California

     “City veterinarian” means any person licensed to practice medicine dealing with the prevention and treatment of diseases and injuries in animals.

     “Curb” means to restrain or control an animal that it urinates or defecates only in the street gutters.

     “Dangerous animal” means any animal of a species or type likely to cause injury to a person, or any animal which has demonstrated a propensity to attach or cause injury to a person.

     “Dog” means a canis familiaris of either sex, altered or unaltered; or any other member of the canis genus if owned, kept or harbored.

     “Dog license” means a properly completed and validated dog license application and rabies certification form issued by city or authorized agency, including the dog owner’s name, address and telephone number; the dog’s name, and description, including breed, color, sex, month and year of birth, rabies vaccination date, license tag number and expiration date.

     “Dog license application and rabies certificate form” means the dog license application form issued by the city or authorized agency.

     “Guard dog” means:

     1.     A “sentry dog” as defined in The Dog Act of 1969 (Health And Safety Code Section 25971);

     2.     Any dog furnished for hire for use in guarding, patrolling or protecting any area, yard or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

     “Guard dog operator” means:

     1.     A “sentry dog company” as defined in The Dog Act of 1969 (Health And Safety Code Section 25974);

     2.     Any person who furnishes a dog for hire for use in guarding, patrolling or protecting any area, yard or premises, with or without supervision, to deter or detain unauthorized persons. The term “hire” shall include, but not be limited to, the renting or leasing of the services of a dog with or without a dog handler, or the sale of a dog with an option to repurchase.

     “Health officer” means the county director of public health, his agents or deputies.

     “Impounded animal” means any animal taken into custody by the city or authorized agency as provided in this chapter.

     “Indoor housing facility” means any structure or building, or housing intended to house animals,

which has the capability of controlling the environment within the enclosure created by the continuous connection of a roof, floor, and walls with at least one opening for entry and exit that is provided with a door or any moveable structure used to close off the opening and typically consisting of a panel of wood, glass, metal, etc. which slides on rollers or swings on hinges; provided, however, that any openings which provide natural light shall be covered with a transparent material, e.g., glass, plastic, etc.

     “Kennel” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises wherein seven or more dogs four months of age or over are kept or maintained for the purpose of breeding, training, boarding or raising for profit or pleasure.

     “Kennel operator” means the person who is the legal owner or is actually in control and operation of a kennel. The term “kennel operator” does not include a veterinarian operating a veterinary hospital.

     “Leash” means any rope, leather strap, chain or other material not exceeding six feet in length, being held in the hand of a person capable of controlling and actually controlling the animal to which it is attached.

     “License tag” means a piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with “Lemon Grove” and a number which has been issued by city or authorized agency.

     “Licensed dog” means a dog wearing its current dog license tag as required by this chapter.

     “Outdoor housing facility” means any structure or building, housing or intended to house animals which does not meet the definition of “indoor housing facility.”

     “Owner” means any person who is the legal owner, keeper, harborer, possessor or the actual custodian of an animal. Ownership is established by a person registering as the owner on a license or other legal document or by a person claiming ownership and taking possession of an animal.

     “Potentially dangerous animal” means:

     1.     Any animal of a species or type likely to cause injury to a person; or

     2.     Any animal which has once within the prior forty-eight-month period attacked, bitten, or otherwise caused a substantial injury to a person engaged in lawful activity.

     “Primary enclosure” means any structure used to immediately restrict an animal or animals to a limited amount of space, such a room, pen, run, cage, or compartment, exclusive of any kennel house.

     “Protection dog” means any attack-trained dog; any dog trained to guard, protect, patrol or defend any premises, area or yard; or any dog trained to protect, defend or guard any person or property with or without the necessity of direct human supervision.

     “Registered owner” means a person registered as the owner on a dog license or a person claiming ownership of an impounded animal and taking possession of it.

     “Sanitize” means to make physically clean and to remove and destroy, to the maximum degree that it is practical, agents injurious to animal or human health.

     “Stray” means an animal which is at large.

     “Substantial injury” means a substantial impairment of the physical condition of a person which requires professional medical treatment, including, but not limited to, loss of consciousness; concussion; bone fracture; protracted loss or impairment of function of any bodily member or organ; muscle tears, disfiguring lacerations or a wound requiring multiple sutures; or any injury requiring corrective or cosmetic surgery.

     “Vaccinated dog” means a dog inoculated with an approved, currently valid, antirabies vaccine, and wearing a current dog license tag indicating proof of such vaccination.

     “Vicious dog” means a dog which:

     1.     Has twice within a forty-eight-month period, bitten or has shown the disposition, tendency or propensity to attack, bite or otherwise cause injury to persons engaged in lawful activity;

     2.     Has once attacked or bitten a person engaged in lawful activity, causing death or substantial injury; or

     3.     Has been declared a “vicious dog” by the city or authorized agency pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 245 §§ 1, 3, 4, 1995; Ord. 227 §§ 1, 2, 1994; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

Article II. Rabies Provisions
6.04.020 Vaccination required.
     Dog owners shall obtain a rabies vaccination for each dog they own, keep, harbor, or have custody of, within one month after it becomes four months of age, or within one month after obtaining any dog over four months of age. It is unlawful for any person or persons to own, keep, harbor, or possess or to have in his or her care, charge or custody, any dog five months of age or over unless such dog has a current and valid rabies vaccination administered by any duly qualified and licensed veterinarian, with a rabies vaccine approved by the State Department of Health for use in dogs. Such vaccination shall be repeated at intervals specified by the State Department of Health in order to maintain adequate immunity. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.030 Vaccination clinics.
     The city or authorized agency shall provide or arrange for rabies vaccination clinics to be held at various locations where dog owners may obtain the required rabies vaccinations at the application fee. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.040 Certificate of vaccination.
     Any veterinarian who vaccinates a dog for rabies shall also certify by properly completing the license application and rabies certificate form issued by the city or authorized agency. When administered for the purpose of issuing a dog license, the vaccination must be valid for the entire licensing period as specified for the indicated vaccine by the State Department of Health. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.050 Exemption.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a dog need not be vaccinated for rabies during an illness if a veterinarian has examined the dog and certified in writing that such vaccination should be postponed because of a specified illness. Old age, debility and pregnancy are not considered contraindications to rabies vaccination. Exemption certificates are subject to approval by the city or authorized agency and shall be valid only for the duration of the illness. Exemption from vaccination does not exempt a dog from the licensing requirement. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.060 Reporting suspected case.
     Any person who observes or has knowledge of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies, or which acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, shall notify the city or authorized agency or the health officer and comply with appropriate laws and regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the city or authorized agency or the health officer. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.070 Reporting of bites.
     All persons bitten and the parents or guardians of minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat or other animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies shall notify the city, authorized agency or the health officer as soon as possible thereafter. Physicians treating such bites and other persons having knowledge of such bites shall also be required to make such notification. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.080 Isolation of suspected rabid animals.
     Upon the order of the city or authorized agency, or the health officer, a suspected rabid animal shall be isolated, at the owner’s expense if owned, in strict confinement under proper care and under the observation of a licensed veterinarian in an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the city or authorized

agency, or the health officer, and such animal shall not be killed or released for at least ten days after the onset of symptoms suggestive of rabies unless permission is obtained from the city or authorized agency, or the health officer to sacrifice the animal for the purpose of laboratory examination. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.090 Isolation of biting animals.
     Upon the order of the city or authorized agency, or the health officer, any dog, cat, skunk, fox, bat, coyote, bobcat or other animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies which bites or otherwise exposes a person shall be isolated, at the owner’s expense if owned, in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the city or authorized agency, or the health officer and observed for at least fourteen days; except that dogs and cats shall be so isolated and observed for at least ten days after the day of infliction of the bite or other exposure. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following alternative to the ten-day isolation of dogs and cats is permitted at the discretion of the city or authorized agency, or the health officer. Dogs or cats which have been isolated in strict confinement under proper care and under observation of a veterinarian in an animal shelter, veterinary hospital, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the city or authorized agency, or the health officer may be released from isolation by the city, or authorized agency, or the health officer after five days of veterinary observation if, upon conducting a thorough physical examination of the fifth day or more after infliction of the bite or other exposure, the observing veterinarian certifies that there are no clinical signs or symptoms of any disease. Notwithstanding all of the foregoing provisions, the city or authorized agency or the health officer may authorize, with permission of the owner if known, the euthanasia of a biting animal for the purpose of laboratory examination. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.100 Animals possibly exposed to rabies.
     Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid or suspected rabid animal, or which has been in intimate contact with such an animal shall be isolated, at the owner’s expense if owned, in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the city or authorized agency, or health officer and observed for a period of six months or destroyed. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the following alternative is permitted in the case of dogs and cats: if the dog or cat has been vaccinated against rabies at least thirty days prior to the suspected exposure with a type of vaccine and within the time period approved by the State Department of Health, the dog or cat may be revaccinated in a manner prescribed by the city or authorized agency, or the health officer and isolated in strict confinement in a place and manner approved by the city or authorized agency or the health officer and observed for a period of thirty days. (Ord. 245 § 6, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

Article III. Dog Licenses
6.04.110 License required—Regulations.
     A.    All dog owners, except tourists or visitors who stay less than one month in an area coming within the jurisdiction of this chapter, shall apply for and obtain a separate dog license for each dog they own, possess, keep or harbor, after it is four months old. All dog owners must possess such license at the time the dog is five months old or one month after obtaining or bringing into an area coming within the jurisdiction of this chapter any dog over four months of age. Dog owners shall renew the dog license before it becomes delinquent for as long as they own, possess, keep or harbor or otherwise have custody of the dog. If renewal is not required, dog owners shall within thirty days after the expiration date advise the city or authorized agency the reason therefor.

     B.     Any dog which is legally impounded according to the provisions of this chapter shall be presumed to be a dog which, prior to impounding,

required a license, regardless of such dog’s actual age or owner’s place of residence.

     C.     Upon presentation by the dog owner of a properly completed license application form including proof that the rabies vaccination will be valid throughout the license period, and the proper license fee, and if applicable, a late or delinquent fee, the city or authorized agency shall issue a validated dog license and license tag. The dog owner shall retain the dog license for inspection by any person charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

     D.    Licenses shall be valid for a term not to exceed the maximum immunity duration periods specified for the various types of canine rabies vaccines approved by the California Department of Health Services and must be renewed prior to the expiration of the term of the payment of the current effective fee for each renewal.

     E.     The dog owner shall securely affix the current license tag to the collar or harness of the dog for which the license tag was issued and shall ensure that the dog wears such license tag at all times except when the dog is being exhibited at a dog show.

     F.     A license tag issued for one dog shall not be transferred or attached to any other dog.

     G.    No unauthorized person shall remove a license tag from a collar or harness or remove the collar or harness bearing such tag from a dog.

     H.    Whenever a license tag is lost or damaged, the owner shall apply for and secure a replacement from the city or authorized agency upon payment of the prescribed fee.

     I.      The license fee for dogs shall be as follows:

 

1-Year License

Altered

$15.00

Unaltered

$40.00

3-Year License

Altered

$35.00

Unaltered

$75.00

Transfer Fee

$10.00

Penalty Fee

Altered

$10.00

Unaltered

$25.00

Tag Replacement Fee

$5.00

 

     J.      The required penalty fee(s) shall be added to the license fee if application or payment is made subsequent to thirty days from the date on which the dog is required to be licensed under this chapter. The time of application or payment shall be determined as follows: if made by deposit with the United States mail, addressed to the finance officer, and postage prepaid, the postmark, or if none, the postage meter imprint, shall be conclusive; otherwise the time of actual receipt by the finance officer shall be conclusive. This penalty shall not be added if the dog to be licensed has been in the applicant’s possession in the city less than thirty days. (Ord. 405 § 2, 2011; Ord. 245 §§ 5, 7, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.120 Transfer of license.
     A.    Owners of dogs having a current license issued by another dog licensing agency may be issued a city dog license upon payment of the applicable transfer fee. The rabies vaccination for any such dog must be valid for the duration of the license issued.

     B.     Whenever the ownership of a licensed dog changes, the new owner shall apply for and obtain a transfer license and pay the applicable fee. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.130 Change of address.
     The address of the owner is presumed to be the address where the dog is kept. Any change of address must be reported to the city or authorized agency within one month following such change. (Ord. 245 § 8, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.140 Change of ownership.
     Dog owners or the parent or guardian of minor children who sell or otherwise transfer the ownership or custody of a dog shall, within one month

thereafter, inform the city or authorized agency of the name, address and telephone of the new owner and the name and description of the dog. (Ord. 245 § 8, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.145 Fee—Exemptions permitted when.
     A.    Service dogs, as defined in the California Civil Code Section 54.1(b)(6)(C)(iii) must be licensed and vaccinated under the provisions of this code; however, their owners shall be exempt from the license fee imposed by this chapter.

     Owners of exempt service dogs shall obtain a tag identifying the dog as a service dog from the city, at no charge. The city shall provide such tag upon owner/applicant’s completion of an application for exemption, including providing verification of service animal status.

     Exempt service dogs are required to meet the requirements for and wear both the license tag required under Section 6.04.110 of this chapter and the service dog tag at all times.

     B.     Upon a service dog’s termination of service to its owner, the dog is no longer considered exempt under this section and the service dog tag must be returned to the city within thirty days of such termination. The regular license fees shall apply. (Ord. 352 § 1, 2005)

 

 

 

Article IV. Kennels
6.04.150 Licensing—Procedures.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate a kennel within the city without first having obtained a license therefor.

     B.     Business licenses for kennels shall expire one year from the date of issue unless the city selects a different expiration. In such case, the license fee shall be prorated.

     C.     Any kennel which is found by the city or authorized agency to be unsanitary or a menace to animal or public health, safety or welfare, is declared to be a public nuisance. The city or authorized agency is authorized and empowered to take such action as is necessary to abate this nuisance. In the event that immediate action is necessary to preserve or protect animal or public health, safety or welfare, the city or authorized agency is empowered to summarily abate such nuisance by any reasonable means including, but not limited to impoundment of the animal and/or immediate closure of the kennel for such time until the nuisance is abated. In such case, hearings shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 245 § 8, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.170 Facilities—In general.
     A.    Structural Strength. Indoor and outdoor housing facilities shall be structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair, to protect the animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of other animals. Crates and boxes, automobile bodies, scrap materials salvaged from plyboards, odd pieces of material such as linoleum, tin, canvas, and other such materials are not suitable and shall not be used.

     B.     Fencing. Any fencing shall be in conformance with planning/zoning requirements and be of suitable sturdy material anchored solidly to the ground in such a manner to prevent animals from escaping by digging under the fence and of sufficient height to prevent animals from escaping. If necessary, to accomplish the intent of containment, a cover over the fenced area shall be installed.

     C.     Water and Electric Power. Reliable and adequate electric power, if required to comply with other provisions of this article, and adequate potable water shall be available.

     D.    Storage. Supplies of food and bedding shall be stored in facilities which adequately protect such supplies against infestation or contamination by vermin.

     E.     Waste Disposal. Provisions shall be made for the removal and disposal of animal and food wastes, bedding and debris. Disposal facilities shall be so provided and operated as to minimize vermin infestation, odors and disease hazards.

     F.     Washrooms and Sinks. Facilities such as washrooms, basins or sinks, shall be provided to maintain cleanliness among animal caretakers. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.180 Facilities—Indoor.
     A.    Heating. Indoor housing facilities shall be warm enough to protect the animals from cold. Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below that temperature to which an animal is acclimated.

     B.     Ventilation. Indoor housing facilities shall be adequately ventilated to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times. Such facilities shall be provided with fresh air either by means of windows, doors, vents, or air conditioning and shall be ventilated so as to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation. Auxiliary ventilation, such as exhaust fans and vents or air conditioning, shall be provided when the ambient temperature is eighty-five degrees Fahrenheit or higher, within the indoor housing facility.

     C.     Lighting. Indoor housing facilities shall have ample light, by natural or artificial means, or both, of good quality and well distributed. Such lighting shall provide uniformly distributed illumination of sufficient light intensity to permit routine inspection of cleaning during the entire working period. Primary enclosures shall be so placed as to protect the animals from excessive illumination.

     D.    Interior Surfaces. The interior building surfaces of indoor housing facilities shall be constructed and maintained so that they are substantially impervious to moisture and may be readily sanitized.

     E.     Drainage. A suitable method shall be provided to rapidly eliminate excess liquid from indoor housing to rapidly eliminate excess liquid from indoor housing facilities. If drains are used, they shall be properly constructed and kept in good repair to avoid foul odors therefrom. If closed drainage systems are used, they shall be equipped with traps and so installed as to prevent any backup of sewage onto the floor of the room. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.190 Facilities—Outdoor.
     A.    Shelter from Sunlight. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or discomfort, sufficient shade shall be provided to allow all animals kept outdoors to protect themselves from the direct rays of the sun.

     B.     Shelter from Rain or Snow. Animals kept outdoors shall be provided with access to shelter to allow them to remain dry during rain or snow.

     C.     Shelter from Cold Weather. Shelter shall be provided for all animals kept outdoors when the atmospheric temperature falls below fifty degrees Fahrenheit. Sufficient clean bedding material or other means of protection from the weather elements shall be provided when the ambient temperature falls below that temperature to which an animal is acclaimed. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.200 General requirements for primary enclosures.
     Primary enclosures must be provided for all animals and shall conform to the following requirements:

     A.    Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain them, and to keep other animals out. They shall be effectively enclosed.

     B.     Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so as to enable the animals to remain dry and clean.

     C.     Primary enclosures shall be constructed and maintained so that the animals contained therein have convenient access to clean food and water.

     D.    The floors of the primary enclosure shall be constructed so as to protect the animals’ feet and legs from injury. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.210 General space requirements.
     Primary enclosures must be large enough so that the animals in them can obtain adequate exercise. Any separate kennel houses used as sleeping quarters must provide sufficient space to allow each animal to turn about freely, stand easily, sit and lie in a comfortable normal position. It is unusual to keep any animal in a primary enclosure or kennel that does not provide adequate space as provided by this article.

 

6.04.220 Feeding.
     A.    Animals shall be provided food which shall be free from contamination, wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.

     B.     Food receptacles shall be accessible to all animals and shall be located so as to minimize contamination by excreta. Feeding pens shall be durable and kept clean. The food receptacles shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. Disposable food receptacles may be used by must be discarded after each feeding. Self feeders may be used for the feeding of dry food, and they shall be sanitized regularly to prevent molding, deterioration and caking of feed. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.230 Watering.
     Clean potable water shall be available to the animals in conformance with the principles of good animal husbandry unless restricted for veterinary care. Watering receptacles shall be kept clean and shall be sanitized at least once every two weeks. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.240 Sanitation requirements for certain areas.
     A.    Cleaning. Excreta shall be removed from primary enclosures and kennel houses as often as necessary, at least daily, to prevent contamination of the animals contained therein and to reduce disease hazards and odors. When a hosing or flushing method is used for cleaning, any animal contained in the enclosure shall be protected during the cleaning process, and adequate measures shall be taken to protect the animals in other such enclosures from being contaminated with water and other wastes. Rugs, blankets, or other bedding material shall be kept clean and dry.

     B.     Sanitizing. Prior to the introduction of animals into empty primary enclosures previously occupied, such enclosures shall be sanitized in the manner provided herein. Enclosures shall be sanitized often enough to prevent an accumulation of debris or excreta, or a disease hazard, provided, however, that such enclosures shall be sanitized once every two weeks in the following manner: Cages, rooms and hard-surfaced pens or runs shall be sanitized by washing them with hot water (one hundred eighty degrees Fahrenheit) and soap or detergent or by washing all soiled surfaces with a detergent solution followed by a safe and effective disinfectant, or by cleaning all soiled surfaces with live steam. Pens or runs using gravel, sand, or dirt shall be sanitized by removing the solid gravel, sand, or dirt an replacing it as necessary.

     C.     Housekeeping. Premises (buildings and grounds) shall be kept clean and in good repair in order to protect the animal from injury and to facilitate the prescribed husbandry practices. Premises shall remain free of accumulations of trash.

     D.    Pest Control. An effective program for the control of insects, ectoparasites, and avian and mammalian pests shall be established and maintained. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.250 Employees.
     A sufficient number of caretakers shall be utilized to maintain the standards set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.260 Classification and separation.
     Animals housed in the same primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups, with the following additional restrictions:

     A.    Females in season (estrus) shall not be housed in the same primary enclosures with males, except for breeding purposes.

     B.     Any animal exhibiting a vicious disposition shall be housed individually in a primary enclosure.

     C.     Puppies or kittens shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with adult dogs or cats other than their dams, except when the owner specifically request they be housed together.

     D.    Dogs shall not be housed in the same primary enclosure with cats, nor shall dogs or cats be housed in the same primary enclosure with any other species of animals unless the owner specifically requests that they be housed together.

     E.     Animals under quarantine or treatment for a communicable disease shall be separated from other animals and other susceptible species of animals in such a manner as to minimize dissemination of such disease. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.270 Recordkeeping requirements.
     The kennel operator shall keep available for inspection on the premises a record that shall show the name, current address and telephone number of the owner of each animal kept at the kennel, the description of the animal, including its age (if known) or approximate age, breed, six and color. As part of such record, a current valid rabies certificate or other written proof of vaccination, verified by phone, shall be maintained for each dog required to be vaccinated by this chapter, showing the dog owner’s name, address, and telephone number; the dog’s name and description, including breed, color, sex, month and year of birth; the date of vaccination; and the name and telephone number of the veterinarian who vaccinated the dog or telephone number of the licensing agency verifying the vaccination. In addition, each kennel operator shall have someone in attendance at the kennel who can identify each animal in the kennel, except that animals under four months of age may be identified as to litter. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.280 Vaccination required for individual dogs.
     A kennel operator shall be not be required to obtain the individual licenses imposed by this chapter for each dog in his kennel for which the kennel license is obtained; however, each kennel operator shall ensure that each dog in his kennel is vaccinated as required by this chapter. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.290 Kennel inspection.
     Because of the need to adequately protect animals within kennels from unhealthy conditions and practices and the interests of society in curbing and preventing inhumane practices, reasonable inspection requirements dictate that the city or authorized agency shall have the right to inspect at reasonable times. Prior to issuing a business license, each operator shall agree to allow the city or authorized agency such inspection. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

Article V. Control Regulations
6.04.300 Conditions of ownership.
     Animal owners or keepers must comply with the following conditions of animal ownership, and the city or authorized agency may require as a condition of licensing such owners or keepers to sign permit or license applications agreeing to comply with such conditions:

     A.    Animals shall be restrained or confined as required by law;

     B.     Animals shall be humanely treated at all times;

     C.     Vaccinations, licenses and permits shall be obtained as required by law;

     D.    Animal premises shall be kept sanitary and shall not continue a fly breeding reservoir, a source of offensive odors or of human or animal disease;

     E.     Animals and animal premises shall not be permitted to disturb the peace or constitute a public nuisance or hazard. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.310 Restraint of dogs by owners.
     Dog owners shall at all times keep their dogs on a leash or their own property or the private property of another, with the permission of the owner that property so as to prevent them from being at large or stray, from biting or harassing any person engaged in a lawful act, from interfering with the use of public property or with the use of another person’s private property, and from being in violation of other sections of this code. However, dogs may be at large while participating in field trials and obedience classes organized and sanctioned by trials and obedience classes organized and sanctioned by recognized dog clubs, while assisting their owner or trainer in legal hunting or in herding of livestock, while assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, or while being trained for the above purposes on private land with the permission of the landowner, so long as such dogs are under direct and effective voice control of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provision of the law. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.315 Protection dog, guard dog, dangerous dog or potentially dangerous animal.
     Any person owning or having custody or control of a protection dog, guard dog, or any potentially dangerous animal is guilty of a misdemeanor if, as a result of that person’s failure to exercise ordinary care, the animal attacks, bites or otherwise causes injury to a person engaged in lawful activity and the owner or custodian knew or should have known of the animal’s vicious or dangerous nature, or the animal’s protection dog, guard dog, dangerous dog or potentially dangerous animal status. This section does not apply to animals used in military or police work while they are actually performing in that capacity. (Ord. 227 § 6, 1994)

 

6.04.320 Committing nuisance prohibited.
     No person shall allow a dog in his custody to defecate or to urinate on public property or any improved private property other than that of the owner or person having control of the dog. It shall be the duty of all persons having control of a dog to curb such dog in order to carry out the intent of this section. If a violation of the above occurs, such person shall immediately remove any feces to a proper receptacle. Unsighted persons while relying on a guide dog shall be exempt from this section. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.330 Female dogs in season.
     Dog owners shall securely confine their female dogs while in season within an enclosure in a manner that will prevent the attraction of male dogs in the immediate vicinity. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.340 Disturbing the peace prohibited.
     No person shall own or harbor an animal in such a manner that the peace and quiet of the public is unreasonably disturbed. The written affirmation by two persons, having separate residences, the violation of Sections 6.04.300(D) and (E), 6.04.310, 6.04.320 and 6.04.350 of this code disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained, on any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person or any animal or fowl, which, by frequent or a long continued noise, causes unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to any person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity, shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to reasonable noises emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies, pounds, farm and/or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals or fowls are permitted. The destruction by an animal of property other than that which belongs to the owner of said animal shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.350 Possession of vicious dogs—Impoundment.
     A.    General Provisions.

     1.     If the city or authorized agency has cause to believe that a dog is a “vicious dog” within the meaning of Section 6.04.010, it may find and declare such a dog a “vicious dog.”

     2.     Upon finding and declaring that a dog is a “vicious dog,” the city or authorized agency shall notify the owner and/or possessor of the city’s or authorized agency’s finding and declaration.

     3.     The notice shall inform the owner and/or possessor of that dog that he may request a hearing within five working days to contest the finding and designation.

     4.     Failure of the owner and/or possessor to request a hearing pursuant to subdivision 3 of this subsection shall result in the declaration becoming final.

     5.     A finding at the hearing that the dog does fall within Section 6.04.010(Y) shall result in the declaration becoming final.

     6.     The city or authorized agency is empowered to impound and/or abate any “vicious dog” independently of any criminal prosecution or the result thereof by any means reasonable necessary to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the public including, but not limited to, the destruction of the dog or by the imposition upon the owner and/or possessor specific reasonable restriction and conditions for the maintenance of the dog. The restrictions and conditions may include, but are not limited to:

     a.     Obtaining and maintaining liability insurance in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars and furnishing a certificate or proof of insurance by which the city or authorized agency shall be notified at least ten days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal or, at the owner’s option, the filing with the city or authorized agency of proof of a bond in the amount of thirty-five thousand dollars, to be able to respond to damages;

     b.     Requirements as to size, construction and design of enclosure;

     c.     Location of the dog’s residence;

     d.     Requirements as to type and method of restraints and/or muzzling of the dog;

     e.     Photo identification or permanent marking of the dog for purpose of identification;

     f.      Payment of a reasonable fee to recover the costs of the city or authorized agency in verifying compliance and enforcing the provisions of this section.

     B.     Notification of Right to Hearing. At least five working days prior to the impoundment and/or abatement, the owner or custodian of record shall be notified of their right to a hearing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment and/or abatement. If a hearing is requested, the impoundment and/or abatement hearing may be held in conjunction with the hearing provided for in subsection A.6.a of this section. If the owner or custodian of record requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement, no impoundment and/or abatement shall take place until the conclusion of the hearing except as noted in subsection A.6.c of this section.

     C.     Immediate Impoundment. When, in the opinion of the city or authorized agency, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the dog has been impounded under other provisions of this code or state law, the pre-impoundment hearing shall be waived; however, the owner or custodian of record shall be given a notice allowing five working days to request an abatement hearing. If requested, a hearing shall be held within five days of the request and the dog shall not be disposed of prior to the conclusion of the hearing. If, after five working days, no request for a hearing is received from the owner or custodian of record, the dog in question shall be disposed of under applicable provisions of law.

     D.    Changes of Ownership, Custody and/or Residence. Owner of a vicious dog who sells or otherwise transfers the ownership, custody or residence of the dog shall at least ten days prior to the sale or transfer, inform the city or authorized agency in writing of the name, address and telephone number of the new owner, custodian and/or residence and the name and description of the dog. The owner shall, in addition, notify the new owner or custodian in writing of the details of the dog’s record, terms and conditions of maintenance and provide the city or authorized agency with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgement by the new owner or custodian of his receipt of the original. The city or authorized agency shall notify the new owner or custodian in writing of any different or additional restrictions or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection A.6 of this section as a result of the change of ownership, custody, or residence.

     E.     Possession Unlawful. It is unlawful to have custody of, own or possess a vicious dog as defined in this chapter, whether or not the dog has been declared a “vicious dog” by the city or authorized agency, unless it is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite, attack or cause injury to any person.

     F.     Declared Vicious Dog. It is unlawful for the owner and/or possessor of a dog declared vicious pursuant to subsection A of this section to fail to comply with any requirements or conditions imposed pursuant to subsection A.6 of this section. If a declared “vicious dog” escapes, the owner/possessor shall immediately notify the city or authorized agency and make every reasonable effort to recapture it. (Ord. 245 § 10, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.360 Complaints.
     Upon receiving a complaint from an identified person alleging a violation of this chapter and upon receiving the name and address of the owner of the animal, if known, an investigation to determine whether a violation exists shall be made. If the investigation discloses a violation of this chapter, prosecution may be initiated against the owner. Complainants’ identities shall be kept confidential to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.370 Capture of animals at large.
     A.    The city or authorized agency or peace officers shall attempt to capture any animal found at large in violation of this code and may destroy an animal at large if, in their judgement, such action is required for public health and safety; provided, however, that the city or authorized agency shall not seize or impound any dog for being at large that has strayed from but then returned to the private property of its owner or the person who has a right to control the dog, but in such case a citation may be issued; provided, further, that if in such a situation, the owner or person who has a right to control the dog is not home, the dog may be impounded, but the city or authorized agency shall post a notice of such impounding on the front door of the living unit of the owner or person who has a right to control the dog. Such notice shall state the following: that the dog has been impounded, where the dog is being held, the name, address and telephone number of the agency or person to be contacted regarding release of the dog, and an indication of the ultimate disposition of the dog if no action to regain it is taken within a specified period of time by its owner or by the person who has a right to control the dog.

     B.     Any person who finds an animal at large may take it into his/her possession and must as soon as possible, but no later than twenty-four hours thereafter, notify the city or authorized agency. The city or authorized agency may accept such animal for impoundment and the person who finds the animal shall surrender the animal to the city or authorized agency upon demand. The finder of an animal at large shall use reasonable care to preserve it from injury; however, he/she shall not be held liable if the animal dies, escapes or injures itself while he/she is carrying out the provisions of this section. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 227 § 3, 1994; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.380 Relinquishing an animal.
     Any person who relinquishes an animal to the city or authorized agency shall give his name, address and, if he is not the owner, the location where he found the animal. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.390 Notification of owner—Right to hearing.
     A.    Upon impoundment of an animal wearing a license tag, or identification listing the owner’s name and address, the city or authorized agency shall immediately mail to the owner of record at the address indicated, a notice of the location.

 

     B.     The owner of an impounded animal shall be notified that he may, within five working days, request a hearing as to the legality of the impoundment.

     C.     If requested, the hearing shall be held within five working days of the date of the request and the time, during which the animal shall not be disposed of other than by return to the owner, shall be extended until the conclusion of the hearing. If at the conclusion of the hearing, the impoundment is found to be unjustified the animal shall be returned to the owner without charge. If the animal is returned to the owner prior to the hearing, any fees paid by the owner to the city as a result of an unjustified impoundment shall be refunded to the owner. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.400 Return of animals to owners.
     The owners of an impounded animal may claim it prior to its legal disposition by providing proper identification, meeting all requirements, and paying the applicable redemption fees. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.410 Holding period—Disposition—Hearing.
     A.    The city or authorized agency shall hold an impounded lost or stray dog for not less than three working days, if it was not wearing a license tag when impounded, and for not less than five working days, if it was wearing a license tag, so that the owner or custodian may claim it prior to other disposition.

     B.     The city or authorized agency may dispose of humanely, or may transfer to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee, any impounded animal not claimed by its owner or custodian within the prescribed holding time. An impounded dog or cat wearing a license tag or other identification when impounded or a dog or cat relinquished by its owner shall not be transferred for the purpose of medical research. Animals relinquished by their owners may be destroyed or transferred to a new owner without regard to any prescribed holding time. Injured or diseased animals or newborn animals unable to feed themselves may be humanely destroyed without regard to the prescribed holding time in order to alleviate suffering or to protect other impounded animals from exposure to a contagious disease.

     C.     Any dog not claimed by its owner and which has not been altered shall not be sold or given away, unless the cost of altering such dog has been deposited with the city or authorized agency, to be refunded upon presentation of proof of altering by a licensed veterinarian.

     D.    Any cat not claimed by its owner and which has not been neutered shall not be sold or given away, unless the cost of neutering such cat has been deposited with the city or authorized agency, to be refunded upon presentation of proof of altering by a licensed veterinarian.

     E.     The individual adopting any cat or dog under the terms of subsections C and D of this section shall be given six months from the date of adoption in which to have the surgery performed. At that time a follow-up will be made if the money deposited has not been refunded, to assure the surgery is performed. Failure to complete the surgery within one month of the date of the follow-up shall constitute a misdemeanor.

     F.     The deposit required by subsections C and D of this section shall be forfeited to the city or authorized agency if proof of altering has not been presented to the city or authorized agency within the period specified in subsection E of this section. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 227 § 4, 1994; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.415 Guard dogs.
     A.    General Provisions. Any guard dog operator, in addition to any requirements of The Dog Act of 1969 (Health and Safety Code 25970 et seq.), shall:

     1.     Comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and permit requirements affecting the keeping of a guard dog and/or the operation of a guard dog business. Upon demand by the city or authorized agency or any other law enforcement agency, each guard dog operator, must demonstrate compliance with all applicable laws, regulations and permit requirements affecting the keeping of a guard dog and/or the operation of a guard dog business;

     2.     Notify the local law enforcement agency and fire department which provide police and fire suppression services, and the city or authorized agency, in writing of the location of the guard dog operator office, base facility and/or kennel where any dogs are maintained for any period;

     3.     Ensure each dog furnished or assigned to any facility within the city is wearing a current dog license tag before such furnishing or assigning of the dog. This license requirement is in addition to the identification tag specified in subdivision (4) of this subsection. A guard dog operator shall obtain individual dog licenses for each dog, whether or not it is kept in a “kennel” as defined in this code;

     4.     Ensure that each dog is wearing a durable identification tag in addition to a current dog license tag. The identification tag provided by the guard dog operator shall contain the name, address and telephone number of the guard dog operator furnishing the guard dog. The telephone number so pro-vided shall be a telephone which is answered by a person twenty-four hours per day every day of the year. In addition, a dog handler shall be available at all times to respond in a timely manner to reports regarding a dog which has escaped, is injured, or presents a risk of harm to animal or public health, safety or welfare;

     5.     The guard dog operator shall provide the city or authorized agency with a written list of dogs to be assigned to any facility within the city. Such list shall include each dog’s name and description, along with the license and identification number;

     6.     Notify the local law enforcement agency and fire department which provide police and fire suppression services, the city or authorized agency, in writing prior to, but not more than, fifteen days before a dog is sent on an assignment of the location and duration of such assignment. In addition, such notification shall be provided, within fifteen days, when the assignment of the dog is terminated;

     7.     Ensure that dogs working with supervision in an unfenced area, yard or premises, be controlled on a “leash” as defined in this code. Dogs working without supervision shall be confined within a fenced or otherwise enclosed facility not open to the public. The fence or other enclosure shall comply with Lemon Grove’s zoning regulations with locked gates and/or doors to ensure the strict confinement of the dog and to prevent unauthorized access. The fence or other enclosure is subject to inspection and approval by the city. The guard dog operator may be required to pay a reasonable fee to recover the costs of such inspection;

     In addition, ensure that each dog, whether or not on duty, is visited at least once every twelve hours and that each dog has adequate food, water and shelter. Any dog which is sick or injured shall be provided proper care and attention and, if on duty, shall be removed from the site. Dogs shall not be kept or maintained on a chain. Dogs shall not be kept or maintained, for any period of time, in an enclosure area with less than twelve feet by five feet floor space or in any enclosure area without adequate ventilation;

     Further, ensure that the dog is not knowingly overworked, or tortured, tormented, neglected, abandoned, deprived of necessary substance or care, drink or shelter, beaten, mutilated or unjustifiably killed. The words “torment” and “torture” include every act, omission or neglect whereby unnecessary or unjustifiable physical pain or suffering is caused or permitted;

     8.     Obtain, and maintain liability insurance issued by an insurance company authorized to transact business in this state which provides minimum limits of insurance of five hundred thousand dollars for any one loss due to bodily injury or death and five hundred thousand dollars for any one loss due to injury or destruction of property. The guard dog operator shall also furnish the city or authorized agency with a certificate or photocopy of the insurance policy and notify the city or authorized agency at least ten days prior to cancellation or nonrenewal of the policy;

     9.     Ensure that durable signs of sufficient size containing both a clear pictorial description of a guard dog and a legible written warning of the presence of a guard dog are conspicuously posted and maintained at every entrance and at reasonable intervals on the fence or other enclosure where the dog is to be assigned so as to be clearly visible. Signs shall also include the name and telephone number of the guard dog operator furnishing the guard dog. The telephone number so provided shall be to a telephone which is answered by a person twenty-four hours per day every day of the year. In addition, a dog handler shall be available at all times to respond in a timely manner to reports regarding a dog which has escaped, is sick, injured or presents a risk of harm to animal or public health, safety or welfare;

     10.   Provide a written statement to any person who obtains a guard dog on hire, prior to a dog being sent on assignment, containing the following:

 

In addition to other provisions of law, any person or business entity with custody of a guard dog is responsible for preventing the dog from being “at large,” within the meaning of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, and from attacking or injuring a person engaged in a lawful act. Any person who obtains a dog on hire shall immediately notify the guard dog operator and the City of Lemon Grove at 464-6934 in the event an escaped dog is not immediately recaptured.

 

Guard dog operators and the keeping or maintenance of guard dogs are regulated by the City of Lemon Grove, 3232 Main Street, Lemon Grove, California, 91945.

 

     The guard dog operator shall also provide the city or authorized agency with a copy thereof containing an acknowledgement of receipt, signed and dated by the person who obtained the dog on hire. Such acknowledgement shall also include the printed name, address and telephone number of the guard dog operator and the person who obtained the dog on hire;

     11.   Transport the dog in a secure, humane manner that will reasonably prevent its possible escape;

     12.   Make every reasonable effort to recapture an escaped dog and, if not immediately recaptured, notify the city or authorized agency;

     13.   Reimburse the city or authorized agency for all costs incurred in enforcing the provisions of this section.

     B.     Any person who obtains a guard dog on hire shall immediately notify the guard dog operator, the city or authorized agency by telephone in the event an escaped dog is not immediately recaptured.

     C.     The sale, transfer or use as a guard dog of any vicious dog as defined in this code is prohibited whether or not the dog had been declared a vicious dog pursuant to Section 6.04.360.

     D.    Any dog kept in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be impounded and/or abated pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.04.440 of this code.

     E.     Any person who violates any provision of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 227 § 6, 1994)

 

6.04.420 Wild animals.
     A.    General Provisions. It is unlawful for any person to own, possess or maintain any wild animal unless he complies with all federal, state and local laws, regulations, and permit requirements affecting such animals. The owner shall also:

     1.     Keep the animals at all times in cages or enclosures of such size and construction or confined in such a manner as to preclude the possibility of escape. Such cages, enclosures or confinement shall be of such size as to permit the animals reasonable freedom of movement;

     2.     Keep the cages or enclosures in a clean and sanitary condition at all times;

     3.     Provide the animals with adequate food, water, shelter, and veterinary care;

     4.     Keep the animal(s) in a manner so as not to threaten or annoy the person of normal sensitivity.

     B.     Additional Provisions. The owner shall, in addition:

     1.     Take adequate safeguards to prevent unauthorized access to the animals and to preserve animal and public health, safety and welfare. In the event of an escape, immediately notify the city or authorized agency and make every reasonable effort to recapture the animal(s);

     2.     Upon request by the city or authorized agency make his animal(s), premises, facilities, equipment, and any necessary permit(s) available for inspection for the purpose of ascertaining compliance with the provisions of this section;

     3.     Reimburse the city or authorized agency for all costs incurred in enforcing the provisions of this section when a violation is found, and shall be responsible for any injury, or any damage to private or public property caused by the animal(s).

     C.     Location and Transportation. Such animals shall be kept upon or transported in escape-proof enclosures to private property which the animals’ owner or the person who has a right to control the animal, owns or has a right to possess or use. All other transportation is prohibited unless authorized by the city or authorized agency.

     D.    Exceptions. Subsections B and C of this section do not apply to:

     1.     Small birds that attain an adult weight under fifteen pounds, small rodents that attain an adult weight under ten pounds, fish, invertebrates, amphibians or reptiles except for the following reptiles: all crocodilians (order crocodilia); all venomous snakes of the cobra (elapidae), seasnake (kydrophidae), and viper (viperidae) families; all “rear fanged” snakes (family colubridae); all boa and python species (family boidae) that attain an adult weight over fifteen pounds or an adult length over three and one-half feet; all lizards of the family helodermatidae (gila monsters and mexican beaded lizards); and all monitor lizard species (family varanidae) that attain an adult weight over ten pounds or an overall adult length over three feet.

     2.     Legally operated zoos or circuses or to recognized institutions of learning or scientific research unless by reason of inadequate caging or other means of protection of the public from such animals, or by the ineffectiveness of sanitation measures or by a particular hazard connected with the animal(s) involved, animal or public health, safety or welfare will be endangered.

     E.     Impoundment and/or Abatement. The city or authorized agency may impound and/or abate any animal held in violation of this section and relocate or dispose of it in a humane manner. At least three working days prior to the impoundment and/or abatement, the owner shall be notified of this right to a city or authorized agency hearing as to whether the animal is being held in violation of this section. If the owner requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement shall take place until the conclusion of the hearing, except as provided herein. If, in the opinion of the city or authorized agency, immediate impoundment and/or abatement is necessary for the preservation of the public health or safety, the city or authorized agency or health officer shall give forty-eight hours advance notice that by reason of inadequate caging or other means of protection of the public from such animals or by the ineffectiveness of sanitation measures or by a particular hazard connected with the animal or animals involved, the public health and welfare will be endangered. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.430 Public nuisance.
     A.    General Provisions. The introduction, possession or maintenance of any animal, or the allowing of any animal to be in contravention of this chapter is, in addition to being a misdemeanor, declared to be a public nuisance. The city or authorized agency, health officer and peace officer may summarily abate any such public nuisance independently of any criminal prosecution or the results thereof by any means reasonably necessary including but not limited to the destruction of the animal or animals involved, or by the imposition of specific reasonable conditions and restrictions for the maintenance of the animal(s). The owner shall reimburse the city or authorized agency for all costs incurred in verifying compliance and enforcing the provisions of this section.

     B.     Notification of Right to Hearing. At least five working days prior to the impoundment and/or abatement, the owner or custodian of record shall be notified of their right to a hearing to determine whether grounds exist for such impoundment and/or abatement. If the owner or custodian of record requests a hearing prior to impoundment and/or abatement, no impoundment and/or abatement shall take place until the conclusion of the hearing except as noted in subsection C of this section.

     C.     Immediate Impoundment. When, in the opinion of the city or authorized agency, immediate impoundment is necessary for the preservation of animal or public health, safety or welfare, or if the animal has been impounded under other provisions of this code or state law, the pre-impoundment hearing shall be waived. However, the owner or custodian of record shall be given a notice allowing five working days to request an abatement hearing. If requested a hearing shall be held within five days of the request, and the animal shall not be disposed of prior to the conclusion of the hearing. If, after five working days, no request for a hearing is received from the owner or custodian of record, the animal in question shall be disposed of under applicable provisions of the law. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 227 § 5, 1994; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.440 Injuries and communicable diseases.
     No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal with a serious injury or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other contagious disease, unless such dog or other animal is, in the opinion of the city or authorized agency, being given adequate treatment for such disease. The city or authorized agency may take immediate possession of any such animal not being so treated or which is not responding to such treatment, and immediately dispose of the animal, unless the owner forthwith places such animal under the control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.450 Hearings.
     A.    All hearings required pursuant to this chapter, shall be conducted by the city attorney or by a designated employee who shall not have been directly involved in the subject action. Hearings shall be held not more than thirty days from the date of the receipt of the request for the hearing and shall be conducted in an informal manner consistent with due processes of law. A hearing may be continued if the hearing officer deems it necessary and proper or if the owner or custodian shows good cause. The city attorney or the designated employee shall render a brief written decision which shall be final. The failure to conduct a hearing required by this article shall have no bearing on any criminal prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Each party shall have these rights: To call and examine witnesses; to introduce exhibits; to cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues even though that matter was not covered in the direct examination; to impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify; and to rebut the evidence against the party. If the owner/custodian does not testify in his own behalf, the owner/custodian may be called and examined as if under cross-examination.

     C.     The hearing need not be conducted according to technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Any relevant evidence shall be admitted if it is the sort of evidence on which responsible persons are accustomed to rely in any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be used for the purpose of supplementing or explaining any direct evidence but shall not be sufficient in itself to support a finding unless it would be admissible over objection in civil actions. The rules of privilege shall be effective to the same extent that they are now or hereafter may be recognized in civil actions and irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

Article VI. Enforcement
6.04.460 Presumption of responsibility for violation.
     A.    In any prosecution involving an animal changing a violation of any provision referred to in Section 6.04.470 of this code, proof by the people of the state of California that the particular animal described in the complaint was found in violation of any provision of said sections, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of he alleged violation the owner of the animal, shall constitute prima facie evidence that the owner of the animal was responsible for the violation of said provisions involving said animal. However, for the purposes of this section proof that a person is the owner of said animal is not prima facie evidence that he has violated any other provision of the law.

     B.     The presumption created by this section shall be nullified when the person charged has made a bona fide sale or transfer and has complied with the requirements of Section 6.04.140 of this code prior to the date of the alleged violations and has advised the court of the name and address of the purchaser, and of the date of sale. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.470 Enforcement provisions.
     A.    The city or authorized agency, each agent or deputy thereof who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of animal regulation laws, and any peace officer are responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, Section 148 of the Penal Code, and any law relating to or affecting animals of the state or city.

     B.     The health officer and each agent or deputy thereof who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of rabies control and sanitation laws are responsible for enforcing Section 148 of the Penal Code and the applicable provisions of this chapter.

     C.     The city or authorized agency, and each agent or deputy thereof who is assigned to duties which include the enforcement of the provisions of the California Food and Agricultural Code relating to the health and sanitary surroundings of livestock, poultry, and rabbits are also responsible for enforcing Section 148 of the Penal Code and the applicable provisions of this chapter.

     D.    Each of the individuals referred to in subsections A, B and C of this section shall cooperate to attain compliance with, and shall take appropriate action in the case of any violations of those provisions which they are responsible to enforce. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.480 Arrest and citation—Authority.
     Each of the individuals referred to in Section 6.04.470 shall have the power to make arrests for violations of those provisions of this chapter and of state law which he has a duty to enforce and to issue citations for such violations. Any person so arrested who does not demand to be taken before a magistrate may instead by cited in the manner prescribed in Chapter 5C (commencing with Section 853.5) of Title 3, Part 2 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.490 Arrest and citation—Alternative procedure.
     A.    Whenever a person is arrested for a violation of Section 6.04.110 of this code and the officer issues a notice to appear, the officer shall note on the form that the charge shall be dismissed on proof of correction unless a disqualifying condition as set forth in subsection B of this section exists. If the arrested person presents, by mail or in person, proof of correction as prescribed in this section, on or before the date on which the person promised to appear, the court shall dismiss the violation or violations.

     Proof of correction shall consist of a certification by the city or authorized agency or by any clerk or deputy clerk of a court that the alleged violation has been corrected.

     B.     A notice to appear shall be issued as provided in subsection A of this section unless the officer finds any of the following disqualifying conditions:

     1.     Evidence of fraud;

     2.     The person has been charged within the past one year period with a violation of Section 6.04.110;

     3.     The violation involves a dog which has demonstrated a propensity to attack, bite or cause injury to a person; or which otherwise presents an immediate safety hazard;

     4.     The person does not agree to, or cannot, promptly correct the violation.

     C.     Any person who signs a certification of correction with a false or fictitious name or who presents as evidence of a correction false or fictitious information is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.500 Agreements—Rules and regulations.
     For the purpose of performing their duties under this chapter the department and the city veterinarian may, with approval of the city council, negotiate agreements, and shall, with the approval of the city council, promulgate such rules and regulations as they may deem proper and necessary. (Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.510 Investigation.
     The city or authorized agency, the health officer, and any peace officer, may enter upon any privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious dogs, rabies, or other contagious animal diseases, and to investigate violations of and enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.520 Epidemics.
     Either the city or authorized agency, or the health officer may determine and declare that an epidemic or other unusually dangerous health situation exists among the animals in the city. Upon the making of such a declaration, the city or authorized agency, or the health officer shall prepare and promulgate, with the approval of the city council such rules and regulations as are necessary for the conduct of all persons within the area where the dangerous condition exists. These rules and regulations may include, but are not limited to, quarantine, vaccination, and destruction of diseased, exposed or stray animals by humane methods. (Ord. 245 § 9, 1995; Ord. 175, 1990)

 

6.04.530 Violation—Infraction.
     Every violation of Title 6 of this code is punishable as an infraction. (Ord. 247, 1996)

Chapter 6.08 DEAD ANIMALS
6.08.010 Definition.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definition applies: “Animal” includes but is not limited to all of the following:

     A.    All animals, whether wild or tame, including but not limited to the dog, cat, horse, mule, cattle, sheep, hog;

     B.     All reptiles, including but not limited to the snake;

     C.     All aquatic animals, including but not limited to fish; and

     D.    All birds, and all fowl including but not limited to the chicken, turkey, duck. (Prior code § 62.801)

 

6.08.020 Prohibited on private property.
     No dead animals shall be deposited or allowed to remain upon any premises within a quarter of a mile of any park, city highway, county highway, state highway, or any public highway, road or alley, or any dwelling or other structure used or occupied by a person or persons, or in any standing or running water or in any open excavation, and any animal deposited or allowed to remain upon such premises is declared to be a public nuisance. (Prior code § 62.802)

 

6.08.030 Duty of owner to dispose.
     It shall be the duty of the owner of a dead animal to dispose of such dead animal in a manner authorized by law. (Prior code § 62.803)

 

6.08.040 Duty of owner or occupant of land to remove.
     It shall be the duty of the owner, the occupant and any person having control of the premises referred to in Section 6.08.020 on which there is a dead animal to remove the dead animal from the premises, or otherwise dispose of the dead animal in a manner authorized by law. (Prior code § 62.804)

 

6.08.050 Removal—By city.
     In the event a dead animal is deposited or allowed to remain upon premises in violation of Section 6.08.020 and the director of public health determines that, in the interest of protecting the public health, the city should forthwith remove and dispose of the dead animal, the director of public health or any department of the city, at the request of the director, may remove and dispose of the animal. (Prior code § 62.805)

 

6.08.060 Removal—Liability for cost.
     In the event a dead animal is deposited or allowed to remain upon premises in violation of Section 6.08.020, the owner of the dead animal, the owner of such premises, the occupant of such premises and any other person having control of such premises who has knowledge of the existence of said dead animal or who has received notice from the director of public health requiring the removal of the dead animal shall be liable to the city for the cost of the removal and disposal of such dead animal by the city. Said cost may be recovered by a civil action in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior code § 62.806)

 

6.08.070 Transportation—Vehicle permits required.
     A.    Any person desiring to engage in the business of collecting and/or conveying or transporting dead animals along any public highways in the city or who collects and/or so transports such animals incidental to the operation of a business, shall annually make an application to the department of public works for a separate permit for each vehicle in which animals are to be transported or conveyed.

     B.     The director of public works shall make an investigation to determine that such vehicle to be used will be suitable to transport dead animals and that such vehicle has a watertight body or watertight tank within which dead animals may be transported or conveyed. If the director of public works is satisfied that such applicant meets the requirements of this chapter he shall grant the applicant a permit to transport dead animals over any public highway in the vehicle for which the permit is issued. The fee for such permit shall be twenty dollars for each such vehicle, which fee shall be paid and collected prior to the issuance of the permit.

     C.     Unless sooner revoked, every permit issued pursuant to this section shall expire December 31st of the year in which it is issued. Each permit issued pursuant to this section shall be displayed in a prominent place on the vehicle for which it is issued. (Prior code § 62.808)

 

6.08.080 Transportation—Condition of vehicles.
     Vehicles used by a permittee to transport dead animals shall have watertight metal bodies and any dead animals therein shall be covered with a tarpaulin or other cover approved by the director of public works. Such vehicles shall be cleaned and disinfected immediately after dead animals are transported in such vehicle. (Prior code § 62.809)

Title 7 (RESERVED)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 FOOD REGULATIONS
Chapter 8.06 WHOLESALE FOOD WAREHOUSES
Chapter 8.08 WEED CONTROL AND WASTE MATTER
Chapter 8.12 ACCUMULATION OF JUNK
Chapter 8.16 APARTMENTS AND HOTELS
Chapter 8.20 MASSAGE THERAPY PRACTICE—LOCAL LICENSING
Chapter 8.21 TATTOO PARLORS AND MOBILE TATTOO VEHICLES
Chapter 8.24 SMOKING IN PUBLIC AREAS (ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES)
Chapter 8.28 ABANDONED VEHICLES, VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REPAIR AND STORAGE
Chapter 8.32 SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.36 PEEP SHOW ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 8.40 BATHHOUSES
Chapter 8.44 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
Chapter 8.48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Chapter 8.52 POST-CONSTRUCTION BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES DESIGN STANDARDS
Chapter 8.56 FIREWORKS
Chapter 8.60 FALSE FIRE ALARMS
Chapter 8.64 PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
Chapter 8.70 TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSE

Chapter 8.04 FOOD REGULATIONS
Note
*     Prior history: Prior code §§ 61.133—61.104, 61.110—61.127; 61.130—61.131; 61.133—61.152; 61.154; 61.170—61.185; 61.210; 61.301—61.304 and Ord. 27, 1978; Ord. 68, 1981; Ord. 70, 1981; Ord. 88, 1982; Ord. 100, 1983.

 

Article I. General Provisions
8.04.010 City regulations to have authority.
     The city council enacts the regulations and standards set forth in this chapter, under the authority of Section 27503 of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, and finds that they are more strict than those of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. The city council adopts the Food Sanitation Act and the Current Good Manufacturing Practices for city wholesale food manufacturers because businesses are not regulated by the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. The health officer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter as well as the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, and the Food Sanitation Act and the Good Manufacturing Practices Regulations. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
     Any word or phrase used in this chapter and not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning established for such word or phrase by the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law or, if not there defined, the common and ordinary meaning required by the context in which it is issued. Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used they shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

     “Approve,” “approved” or “approval” means the approval of the health officer, or the State Department of Public Health, as a result of tests or investigations or by reason of accepted principles of public health and sanitation.

     “California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law” means Chapter 4 of Division 22 of the Health and Safety Code of the State of California.

     “Establishment” means any restaurant; itinerant restaurant; food vending vehicle; vending machine, other than a vending machine which dispenses wrapped non-perishable solid foods or which dispenses bottled or canned liquid foods or beverages other than milk, ice cream, milk products or other perishable foods or beverages, or which exclusively dispenses peanuts, wrapped candy, chewing gum or ice; grocery; food market; meat or fish market; bakery; confectionery; delicatessen; food or potable liquid packaging or bottling plant; plant or room used to prepare any food or beverage product whatsoever that is dispensed by machine, whether or not such food or beverage product is perishable and whether or not such a dispensing machine is a “vending machine” as defined in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law; temporary or permanent food or beverage concession; package liquor store; or any other place in the city where food or beverages are prepared for sale, sold, stored, distributed or displayed for sale.

     “Establishment” does not include a wholesale delivery truck used exclusively to transport previously inspected and packaged, canned or bottled foods or beverages, or any combination thereof, and does not include a retail delivery truck used exclusively to transport previously inspected and packaged, canned or bottled milk, water or groceries, or any combination thereof.

     “Establishment” does include any wholesale or retail delivery truck transporting any food or beverage product other than or in addition to the aforementioned types of products.

     “Food or beverage” means “food,” as defined in Section 27519 of the California Health and Safety Code. “Restaurant” for grade card posting purposes means any coffee shop, cafeteria, short-order café, luncheonette, tavern, cocktail lounge, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private and public school cafeteria or eating establishment, and any other eating establishment organization, club, including veterans club, boarding house, guest house, or political subdivision, which gives, sells, or offers for sale, food to the public, guests, patrons, or employees as well as kitchens in which food is prepared on the premises for serving elsewhere, including catering functions. The term “restaurant” does not include itinerant restaurants, vending machines, vehicles or cooperative arrangements by employees who purchase food or beverage for their own consumption.

     “Food vending vehicle” means any vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the Vehicle Code, or any mobile unit however propelled, upon or from which any food or beverage is vended, displayed or given away.

     “Health officer” means the director of public health and any regularly appointed sanitarian or employee of the department of public health.

     “Perishable” means, with respect to food and beverage products, those products which support or are conducive to the growth of pathogenic microorganisms; perishable food and beverage products include, but are not limited to, fresh, cured, prepared or packaged meat or meat products, seafood or seafood products, custard and/or cream pies and pastries, wrapped or unwrapped sandwiches, salads, and mild or milk products.

     “Permit” means the public health permit.

     “Provided by law” means authorized or required by this code, the rules of the board of health, the California Restaurant Act and other applicable state laws, and the rules or regulations of the state department or public health.

     “Retail delivery truck” means any vehicle used for the transportation of food or beverage products which is not a wholesale delivery truck as defined in this section, and includes a vehicle used to service vending machines.

     “Wholesale delivery truck” means a vehicle that delivers food or beverage products from a producer or distributor to a consumer, retailer or wholesaler pursuant to orders therefor previously obtained; wholesale delivery truck does not include a vehicle from which selling is done directly by a driver, salesman or other person. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.030 Prohibited acts.
     It is unlawful for any person to do any act prohibited in this chapter; to maintain any establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter; or to sell, offer for sale, barter, trade or give away any food or beverage, or permit the same to be done, without complying with the requirements provided by law in connection therewith. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.040 Nuisance—Authority of health officer to abate.
     A.    Any establishment or activity which is found by the health officer to be unsanitary or a menace to the public health or which is in violation of this chapter or of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law is declared to be a public nuisance. The health officer is authorized and empowered to take such action as is necessary to abate the nuisance. In the event that immediate action is necessary to preserve or protect the public health or safety, the health officer is authorized and empowered to summarily abate such nuisance by any reasonable means; otherwise, the health officer shall inaugurate proceedings in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code or shall seek a court order abating the nuisance. Nothing contained in this code shall be deemed to limit the right and duty of the health officer to take immediate action in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare. The remedies authorized by this section are not exclusive, but are cumulative to other remedies provided by law. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.050 Enforcement authority.
     The health officer is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to inspect such activities as are regulated in this chapter for the purpose of determining the health conditions of such activities. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the health officer in the performance of these duties. The health officer shall be empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to the Penal Code Sections 836.5 and 853.6 for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article II. Public Health Permit
8.04.060 Permit required.
     No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter, trade or give away any food or beverage and no person shall permit the same to be done, from any establishment unless such establishment has a valid public health permit, which permit has not been revoked or suspended. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.070 Application—Filing requirements—Annual inspection fee.
     A.    Every person applying for a permit shall file with the health department a written application which shall set forth the name and address of the applicant; a description of the premises wherein or whereon it is proposed to conduct the establishment; the type and nature of the establishment proposed; and such other information as the board of health by rule may require.

     B.     Every applicant for a permit shall pay to the health officer the annual inspection fee established by this chapter at the time of making such an application. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.080 Investigation—Notice of issuance and denial.
     A.    Upon filing of the application and the payment of the required fee, it shall be the duty of the health officer to investigate the information contained in the application and the sanitary condition of, in, and about the establishment, and to determine whether or not such establishment conforms to the requirements of this chapter, the Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, and all applicable city ordinances or regulations.

     B.     The health officer shall grant the permit if such establishment is sanitary and does conform with such laws and such rules and regulations; otherwise, he or she shall deny such application.

     C.     The health officer shall send, deliver or give written notice of such grant or denial to the applicant within five days following such grant or denial. A permit for which application is made pursuant to this chapter may be granted at any time during the year. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.090 Appeal.
     A person aggrieved by the denial to him or her of a permit may appeal from such denial to the city council in the manner set forth in Section 8.04.220. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.100 Permit subject to revocation or suspension.
     A permit shall be granted only on the express condition that it is subject to revocation or suspension upon a showing satisfactory to the health officer of the violation by the permittee, his or her employee, servant or agent, or any other person acting with his or her consent or under his or her authority, of any provision of this chapter, or the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.110 Permit required for each business.
     A separate permit shall be required for each place of business, concession, or vehicle used by permittee. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.120 Annual inspection fees—Penalties—Exemption.
     A.    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, every person applying for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall at the same time of making application for such permit pay a fee, the exact amount of which shall be determined by the county and kept on record by the county department of health services and on file in the office of the city clerk.

     B.     In any case where the applicant has failed for a period of thirty days to file the application and obtain the permit required by this chapter, there shall be added to and collected with the inspection fee a penalty equal to fifty dollars or an amount equal to fifty percent of the fee, whichever is less.

     C.     In any case where a fee is sixty days delinquent, a total penalty of one hundred fifty dollars or one hundred fifty percent of the fee, whichever is less, shall be added to and collected with the required fee.

     D.    The imposition or payment of the penalty imposed by this section shall not prevent the imposition of any other penalty prescribed by this chapter or a criminal prosecution for violation of this chapter.

     E.     The delinquent penalty may be waived by the director in case of error made by environmental health services staff or when the applicant has not held a health permit during the past five years, and was unaware that a health permit was required. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.130 Renewal—Penalty for delinquency.
     A.    A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the one-year anniversary date of the date of issuance and each permit shall be renewed annually. Application for the renewal shall be made to the health officer. At the time application is made there shall be paid to the health officer the annual fee prescribed by Section 8.04.120, which annual fee is due and payable each year.

     B.     The annual fee, if unpaid, is delinquent thirty days following the date it is due, and thereafter a penalty shall be imposed in the manner prescribed in Section 8.04.120. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.140 Permit not transferable.
     A permit is not transferable for one person or one place to another and shall be deemed voided if removed from the place or location specified in the written application and in the permit. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.150 Grading of establishments.
     A.    The health officer, by regulation, may adopt a score card for the grading of establishment undergoing inspection. No permit shall be issued to any establishment scoring less than eighty percent on the score card. Each establishment shall maintain standards of sanitation and health sufficient to score eighty percent on the score card at all times. If upon inspection any establishment shall fail to attain a score of eighty percent, due written notice shall be served on the applicant for the permit. The notice shall list the deficiencies and state that such deficiencies must be corrected within thirty days, at which time a reinspection will be made. An establishment failing to comply with the written notice, or failing to attain a score of eighty percent on the reinspection, shall immediately close and remain closed until a score of at least eighty percent is achieved on a reinspection by the department.

     B.     The health officer shall issue an alphabetical grade card to each restaurant inspected, which grade card shall be displayed at all times while the restaurant is open to the public. Restaurants scoring ninety percent or more on the score card shall receive an “A” grade card; those scoring eighty to eighty-nine and one-half percent shall receive a “B” score card; those scoring below eighty percent shall receive a “C” score card. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.155 Grading of mobile food facilities.
     The provisions of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permanent and mobile food facilities, at Title 6, Division 1 of the County Code, are incorporated into this code by reference. (Ord. 412 § 1, 2012)

 

8.04.156 Fees.
     All persons and businesses required to obtain a health-related permit or related service from the county of San Diego, department of environmental health (DEH) pursuant to this code shall pay the county the fee established in the County Code for that permit or service, including delinquent payment fees. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2012)

 

8.04.160 Permit and grade card—Posting requirements.
     Every health permit and/or alphabetical grade card issued shall be kept posted in a conspicuous place in the establishment for which the permit is issued. The health officer shall prescribe the location in or on the establishment where such permit shall be kept posted. Alphabetical grade cards shall be posted in the front window of the establishment so as to clearly visible to patrons entering the establishment, or in a display case mounted on the outside of the front door, or in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the establishment within five feet of the front door, or in some other location clearly visible to patrons entering the establishment which has been approved by the health officer. The alphabetical grade card shall be protected from damage by weather conditions and shall not be defaced, marred, or camouflaged or hidden so as to prevent the general public from observing it. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.170 Sale of fruits, vegetables and farm produce—Open stands.
     A.    Fruits, vegetables and produce produced on property where an approval has been issued may be sold on-site consistent with Section 17.24.060(D)(4) and applicable county food handling regulations.

     B.     Such fruits, vegetables or produce may be displayed on and sold from an open stand located on the property on which they are grown, provided such open stand is maintained in a clean, sanitary manner. Such open stand located on the property on which such fruits, vegetables and produce are grown may be maintained as a part of an establishment for which a permit has been issued pursuant to Section 8.04.080 or as a separate stand for which a permit has been issued pursuant to this section. Cider may be displayed and sold at such open stand. (Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.180 Special permit for isolated rural areas.
     In the isolated or rural districts where running water, electricity or other modern conveniences are not available, a special permit may be issued if in the opinion of the health officer such is advisable and is consistent with the preservation of the public health and safety. All such special permits shall be revocable for any cause which affects the public health and safety. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.190 Suspension or revocation when.
     The director of public health shall order that a director of public health shall order that a hearing be held, with him or herself as hearing officer, to determine whether or not the health permit of an establishment should be suspended or revoked whenever it appears to him or her, by reason of either citizen complaint or health department investigation, that the holder of such permit or his employee, servant or agent, or any person acting with his consent or under his authority, has or may have violated any provision of this chapter or any relevant requirement established or provided by law. Any hearing pursuant to this section and any order of suspension or revocation resulting therefrom is supplemental to and shall not bar or foreclose subsequent proceedings against such person initiated pursuant to Sections 1.12.010 and 1.12.020 of this code. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.200 Hearing—Notice.
     Upon the determination that a hearing be held pursuant to Section 8.04.190 the health officer shall immediately send to the permittee a notice of hearing, which shall provide substantially as follows:

 

NOTICE OF HEARING

 

To: (name and address of permittee)

 

     Notice is hereby given that on______ the Director of Public Health of San Diego County (insert “and of the City of —— if appropriate) ordered that a hearing be held on (date and hour) at (place of hearing) to determine whether or not Health Permit No. ________, issued to you for the establishment known as ________ should be suspended or revoked.

     The actions or inactions complained of are as follows: (set forth actions or inactions and dates of such, and the code sections, statutes, or regulations violated).

     Be prepared to present evidence and witnesses on your behalf at this hearing if you so desire. You may be represented by legal counsel. Your failure to appear will not prevent the issuance of an order of suspension or revocation should such order appear justified by the evidence presented.

 

(Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.210 Hearing—Rules and procedure.
     The following rules and procedures shall govern hearings held pursuant to this chapter:

     A.    Hearing Officer; Disqualification of Director of Public Health. The director of public health shall be the hearing officer. Upon the disqualification of the director of public health to act as hearing officer, either on his own motion or that of the permittee acceded in by the director, any member of the board of health may act as hearing officer. The sole grounds for disqualification are financial interest, bias or prejudice. Prior knowledge of facts alone does not constitute bias or prejudice.

     B.     Time. The hearing date shall be no less than ten and no more than thirty days following the date on which notice thereof was sent to the permittee.

     C.     Continuance. The hearing officer may order such continuance or continuances as he deems necessary and proper.

     D.    Transcript of Hearing. The city is not required to furnish a shorthand reporter or any other method of reporting and hearing; the permittee may furnish such at his sole and nonreimbursable cost and expense if he so desires.

     E.     Waiver of Irregularities. Any procedural or evidentiary irregularities in the hearing are deemed to be waived unless objection is taken thereto and a specific ruling requested thereon.

     F.     Findings. Specific findings, including a finding that the public health, safety and welfare are subject to a clear and present danger, may be made but are not required. If specific findings are not made the hearing officer shall make a general finding that the actions or inactions complained of, as set forth in the notice of hearing, are true or untrue, and that such actions or inactions do or do not constitute a violation of the conditions set forth in Section 8.04.100.

     G.    Decision and Order. If the hearing officer finds that the actions or inactions complained of are untrue he shall order that the proceedings are dismissed. If the hearing officer finds that the actions or inactions complained of are true, and that a violation as aforesaid has occurred, he shall order either that the permit be suspended for a period not to exceed six months or that the permit be revoked. The decision and order of the hearing officer shall be final unless an appeal is taken pursuant to Section 8.04.220.

     H.    Modification or Rescission of Order of Suspension. If the hearing officer orders that the permit be suspended for a certain period, the permittee may subsequently petition for the modification or rescission of the order of suspension and the reinstatement of the permit. The hearing officer, in his discretion, may grant or deny the petition; or he may grant the petition subject to the condition of the imposition of a probationary period, during which period any violation by the permittee of the condition set forth in Section 8.04.100 is grounds for summary suspension of the permit for the remainder of the period established by the original order of suspension, and is also grounds for the institution of new proceedings for suspension or revocation of the permit. The order of the hearing officer with respect to such petition is final, and no administrative appeal shall lie therefrom.

     I.      Probation. 1.   If the hearing officer orders that the permit be suspended or revoked, he may, in the interests of justice and equity, further order that the order of suspension or revocation be stayed and the permittee be placed on probation for a period not to exceed three years. The hearing officer may grant probation on such conditions as he deems to be fair and reasonable. If the permittee is dissatisfied with the order of probation, or with the conditions thereof, he may reject the offer of probation in which event the order of suspension or revocation shall become final; if the permittee is satisfied with the order of probation he shall indicate such assent, and his agreement to be bound by the terms thereof, by affixing his signature thereto.

     2.     Upon the charge by the health officer of the violation by the permittee of a condition of probation, a hearing shall be held pursuant to this section, limited to the issue of whether or not such condition was in fact breached. If it is found that the condition was breached, the original order of suspension or revocation shall be forthwith enforced, and probation in the same matter shall not be granted again.

     3.     Upon the petition of the permittee for termination of probation and release from the conditions thereof, the rules and procedures established by subsection H of this section shall apply; except, that the hearing officer shall either grant or deny such petition and shall not impose any condition or such grant or denial. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.220 Appeal.
     Any permittee aggrieved by the decision or the order of the hearing officer or by the denial of an application for a health permit may, within fifteen days of the date of the written announcement of the decision and order of the denial, appeal to city council. Such appeal shall be effected by depositing in the office of the city clerk within said fifteen days a notice of appeal which sets forth the notice of hearing and the decision and order of the hearing officer. The clerk shall present the notice of appeal to the city council at their next regular meeting, at which time the council shall set the matter for hearing de novo at the earliest date possible in light of its regular business. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.230 Appeal—Rules and procedures.
     The following rules and procedures shall govern appeals pursuant to this chapter:

     A.    Effect of Appeal. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the order of the hearing officer shall be stayed unless the hearing officer has found that the public health, safety and welfare are threatened, in which case the director of public health shall make order or orders as are necessary to safeguard the public health, safety and welfare. If the permittee agrees and writing to comply with such order or orders of the hearing officer shall in that case also be stayed; otherwise it shall not be stayed.

     B.     Hearing De Novo. The city council shall hold a hearing de novo at which time the health officer and the permittee may offer any and all relevant evidence, whether or not such evidence was before the hearing officer, and may make oral arguments. The city council is not bound or limited in any way by the evidence before the hearing officer, although it may consider such evidence, or by the rulings, findings, decision or order of the hearing officer.

     C.     Application of Hearing Rules and Procedures. The provisions of subsections C—I of Section 8.08.210 conducted pursuant to this section; provided, that in the hearings conducted pursuant to this section of the city council shall exercise the powers given to the hearing officer by said subsections of Section 8.08.210; and, further provided, that the decision and order of the city council shall be final for all purposes. (Ord. 180, 1980)

 

Article III. General Regulations
8.04.240 Food for sale—Inspection required.
     No person shall sell, distribute, offer for sale, vend or give away any manufactured or prepared food or beverage product in the city other than the product of an establishment that is regularly inspected by the health officer or some other health department inspection service recognized and approved by the director of public health. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.250 Food for sale—Cover required.
     No person shall sell, expose, or offer for sale, or cause or permit to be sold, exposed or offered for sale in the city any article of food prepared or intended for human consumption, which article of food is smoked, cooked, dried or otherwise prepared and intended for human consumption without further cooking, washing or other preparation, unless such article of food is covered or enclosed by glass or some other approved substance or material in such a manner as to prevent the handling of such article of food by any person other than the person selling, offering or exposing such article of food for sale, and to prevent such article of food from coming in contact with any deleterious, unwholesome or unhealthy substance or material; provided, however, that the provisions of this section do not apply to food uncovered in the process of preparation, or to food uncovered for display for immediate consumption on the premises where steam tables or other approved service tables are in use and are properly protected from unwholesome or unhealthy contamination as provided in this chapter and the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.260 Food for sale—Personnel with communicable disease prohibited.
     No person, proprietor or manager of an establishment shall require or permit any person to work, nor shall any person work, in any establishment, who is affected with any communicable disease. It shall be the duty of all owners, proprietors, or managers to report to the health officer any person afflicted with, or reasonably suspected to being afflicted with, venereal disease, smallpox, diphtheria, scarlet fever, dysentery, measles, mumps, German measles, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, chicken pox or any other infectious or contagious disease, whereupon it shall be the duty of the health officer to examine, or cause to be examined, any such person afflicted with, any of the above mentioned diseases and said person shall no longer be permitted to work in any establishment where food is handled, prepared, sold or distributed. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.270 List of employees and duties required.
     All owners, proprietors or managers of establishments shall keep an accurate and complete list of all persons employed indicating the physical description of, and the duties performed by, each employee. A copy of the list shall be furnished to the health officer and shall be kept constantly up to date, by the owner, proprietor or manager. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.280 Employee clothing requirements.
     Persons employed in an establishment for serving, preparing or handling food for human consumption, or handling food utensils, shall wear uniforms, clothing or aprons which are made of washable material and kept clean at all times. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.290 Light, ventilation and plumbing to comply with law.
     Every establishment shall be properly lighted, drained, ventilated and provided with adequate plumbing and sanitary drainage, as provided by law. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.300 Structural requirements for cleaning purposes.
     The floors of every establishment shall be smooth and cleanable, shall be of good quality nonabsorbent material and shall be kept in good repair and in a clean, sanitary condition at all times. The walls and ceilings shall be smooth, sound and cleanable and shall be kept painted with oil paint or other approved finishing material and maintained in good repair and in a clean and sanitary condition. In the proximity of sinks, mixers, stoves, ranges or other equipment where water, grease or other matter is likely to be splashed, walls shall be constructed of tile or other approved material to a sufficient height thoroughly to protect said walls; provided, the backs of stoves may be flashed with metal. Drainboards shall be made or constructed of metal, tile or approved substitutes. The use of wooden drainboards or wooden drainboards covered with metal is prohibited. Food preparation and utensil washing areas shall be painted with light colored oil paint or enamel. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.310 Toilet rooms and washrooms—Construction requirements.
     Floors of toilet rooms and washrooms shall be of cement, tile laid in cement, or other nonabsorbent material. The interior area of a toilet room shall not be less than eighteen square feet. No door or other opening from a toilet room shall open directly into a kitchen, dining room or other place where food is served. The number of toilet rooms and plumbing fixtures of each toilet room shall be as required in Appendix C of the most recent edition of the Uniform Plumbing Code except that establishments with five or less employees and serving no alcoholic beverages may be equipped with only one toilet room. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.320 Garbage can requirements.
     Every establishment shall be provided with garbage and trash cans with fly-tight covers, made of metal or other approved material, for disposal of vegetable trimmings, food scraps and other refuse. A sufficient number of cans shall be available to prevent overloading, and tight-fitting covers shall be kept in place at all times. Garbage and trash cans shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in good repair, and shall be cleaned at such intervals as the department may direct. Garbage and trash cans placed outside of the establishment shall be located on smooth, washable concrete or some other foundation approved by the health officer. Where there is an access of vegetable trimmings or other waste material subject to decomposition, a fly-tight screened room shall be constructed of screen wire of not less than fourteen meshes to the inch and all such excess waste material shall be kept in said screened room until removal from the premises. Where screened rooms are provided, the lower three feet of wall space shall be constructed of a smooth, washable material in a workmanlike manner, and maintained in good repair. When the can or dumpster area is enclosed by walls, the interior walls shall have a smooth plaster coating to facilitate cleaning or finished by some other method approved by the department. All waste water from the washing of garbage cans, trash cans, dumpsters, flood mats, garbage and trash compacting equipment, the exterior delivery/disposal area, and any other source shall enter an approved sewer by a method approved by the department. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.330 Use of sawdust prohibited.
     No person shall use or permit to be used any sawdust or similar material on the floor of an establishment, except that in butcher shops clean sawdust may be used on floors in a cooler or behind the counter. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.340 Sleeping in establishments prohibited.
     Living and sleeping quarters shall be separated entirely with a solid partition from the establishment. No couch, cot, bed, bedding and/or articles used for living or sleeping purposes shall be maintained or kept in any room of the establishment where food is prepared, stored, served or displayed. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.350 Locker rooms to be provided.
     There shall be provided in all establishments a room or enclosure, separated from toilets or food storage or preparation area, wherein employees may change and store outer garments. No person shall change or store clothes elsewhere in an establishment. Locker rooms shall have a minimum of eighteen square feet for the first four employees, including owners and managers. Additional floor area shall be required for employees exceeding four per shift. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.360 Rodent or vermin infestation—Notice—Failure to comply.
     A.    The owner, operator or manager of every establishment shall take every precaution to keep the premises free and rid of rats, mice, roaches, ants and other vermin and pests.

     B.     Whenever it appears to the health officer that any establishment is infested with rodents, vermin or pests, a written notice shall be given to the person owning, operating or managing the establishment that said infestation with rodents, vermin or pests constitutes a public nuisance and endangers the public health and safety, and that such infestation shall be abated within thirty days from the date of the written notice.

     C.     Failure to comply with the written notice within thirty days shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter, and the health officer shall suspend the permit summarily and close such establishment until the nuisance has been abated. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.370 Common drinking cups unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person conducting, having charge or control of any hotel, restaurant, saloon, soda fountain, theater, public hall, public or private school, church, hospital, club, office building, park playground, lavatory or washroom, barbershop or any other public place, building, room or conveyance, to provide or expose for common use, or permit to be so provided or exposed to allow to be used in common, any cup, glass or other receptacle used for drinking purposes. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.380 Water containers—Requirements.
     No cask, water cooler or other receptacle shall be used for storing or supplying drinking water to the public or to employees unless it is covered and protected so as to prevent persons from dipping the water therefrom, or from otherwise contaminating such water. All such containers shall be provided with a faucet or other approved device for drawing the water. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.390 Outdoor displays prohibited.
     No food or food product, fruit or vegetable shall be displayed outside of any building or property line, or on any sidewalk, public street or highway in any fruit stand or market. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.400 Prevention of sun damage.
     Deciduous fruits, or other food subject to damage by the rays of the sun, shall be kept at all times well inside of the building proper and elevated not less than eighteen inches above the floor level. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.410 Wrapping requirements.
     No person shall use newspapers for wrapping fruits, vegetables or other food products unless such fruits, vegetables or other food are first wrapped in clean wrapping paper. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.420 Keeping and disposal of surplus containers.
     All surplus boxes, crates, lug boxes and similar containers in which fruits, vegetables and other products are delivered or received by an establishment shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be removed from premises daily unless some other removal interval is established by the health officer. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.430 Wineries and cider mills—Requirements for compliance.
     All wineries or cider mills where wine or cider is manufactured, processed or bottled shall:

     A.    Have properly drained cement floors and a properly installed sink with running water;

     B.     Wash and sterilize thoroughly all bottles, jugs or receptacles used for bottling wine or cider;

     C.     Use new corks or stoppers in all bottles, jugs or containers;

     D.    Dispose of all pulp by a method approved by the health officer;

     E.     Be equipped with a conveniently located water flush toilet in accordance with this code. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.440 Pre-prepared sandwiches—Requirements for sale.
     A.    For the purpose of this section, a “pre-prepared sandwich” means a sandwich which is intended to be distributed subsequent to the time of preparation or at a location other than at which it is prepared. A hard sandwich is a sandwich made with hotdogs, sliced meats without condiments, etc. A soft sandwich is made with egg salad, tuna salad, etc., and may contain condiments such as tomatoes, lettuce, and similar items. Frozen means to be maintained at thirty-two degrees Fahrenheit or less.

     B.     No person shall give away, trade or sell any pre-prepared sandwich unless such sandwich meets all of the following requirements:

     1.     The sandwich shall be prepared and wrapped at some sanitary location which is regularly inspected by a recognized health department inspection service approved by the director of public health;

     2.     No sandwich shall be sold more than ninety-six hours after preparation. Each sandwich shall be clearly stamped or marked with the last date the sandwich may be sold and shall bear the name and address of the person or the company that prepared it.

     C.     However, sandwiches that are frozen immediately after preparation may be sold beyond the ninety-six hour interval if kept frozen until loading for delivery to the retailer, and thereafter maintained at a temperature not more than forty-two degrees Fahrenheit until sale to the consumer; provided, however that said sandwiches may be heated prior to sale if maintained at a temperature of at least one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit after heating until sale. Such heated sandwiches may not be sold except on the day on which they are heated. No sandwiches so frozen may be loaded for delivery to the retailer one year after preparation unless a longer period is approved in writing by the director of public health. No sandwiches which have been frozen shall be sold more than fifteen days after unfreezing or more than three days after delivery to a food vending vehicle. Frozen sandwich cartons shall bear a legend reading “KEEP FROZEN” and shall bear a legend showing the date of preparation of the contents. The frozen sandwich packages upon delivery to the retailer shall be clearly stamped or marked with the last date the sandwich may be sold and shall bear the name and address of the person or company that prepared it. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.450 Foods and beverages to remain in original containers.
     All fruit juices, soft drinks, honey and/or other beverages, or foods, shall be bottled in a regularly inspected plant, and shall not be changed from one container to another except in the plant. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.460 Food handling establishments—Special requirements.
     No person shall operate or maintain any establishment without complying with the following regulations:

     A.    Hoods for Ranges. All stoves, ranges, cooking kettles, doughnut kettles, oven and hot plates shall be equipped with a metal hood (canopy) of a size at least six inches greater on each side than the cooking surface of such cooking device or devices. The hood shall be ventilated to the outside air by a separate ventilating flue not less than twelve inches in diameter for an ordinary stove, or of such larger diameter as the health officer may deem necessary for effective operation. Hoods and mechanical ventilation shall be installed to accomplish air circulation in accordance with standard ventilation tables maintained by the department. The six inches is measured from the inside of the grease gutter of the hood to the edge of the cooking surface. For pizza and baking ovens, barbecue units and similar cooking equipment, there shall be an eighteen inch overhand in the front and twelve inches on the side.

     B.     Water and Sinks. All sinks of establishment shall have an adequate supply of running hot and cold water of a safe, sanitary quality available at all times. All sinks shall be of metal or approved impervious material. At hand lavatories the water temperature shall be a minimum of one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit. Number and type of sinks shall be regulated by rules of the health officer as required by the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law, Good Sanitation Act and the Good Manufacturing Practices Regulations.

     C.     Damaged Utensils. Dishes, glasses, drinking glasses or other utensils that are cracked, chipped or damaged shall not be used, and may be confiscated or destroyed at any time when necessary, in the opinion of the health officer, to protect the public health and safety.

     D.    Headdress. Male and female persons engaged in cooking or food preparation shall wear an approved cap, hairnet or headdress to prevent the falling of hair into such foods.

     E.     Containers for Storage of Foods. No tin can, lard stand or other such container shall be used for the purpose of cooking, preparing or storing of food stuffs. The health official shall condemn and/or destroy all food held in storage contrary to the provisions of this subsection.

     F.     Screens. All establishments where food is prepared, served or kept shall have wire screens at all outside openings for the purpose of excluding flies and other insects. All screen doors must be self-closing and outside doors shall open outwards only. All screening used in such places shall be not less than fourteen meshes to the inch. Fly fans may be substituted for screen doors and, when used, so that the airflow is directed downward and outward. Fly fans shall produce an airflow with a minimum velocity of seven hundred fifty feet per minute over the entire door opening from the top thereof to a point three feet above the floor. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article IV. Food Vending Vehicles
8.04.470 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter and of other city ordinances and state laws and regulations relative to health and sanitation apply to food vending vehicles. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.480 Definitions.
     Whenever in this article the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Prepared food vending vehicle” means a food vending vehicle from which any food or beverage product is sold, given away, displayed or offered for sale, at retail, other than an unprepared food vending vehicle, catering truck, bakery truck, or ice cream or ice cream product truck.

     B.     “Unprepared food vending vehicle” means a food vending vehicle from which is sold, given away, displayed or offered for sale, at retail, any raw or unprepared food or food product including, but not limited to, fruits, vegetables, produce, meats, fish, poultry or seafood. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.490 Parking and stopping regulations.
     No person shall stop or park a food vending vehicle on a public thouroughfare for the purpose of selling, giving away, displaying or offering for sale any food or beverage product except for a period of time sufficient to consummate an immediate sale or sales. No person shall stop, park or cause any food vending vehicle to remain on any public property except pursuant to the order of a lawful authority or for the purpose of making emergency repairs to the vehicle; in no event shall any person sell or give away any food or beverage product from a food vending vehicle while on any public property, other than a thoroughfare. No person shall stop, park or cause a food vendor to remain on any private property for the purpose of selling, giving away, displaying or offering for sale any food or beverage product to any person other than the owner of such property or his agents, customers or employees. Water flush toilet facilities for the use of food service personnel shall be available within one hundred feet of the vehicle whenever it is stopped to conduct business for more than a one hour period. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.500 Refrigeration required.
     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a food vending vehicle unless it is furnished with mechanical refrigeration equipment, in good working order, sufficient to maintain perishable food and beverage products at a temperature not in excess of forty-five degrees Fahrenheit, except that frozen perishable foods may be refrigerated with dry ice. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.510 Certificate and identification required.
     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a food vending vehicle that does not display a valid certificate of inspection, or that does not display on each exterior side of the vehicle, in letters not less than four inches high, the name of the owner or the fictitious name under which he operates, and business address and telephone number of the owner, and the distinctive identifying number or symbol assigned to the vehicle by the department of public health. Such lettering shall be permanently affixed to the vehicle by painting, decal or other method approved by the health department. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.520 Vehicle cleanliness required.
     The interior and the exterior of every food vending vehicle and all equipment therein, shall have smooth, washable surfaces and shall be maintained in good repair and in a sanitary manner. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.530 Unprepared food vending vehicles—Compliance with regulations required.
     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, an unprepared food vending vehicle without complying with all of the following regulations:

     A.    All tools, implements and receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

     B.     Sufficient fly-tight containers, of metal or some other approved substance, shall be provided for the disposal of trimmings and refuse and shall be emptied and washed daily.

     C.     No fish, poultry or other animal shall be cleaned in a food vending vehicle, nor shall the entrails of any fish, poultry or other animal be there removed. No fish, poultry, meat or meat products shall be cut, processed or otherwise prepared in a food vending vehicle.

     D.    Scales and other weighing devices shall be protected from dust, dirt, flies and other vermin and contaminants.

     E.     Every unprepared food vending vehicle shall be inspected at least semiannually on dates scheduled by the health officer, or more often if the health officer so requires. The vending vehicle shall be fully loaded and ready for operation at the time of such inspection. The health officer shall issue a certificate of inspection if his inspection discloses that the vehicle conforms to the requirements of this code. The certificate of inspection shall expire six months from and after the date of its issue, and shall specify the particular food and beverage products authorized to be sold or otherwise distributed from the vehicle.

     F.     Every unprepared food vending vehicle shall establish within the county a headquarters which shall be used only for cleaning the vehicle, and storage of food products to be sold or distributed from the vehicle. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.540 Prepared food vending vehicles—Compliance with regulations required.
     No person shall operate, or cause to be operated, a prepared food vending vehicle without complying with all of the following requirements:

     A.    Such person shall establish, within the county, a service room which meets all of the requirements of this chapter applicable to food establishments. The service room shall be used for the preparation and/or temporary storage, at temperatures required by this chapter, or food and beverage products prior to the delivery thereof to a food vending vehicle. Unless written authorization from the director of public health to do otherwise is first obtained, food vending vehicles shall be stocked only at and with food and beverage products prepared or stored at the service room. No food or beverage product shall be sold or otherwise distributed from a food vending vehicle unless such product was prepared in a service room or in a food establishment, for either of which a valid permit is held, or in some other sanitary location appropriate for such preparation which is regularly inspected by some recognized health department inspection service approved by the director of public health. Food or beverage products not prepared in such service room or establishment shall be stored at a service room prior to delivery to the food vending vehicle.

     B.     All prepared food, not including coffee or hot water, sold, given away, bartered, or distributed from a food vending vehicle shall be packaged at a service room or other fixed location approved by the health officer.

     C.     All readily perishable foods, as defined by Section 28648.5, California Health and Safety Code, shall meet the following requirements:

     1.     No product shall be sold more than ninety-six hours after preparation.

     2.     All such products, at the time of preparation, shall be clearly marked with the last date the food may be sold.

     3.     Dairy products may not be sold beyond the quality assurance date on the package.

     However, readily perishable foods which are frozen at the time of preparation may be sold beyond the ninety-six hour interval, provided handling of such frozen foods is in compliance with the provisions of Section 8.04.450 which relate to frozen sandwiches. The date of heating such frozen foods must be affixed to the package at the time of heating and such package may not be sold after said date.

     D.    Every prepared food vending vehicle shall be inspected, on dates scheduled by the health officer, as often as he deems such inspections necessary. The vending vehicle shall be fully loaded and ready for operation at the time of such inspection. The health officer shall issue a certificate of inspection if his inspection discloses that the vehicle conforms to the requirements of this code.

     E.     All foods found not to be in conformance with the provisions of this section shall be quarantined by the health officer. Foods under quarantine shall be disposed of by the permittee in a manner approved by the health officer.

     F.     Notwithstanding subsections A and B of this section, the health officer may permit vehicles upon which food is prepared and packaged to be operated at fairs, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, parades, sports tournaments, or at other similar events open to the general public. A separate health permit shall be required for each such event, and a fee of twenty dollars per vehicle shall be paid by the person applying for such permit at the time of making application. The public event permit shall be valid only for the duration of the public event. Whenever such a food preparation vehicle remains at one public event location for a period exceeding twenty-four hours continuously, daily disposal of both liquid and solid wastes in a manner approved by the health officer shall be provided by the permittee.

     G.    Notwithstanding subsection F of this section, a single permit may be issued for a vehicle upon which food is prepared and packaged for more than one public event where the operation is limited to one site, and the days of operation during any calendar year do not exceed fifteen. As a condition of such permit, the permittee shall notify the health officer in writing of any intended operation of the vehicle at least two days prior to said operation. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.550 Vehicle use restricted.
     Food vending vehicles shall be used for no purpose other than those purposes permitted by this chapter, unless the health officer has approved in writing some other proposed use of such vehicle. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article V. Vending Machines
8.04.560 Definition.
     “Operator” means the person who furnishes, installs and services the vending machine. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.570 Permit required—Application and compliance requirements.
     A.    No operator shall maintain, conduct, manage or operate any vending machine unless a permit for such machine has been issued by the health officer and unless such permit is valid and unexpired.

     B.     The applicant for a permit shall designate in writing the products to be vended, and permits shall be valid only for those products listed on the permit. Unless it appears to the health officer that the vending machine will at all times be maintain in a clean and sanitary condition, and that all products of the machine will reach the consumer in a clean and wholesome condition, he shall deny the application for the permit.

     C.     If the permit is granted, the operator shall be responsible for the proper operation and maintenance of the vending machine and for complying with the requirements of this chapter and of state laws and regulations in connection therewith. The name and address of the operator shall be posted conspicuously on the vending machine. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.580 Vehicle permit required.
     No operator shall use a vehicle to service vending machines, or allow such use, unless the health officer has issued a permit for such vehicle. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.590 Location—Notice and sanitation requirements.
     The operator shall furnish the health officer with the location of any vending machine installed sufficiently soon so that, within seventy-two hours subsequent to such installation, the health officer may inspect the vending machine and the location. If the location of the machine is not approved by the health officer, the vending machine shall be removed immediately and not operated until the location thereof is rendered acceptable. Each vending machine shall be so located so that sanitary facilities, fixtures and receptacles for emptying waste containers and for performing required sanitation are readily accessible. The area around the vending machine shall be maintained clean and free of accumulated paper cups and wrappers, spillage and other waste material and trash. Approved trash receptacles shall be provided by the machine operator, proximate to vending machines, whenever required by the health officer. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.600 Service room required.
     All operators shall establish within the county a service room or rooms, which shall be used only for cleaning, storing and maintaining vending machines, supplies and sanitized parts. All cleaning and sanitizing of vending machines parts which come in contact with food, food products or liquids dispensed by a vending machine shall be done in the service room previously approved by the health officer. The service room shall meet all the requirements of this division relative to food handling establishments. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.610 Cleaning and sanitizing requirements.
     Vending machines dispensing liquids shall be cleaned not less frequently than three times each week, and machines dispensing unwrapped, nonliquid food products shall be cleaned not less frequently than once each month, except as noted in this section, in the manner set forth below:

     A.    General. The following general regulations apply to all vending machines:

     1.     The operator shall clean the outside of the machine, and any vending stage, door, chute, drip plate and waste can.

     2.     Used cup and trash containers shall be emptied and cleaned.

     3.     Parts shall be wiped with a cleaned moist cloth which has been dipped in a solution containing not less than two hundred parts of active chlorine per million parts, or in some other approved sanitizing agent or material.

     B.     Cold Carbonated Beverages. In addition to the servicing required by the general regulations, machines dispensing cold carbonated beverages shall be serviced as follows:

     1.     Not less frequently than once each sixty days all contact parts of the machine shall be cleaned by removing, washing and disinfecting all tanks, valves, faucets, pipe lines and water filters.

     2.     Interior water filter and conditioning elements shall be taken to the service room for servicing; properly sanitized replacements may be transported under sanitary conditions from the service room and installed while the other water filter and conditioning elements are being serviced.

     3.     Water filters and water conditioning devices shall be of a type which permit periodic cleaning and replacement.

     C.     Milk Products. In addition to the servicing required by Article III, machines dispensing milk and milk products shall be serviced as follows:

     1.     Fluid milk or ice cream shall be removed from the machine and discarded daily, and fresh products added.

     2.     Canned evaporated milk may be dispensed for seventy-two hours before discarding provided that throughout this period the temperature of such milk is maintained at not more than fifty degrees Fahrenheit.

     3.     All parts and appurtenances of vending machines that come in contact with fluid milk or milk products shall be removed daily and cleaned and sanitized.

     4.     Vending machines that dispense nonliquid milk or nonliquid cream products shall be sanitized not less frequently than three times each week.

     5.     Refilling. Vending machines, in locations for which the health officer has not issued a food handling establishment permit, shall be refilled only by substituting for the empty container one which was cleaned, sanitized and filled in the service room. The emptied container shall be transported to the service room for cleaning and sanitizing. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article VI. Food Handlers
8.04.620 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Department” means the county department of public health.

     B.     “Director” means the deputy director of environmental health of the county department of public health or his duly appointed deputy or representative.

     C.     “Food handler” means any person engaged or employed in a business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Article II of this chapter who handles food in such manner that some portion of his clothing or body or body discharges might come in contact with such food or with the utensils used in connection therewith. Food handler shall not include, however, those persons engaged or employed in youth organizations, churches, church societies, private clubs or other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic improvement, youth development, social, political, or educational nature which purchase food, food products, or beverages, for service without charge to their members, or for service or sale at a reasonable charge to their members or to the general public at fund-raising events, for consumption on or off the premises at which the food, food products, or beverages are served or sold, if the service or sale of such food, food products or beverages does not constitute a primary purpose or function of the club or association, and if no employee or member is assigned full time to care for or operate equipment used in such arrangement.

     D.    “Food service manager.” For the purposes of this chapter, “food service manager” means the owner, operator, licensee or any other person who supervises all or part of food service operations within a food service establishment and is responsible for the actions of employees under his or her charge. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.630 Carrier of transmissible disease not to act as food handler.
     No person who has contracted or is afflicted with a disease or infection determined by the director to be a danger to public health, transmissible, either directly or through food or drink, to other persons, or who is known or suspected to be a carrier of organisms causing such disease, or who has come in contact with any person afflicted with such communicable disease or infection, shall act or be engaged or employed as a food handler. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.640 Transmissible disease—Director’s authority to act.
     Whenever information that the possibility of transmission of disease determined by the director to be a danger to public health exists in a food handler or in any business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Article II of this chapter is presented to the director, he shall investigate conditions and take appropriate action. The director may, after investigation, and for reasonable cause, require any of the following measures to be taken:

     A.    The immediate exclusion by the director of any food handler from the affected business, or establishment;

     B.     The immediate closing of any affected business or establishment until, in the opinion of the director, no further danger of the outbreak of disease exists;

     C.     Medical examination of the owner, employee, and his co-employees, with such laboratory examination as may be indicated; or should such examination or examinations be refused, then the immediate exclusion of the refusing owner, employee or co-employee from that or any other food establishment operation, until a medical or laboratory examination shows that the person is not infected with, or a carrier of, any such disease in a communicable form. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.650 Training requirements.
     No person shall act as or be engaged as a food handler unless such person: (1) possesses a valid food handler training certificate as described in subsection A of this section, or (2) is working in an establishment under the supervision of a food service manager possessing a food service manager training certificate as described in subsection B of this section, or possesses a food handler card as described in subsection C of this section; provided, however, that a person may act as or be engaged as a food handler under the supervision of such food service manager for up to ten calendar days without a food handler card.

     A.    Food Handler Training Certificate. Food handler training certificates or renewals thereof shall be issued by the health officer, or any other qualified person or agency as may be designated by the health officer, or persons who, immediately preceding such issuance, have successfully completed a food sanitation training course having a duration of at least three hours, taught by an instructor approved by the health officer, and having a course content approved by the health officer. In order to successfully complete the course, a person must pass a proficiency test, approved by the health officer, with at least a seventy percent grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects:

     1.     Microorganisms;

     2.     Sources of foodborne disease microorganisms;

     3.     Foodborne diseases;

     4.     The means by which food is contaminated by microorganisms and toxic substances;

     5.     Methods for protection of food to prevent foodborne illnesses;

     6.     Control of the spread of disease through food;

     7.     Personal hygiene for food handlers;

     8.     The role of utensils and equipment in the transmission of diseases; and

     9.     Dishwashing procedures.

     B.     Food Service Manager Training Certificate. A food service manager training certificate shall be issued by the health officer, or by a person or agency authorized by the health officer, to any person who has (1) attended a food service manager’s training course, having a duration of at least sixteen hours, taught by an instructor approved by the health officer, and having a course content approved by the health officer, with at least a seventy percent grade. The course of instruction shall include at least the following subjects:

     1.     Microbiology of foodborne disease;

     2.     Methods of preventing foodborne diseases;

     3.     Personal sanitation practices;

     4.     Warewashing and sanitizing;

     5.     Housekeeping and waste disposal practices;

     6.     Food purchasing, transportation, receiving and storage;

     7.     Food preparation and use;

     8.     Sanitation of kitchens;

     9.     Dining service;

     10.   Legal regulations and the food industry; and

     11.   Sanitation and safety management.

     A food service manager training certificate may also be issued to persons with any one of the following combinations of academic preparation and work experience, providing they pass the proficiency test specified above with at least an eighty-five percent grade:

     A baccalaureate degree with at least a minor in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least two years of occupational experience in said fields; or

     An associate degree or sixty semester units of course work in food service occupations, environmental sanitation, biological sciences, hospitality services or related subjects and at least four years of occupational experience in said fields; or

     A high school diploma or its equivalent or evidence of successful completion of secondary education and at least six years of occupational experience in the food service field.

     A food service manager training certificate may be issued by the health officer to any person possessing formal education and practical experience in the application of food sanitation principles determined by the health officer to be equivalent to the formal education and practical experience to that of a registered sanitarian with ten years experience in food sanitation.

     The health officer’s designation of persons or agencies to issue food service manager training certificates and the health officer’s approval of instructors course contents and proficiency tests may be withdrawn by the health officer at any time. The food service manager training certificate shall not expire by passage of time.

     C.     Food Handler Card. A food handler card or a renewal thereof, in a form prescribed by the health officer, may be issued by a food service manager possessing a food service manager training certificate to food handlers under the manager’s supervision, provided said food handlers pass a test relating to fundamental principles of sanitary food service practices, with at least a seventy percent grade. The test shall be prepared by the health officer based on information contained in an informational booklet on sanitary food practices, which shall also be prepared by the health officer and which shall be distributed at cost by the health officer. Test records and records of the duration of the food handler’s employment, including the date that the food handler began to perform food handling services, shall be maintained on the premises where the food handler is performing such services. The food handler card shall be valid for three years from the date of issuance, or until the food handler’s performance of food handling services at the establishment where the card was issued ceases, or until the expiration of sixty days from the date that the establishment ceases to have a food service manager processing a food service manager training certificate to supervise the food handler, whichever occurs the earliest. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.660 Employment regulations.
     No person who owns or operates a business, occupation or establishment for which a permit is required by Article II of this chapter shall permit or authorize any person to act as or be engaged as a food handler in said business, occupation or establishment unless such person is legally permitted to act as or be engaged as a food handler pursuant to Section 8.04.650. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.670 Fees.
     No fee shall be charged for any test or examination made pursuant to this chapter by the department. The city shall not be liable for any fee or charge made for any test, x-ray or examination required by this chapter that is not made by the department. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article VII. Destruction of Spoiled Food
8.04.680 Authority of health department to inspect.
     The health department shall be and is authorized and empowered to make inspections from time to time of lobsters, crawfish, shellfish, meat, meat food products and all other foodstuffs within the city at such times and in such manner as may be reasonable and necessary or advisable for protecting the public health and shall, after inspection, seize, condemn and destroy any and all lobsters, crawfish, shellfish, meat, meat food products and other foodstuffs appearing to the health department to be unfit for human consumption. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.690 Sale of unfit seafood prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, or the agent or employee of any person, to sell or exchange for other things of value within the city any lobster, crawfish, or shellfish, or to have in their possession for the purpose of preparing same for human consumption any lobster, crawfish or shellfish that does not show conclusive signs of life immediately before the preparation thereof in any manner as food for human consumption. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.700 Authority of health department to confiscate unfit seafood.
     Whenever it appears to the satisfaction of the health department that any lobster, crawfish, or shellfish does not shown conclusive signs of life immediately preceding the preparation thereof as food for human consumption, or that any lobster, crawfish or shellfish or parts thereof may be unfit for human food, or that the same is offered for sale contrary to the provisions of this chapter such lobster, crawfish, or shellfish and all parts thereof shall be subject to confiscation by the health department or subjected to such treatment as shall satisfy the health department that such lobster, crawfish, shellfish or parts thereof cannot thereafter be sold for human consumption in any manner whatsoever. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

8.04.710 Possession or importation of uninspected meat prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to have in his possession, to bring into or cause to be brought into the city, any meat, meat food products, foodstuffs containing meat, or lobsters, crawfish and shellfish, unless such meat, meat food products, foodstuffs containing meat, or lobsters, crawfish and shellfish bear the inspection seal of the Department of Agriculture, state of California, or of the United States Department of Agriculture, Federal Meat Inspection Service, or of the board of health of the city. The presence of such meat, meat food products, foodstuffs containing meat, or lobsters, crawfish and shellfish in the city is hereby declared to be a nuisance and inimical to public health. (Ord. 180, 1990)

 

Article VIII. Food Caterers and Catering Equipment Rentals
8.04.720 Definitions.
     Whenever in this article, the following terms are used, they shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Caterer” means a business which prepares food for a catering function for events such as, but not limited to, picnics, weddings, banquets, parties and gatherings.

     B.     “Catering vehicle” means a vehicle upon which food, beverages and related serving equipment are transported related to a catering function.

     C.     “Catering function” means any event where a caterer provides food for a person or persons at other than an existing health regulated establishment. A catering function shall not include those functions that are conducted by persons engaged or employed in youth organizations, churches, church societies, private clubs or other nonprofit associations of a religious, philanthropic, civic improvement, youth development, social, political, or educational nature which purchase food, food products, or beverage, for service without charge to their members or to the general public at fund-raising events, for consumption on or off the premises at which food, food products or beverages does not constitute a primary purpose or function of the club or association, and if no employee or member is assigned full time to care for or operate equipment used in such an arrangement.

     D.    “Catering rental equipment rental establishment” means an establishment that provides food service utensils such as dishes, tableware, pots and pans to caterers or to the public but does not provide catering service.

     E.     “Department” means the San Diego Department of Health Services. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.730 County authority.
     The provisions of Division I, Title 6, of the San Diego County Code of Regulatory Ordinances and the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law (CURFFL) relative to food handler training and the preparation and distribution of food apply to caterers and caterer operations. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.740 Health permits and fees required.
     Persons operating as caterers and catering equipment rental establishments are considered to be operating a health regulated establishment and are subject to public health permit requirements as specified in Article II of this code. Such persons shall pay the permit fees prescribed for restaurants in Section 8.04.070 of this chapter and shall be subject to penalties for delinquent fee payment as set forth in Sections 8.04.120 and 8.04.130 of this chapter. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.750 Notification requirements.
     When requested by the deputy director of environmental health services, caterers shall notify the department of the time, date and location of each catering function in a manner specified by the department. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.760 Protection from contamination required.
     All potentially hazardous foods as defined in Section 27531 of the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law that are stored, held, transported or served by a caterer must be protected from contamination and kept at temperatures as required by California State Law. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.770 Toilet facilities to be available.
     Adequate toilet and handwashing facilities, as determined by the deputy director of environmental health services, must be reasonably available in the vicinity of any location where food is prepared or served. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.780 Catering vehicles—Compliance required.
     No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated, a catering vehicle without complying with the following:

     A.    Such person or company shall have a valid health permit as required in Section 8.04.730.

     B.     Foods and food containers shall be carried in compartments with cleanable interior surfaces.

     C.     Vehicles shall be maintained in a clean condition. (Ord. 153, 1988)

 

8.04.790 Catering equipment rental—Compliance required.
     No person or company shall operate or cause to be operated, a catering equipment rental establishment without complying with the following:

     A.    All food service equipment shall be stored in a building that meets the requirements of the California State law.

     B.     All food service equipment such as dishes, glasses, tableware, pots and pans shall be cleaned and sanitized by methods prescribed in the California Uniform Retail Food Facilities Law. (Ord. 153, 1988)

Chapter 8.06 WHOLESALE FOOD WAREHOUSES
8.06.010 Wholesale food warehouses.
     The provisions of the County Code of Regulatory Ordinances concerning permitting and regulation of wholesale food warehouses, codified at Sections 61.212 through 61.256 of the County Code, are incorporated into this code by reference.  (Ord. 321 § 3, 2003)

 

8.06.020 Fees.
     The county shall retain all fees and charges collected by it from regulated wholesale food warehouse owners or operators pursuant to this code. (Ord. 321 § 3, 2003)

Chapter 8.08 WEED CONTROL AND WASTE MATTER
8.08.010 Definition.
     “Waste matter” is defined for the purpose of this chapter as unused or discarded matter having no substantial market value, which is exposed to the elements and is not enclosed in any structure or otherwise concealed from public view, upon streets, sidewalks, or private property in the city which consists (without limitation or exclusion by enumeration) of such matter and material as:

     A.    Rubble, asphalt, concrete, rebar, scrap metal, plaster, tile, pipes, and any other debris;

     B.     Rubbish, refuse, dirt, crates, cartons, metal and glass containers;

     C.     Vehicle bodies and parts. (Ord. 338 § 1, 2004; Ord. 9 § 3, 1977)

 

8.08.020 Nuisance declared—Weeds, dry grasses, etc.
     A.    All weeds, dry grasses, dead shrubs, dead trees, stubble, brush, sagebrush, chaparral, weeds which bear seeds of a wingy or downy nature, and any other brush or weeds which by reason of their size, manner of growth, and location constitute a fire hazard to any building, improvements, crops or other property, and weeds and grasses which, when dry, will in reasonable probability endanger the public safety by creating a fire or other safety hazard, any of which are growing on the streets, sidewalks, or private property in the city are declared to be a public nuisance.

     B.     Poison oak and poison ivy when conditions of growth are such as to constitute a menace to public safety, and weeds which are otherwise noxious or dangerous and a hazard to public safety, growing on the streets, sidewalks or private property in the city are declared to be a public nuisance.

     C.     Any rubbish, litter, refuse, flammable material, or any material growing upon the streets, sidewalks, or upon private property within the city that constitute a fire or safety hazard, are declared to be a public nuisance.

     D.    Cultivated and useful grasses and pastures shall not be declared a public nuisance. However, if the fire chief or his or her authorized representative determines it necessary to protect adjacent improved property from fire exposure, an adequate firebreak may be required. (Ord. 338 § 1, 2004; Ord. 9 § 1, 1977)

 

8.08.030 Nuisance declared—Waste matter.
     Waste matter as defined in Section 8.08.010, which by reason of its location and character is unsightly and interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of property by neighbors and the public, or which would materially hamper or interfere with the prevention or suppression of fire, create a safety hazard, or hamper the abatement of a nuisance upon the premises, as defined by Section 8.08.020, is declared a public nuisance. (Ord. 338 § 1, 2004; Ord. 9 § 2, 1977)

 

8.08.040 Notice to abate—Contents.
     If it is determined that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists on any lot or premise, or upon any sidewalk, parking or street adjacent to such lot or premise, the chief of the fire department shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed: “NOTICE TO CLEAN PREMISES” in letters not less than one inch in length and which shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars. Notices served by means other than posting as provided by this chapter shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance. (Ord. 9 § 4, 1977)

 

8.08.050 Notice to abate—Service.
     The notice required by Section 8.08.040 may be served in any of the following manners:

     A.    By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge or control of the property;

     B.     By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known;

     C.     By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of-way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contains a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of such newspaper advertisements shall not be considered in computing the appeal periods provided by this chapter. (Ord. 9 § 5, 1977)

 

8.08.060 Appeal.
     Within ten days from the date of posting, mailing or personal service of the required notice, the owner or person occupying or controlling such lot or premises affected may appeal to the city council. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk. At the regular meeting or regular adjourned meeting of the city council, not less than five days nor more than twenty days thereafter, it shall proceed to hear and pass upon such appeal, and the decision of the city council thereupon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 9 § 6, 1977)

 

8.08.070 Removal of nuisance—Duty of owner.
     It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the city, within ten days from the date of notification as provided in Section 8.08.050, or in case of an appeal to the city council, within ten days from the determination thereof, unless the same is sustained, to remove the nuisance as stated. (Ord. 9 § 7, 1977)

 

8.08.080 Removal of nuisance—Failure of owner—Action by city.
     If the owner fails or neglects to remove the nuisance as defined in this chapter within the time specified in this chapter, the chief of the fire department shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city crews or by private contractor. A report of the proceedings and an accurate account of the cost of abating the nuisance on each separate property shall be filed with the city council. Notice of the public hearing shall be mailed to the owners along with bill for abatement work accomplished. (Ord. 9 § 8, 1977)

 

8.08.090 Report and account—Hearing.
     The city clerk shall thereupon set the report and account for hearing by the city council at the first regular or adjourned meeting which will be held at least seven calendar days after the date of filing, and shall post a copy of said report and account and notice of the time and place of hearing in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance of the city administration center. (Ord. 9 § 9, 1977)

 

8.08.100 Report and account—Decision of council by resolution.
     The city council shall consider the report and account at the time set for hearing, together with any objections or protests by any interested parties. Any owner of land or person interested therein may present a written or oral protest or objection to the report and account. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account as submitted, or as modified or corrected by the city council. The amounts so approved shall be liens upon the respective lots or premises, and the city council shall adopt a resolution assessing said amounts as liens upon the respective parcels of land as they are shown upon the last available assessment roll, and determining that such weeds, grasses, dead trees, dead shrubs, and waste matter constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 9 § 10, 1977)

 

8.08.110 Filing of resolution.
     The city clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor of the county a certified copy of the said resolution of the city council. (Ord. 9 § 11, 1977)

 

8.08.120 Payment of bills.
     The city treasurer may accept payment of any amount due at any time prior to the city council hearing, as called for in Section 8.08.090. Persons whose bills have been adjusted as a result of a public hearing have thirty days in which to either pay the bill or amount due will become a lien on their taxes. (Ord. 9 § 12, 1977)

 

8.08.130 Assessment of costs as taxes—Penalties for delinquency.
     The provisions of Section 39580 to 39585, inclusive, of the Government Code are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor shall enter each assessment in the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and, if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and

 

procedure of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 9 § 13, 1977)

 

8.08.140 Discretion.
     Where discretion is given in this chapter to determine a public nuisance or reasonable probability thereof or any material question of fact raised in this chapter, that discretion shall lie with the fire chief or his or her designee. (Ord. 338 § 2, 2004)

 

8.08.150 Violations declared.
     The maintenance of premises so as to constitute a nuisance under the terms of this chapter is declared to be a violation of this code punishable as described in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 338 § 2, 2004)

Chapter 8.12 ACCUMULATION OF JUNK
8.12.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Junk” means any combustible or noncombustible non-putrescible waste, including but not limited to trash; refuse; paper; glass; cans; bottles; rags; fabrics; bedding; ashes; trimmings from lawns, shrubbery or trees, except when used for mulch or like agricultural purposes; household refuse other than garbage; lumber, metal, plumbing fixtures, bricks, building stones, plaster, wire or like materials from the demolition, alteration or construction of buildings or structures; tires or inner tubes; auto, aircraft or boat parts; plastic or metal parts or scraps; damaged or defective machinery, whether or not repairable; and damaged or defective toys, recreational equipment or household appliances or furnishings, whether or not repairable.

     B.     “Lot” means a lot or parcel two acres or less in size.

     C.     Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means the line separating the front of the lot from the street. If a lot is bounded by more than one street, then the front lot line is the line most nearly facing the front of the main building on the lot; provided, that, if there is no building on the lot, the front lot line may be designated by the owner of the lot.

     D.    Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means the lot boundary line or lines most distant from and generally opposite the front lot line.

     E.     Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot boundary line that is not a front or a rear lot line.

     F.     “Lot used for residential purposes” means a lot on which one or more dwellings are located.

     G.    Yard, Front. “Front yard” means a yard extending across the full width of a lot and extending from the front lot line to the front foundation line, and its prolongations, of the main building, as shown in Figure l.* If the lot is vacant, the front yard depth shall be fifty feet. (Prior code § 68.701)

 

Note
*     Editor’s Note: See prior code §68.701, on file in the office of the city clerk.

 

8.12.020 Nuisance declared.
     The accumulation of junk contrary to this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance. Upon direction of the city council the city attorney shall bring an appropriate action to abate such public nuisance in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior code § 68.713)

 

8.12.030 Prohibitions.
     No person shall accumulate junk:

     A.    On any lot that is not in his ownership or possession, unless he has permission from the owner of such lot to do so in a manner otherwise consistent with law;

     B.     On any lot used for residential purposes, unless done in strict compliance with Section 8.12.030.

     C.     On any parcel of land adjacent to a lot used for residential purposes, except:

     1.     As part of an incident to a lawfully established and conducted commercial or industrial enterprise; or

     2.     When done in strict compliance with Section 8.12.040.

     D.    On any property in the city. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2004; Ord. 190, 1991; prior code § 68.702)

 

8.12.040 Regulations.
     A.    No person shall accumulate junk, or permit junk to be accumulated, on any property in the city:

     1.     Within four feet of any building or structure; except, that junk may be accumulated within two feet of a fence or wall which is constructed of a nonflammable material is not used for structural support of a building;

     2.     Within fifteen feet of any rear lot line;

     3.     Within ten feet of any side lot line; or

     4.     In the front yard.

     B.     No person shall accumulate junk, or permit junk to be accumulated on any property in the city except in accordance with all of the following regulations:

     1.     The accumulation shall be stored either in sturdy, vermin-proof, closed containers, or on platforms elevated not less than eighteen inches above the ground;

     2.     The accumulation shall not be maintained so as to be conducive to the breeding, shelter or harborage of insects, rodents, vermin or pests;

     3.     The accumulation shall not be strewn about or maintained in an unsightly condition;

     4.     The accumulation shall be maintained so as not to constitute a fire hazard;

     5.     The accumulation shall be maintained so as not to constitute a danger or potential danger to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

8.12.050 Junkyards.
     This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation of junk in the course of the lawful operation of a junkyard, motor vehicle storage or wrecking yard, or salvage yard conducted in the manner authorized by the zoning ordinance and/or this code. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to authorize the establishment or maintenance of a junkyard, motor vehicle storage or wrecking yard, or salvage yard. (Prior code § 68.704)

 

8.12.060 Firewood.
     This chapter does not prohibit the accumulation of used lumber, lumber scraps and/or materials fabricated out of wood for use as firewood or fuel; provided, however, that any such accumulation shall neatly stacked and shall be maintained in accordance with the provisions of subdivisions 1 and 4 of subsection A and of subdivisions 2, 3 and 4 of subsection B of Section 8.12.040; and, provided further, that the components of such an accumulation shall be sawed or otherwise reduced in size so that no piece thereof exceeds five feet in length or two feet in width. (Prior code § 68.706)

 

8.12.070 City manager to enforce.
     The city manager or his or her designee shall enforce this chapter. (Ord. 337 § 2, 2004)

 

8.12.080 Determination of city manager.
     The city manager shall determine whether or not a person is accumulating junk in such a manner as to constitute a violation of this chapter. In making such determination, the city manager may consider the nature, size and extent of the accumulation; the length of time the accumulation has been

permitted to remain; whether, and to what extent, the accumulation is detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare; and whether any unusual conditions exist that would render the disposal of such junk in a lawful manner a hardship. (Ord. 337 § 2, 2004)

 

8.12.090 Notice of violation.
     If the city manager determines that an accumulation of junk exists in violation of this chapter, he shall give a written notice and order to the owner or to the occupant of the premises or, if such person cannot be located on the premises, to any person over the age of eighteen years who is apparently in possession of the premises, or, if there is no such person, then by mailing said written notice and order postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to the person shown to be the owner by the latest equalized assessment roll or any more recent record in the office of the county assessor. Such written notice and order shall be substantially in the following form:

 

     “You are hereby informed that the City Manager of the City of Lemon Grove has determined that there is an unlawful accumulation of junk, contrary to Section 8.12.030 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, on the following premises:

(street address or other designation of premises)

     You are hereby ordered to remove said accumulation of junk from said premises within ten days from the date of this Notice and Order or, alternatively, and within the same period of time, to bring said accumulation of junk into conformity with the requirements of said Section 8.12.030 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. You are hereby advised of your rights to appeal from this Notice and Order pursuant to Section 8.12.100 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Failure to comply with this Notice and Order constitutes a violation of Section 8.12.120 of said Lemon Grove Municipal Code.”

 

(Ord. 337 § 2, 2004)

 

8.12.100 Appeal—Notice of hearing—Hearing—Findings—Order of Abatement—Enforcement.
     A.    Within a period of three days, exclusive of Saturdays, Sundays and holidays, following the service of written notice and order by the city manager pursuant to Section 8.12.090, the person ordered to remove the accumulation of junk may file with the city clerk a written appeal from said notice and order. Such appeal shall contain the appellant’s name, mailing address and a general statement of exceptions taken by the appellant to the notice and order.

     B.     Upon receipt of an appeal, the city clerk shall immediately notify the city manager and shall set such appeal for hearing at the next regular meeting of the city council at which, in the opinion of the clerk, there will be sufficient time available to conduct such hearing. Said clerk shall forthwith give a written notice of the time, date and place of hearing to the city manager and shall send a copy of such notice through the United States mail to the appellant at the address specified in the appeal.

     C.     At the time, date and place indicated, the city manager shall produce evidence of the existence of the unlawful accumulation of junk that is the subject of the notice and order. The appellant may likewise produce relevant evidence.

     D.    The city council shall consider all relevant evidence produced at said hearing and, if it finds by the preponderance of the evidence that there is in fact an unlawful accumulation of junk, it may declare the same to be a public nuisance.

     E.     The determination that such accumulation of junk constitutes a public nuisance shall be supported by such findings as are necessary and proper, which findings need not be reduced to writing unless the appellant so requests at the hearing. Upon determining that a public nuisance exists, the city council may order the abatement thereof upon such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable and just under the circumstances, or it may modify or affirm the notice and order made by the city manager.

     F.     If the city council does not find that a public nuisance exists, it shall vacate the order of the city manager, in which event the city council need not make findings. In the event the city council determines that a public nuisance exists and orders the abatement thereof, the city manager shall serve the order of abatement in the manner described in Section 8.12.090, shall enforce the order, may supervise the abatement of the nuisance if he deems it necessary to do so, and may take such further orders in furtherance of said order of abatement as he deems necessary under the circumstances. (Ord. 337 § 2, 2004)

 

8.12.110 Dumping prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful to place, deposit, dump or cause to be placed, deposited or dumped any solid waste, recyclables, yard waste or other refuse or debris of any kind or character whatsoever (collectively referred to as "waste matter"), in the following places:

     1.     Upon any public or private highway or road, including any portion of the right-of-way;

     2.     Upon any private property into or upon which the public is admitted by easement or license;

     3.     Upon any private property without the consent of the owner; or

     4.     Upon any public park or other public property without the consent of the state or local agency having jurisdiction over the property.

     B.     It is unlawful for such person to deposit or place such materials in any waste container owned or used by the owner of such property unless such person first obtains the permission of the owner to do so. It is further unlawful for such persons to

co-mingle their solid waste materials with that of another thereby avoiding payment for solid waste and recycling services.

     C.     Each day that waste matter placed, deposited, or dumped in violation of this section remains shall be a separate violation. A person convicted under this section, as a condition of probation, may be required to remove or pay the cost of removing all waste and refuse which the convicted person placed, deposited or dumped or caused to be placed, deposited or dumped upon private or public property. (Ord. 348 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 8.16 APARTMENTS AND HOTELS
8.16.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meaning:

     A.    “Apartment house” means any structure more than one story in height, or any portion of any such structure occupied, or designed, built or rented for occupancy, as a home by three or more families, each living in a separate apartment and cooking within the structure.

     B.     “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of a structure, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, public club, or private club, containing six or more guestrooms and which is occupied or is intended or designed for occupancy, by six or more guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise. “Hotel” does not include any jail, hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, prison, detention center, or other building in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. (Prior code § 66.1001)

 

8.16.020 Permit—Required.
     It is unlawful to occupy, or to permit to be occupied, any apartment house or hotel now or hereafter erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered,

converted or moved, as the case may be, or any portion thereof, for human habitation without an annual permit therefor issued by the health officer. (Prior code § 66.1002)

 

8.16.030 Permit—Application.
     The permit required by this chapter shall be applied for to and issued by the county department of health services. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

8.16.040 Permit—Inspection fees.
     Every person applying for a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall at the time making application for such permit pay a fee, the exact amount of which shall be determined by the county of San Diego and kept on record by the county department of health services and on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

8.16.050 Health officer to enforce state housing law.
     The health officer, in addition to his or her other duties, is designated as the officer to enforce and is charged with the enforcement of the provisions of the State Housing Law pertaining to sanitation, ventilation, use or occupancy of apartment houses and hotels within the city. (Prior code § 66.901)

 

8.16.060 Inspection.
     It shall be the duty of the health officer to inspect all hotels and apartment houses as often as request therefor is made or whenever the health officer deems it necessary, and in any event as often as once in each year. (Prior code § 66.902)

 

8.16.070 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than twenty dollars nor more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period of not less than five days nor more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 66.1005)

Chapter 8.20 MASSAGE THERAPY PRACTICE—LOCAL LICENSING
Note
*     Prior history: Prior code §§ 66.507—66.523 and Ord. 51.

 

8.20.010 Title.
     This chapter may be cited as the “Lemon Grove Massage Therapy Business License Ordinance.” (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.501)

 

8.20.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to implement local regulatory requirements, within the authority of the city of Lemon Grove, under the general laws of the state of California, to the fullest extent that local zoning, business licensing, police power and reasonable health and safety regulations are allowed. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.502)

 

8.20.030 Rules of construction.
     This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. Unless otherwise specifically prescribed in this chapter the following provisions shall govern its interpretation and construction:

     A.    When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular

number and words in the singular number include the plural number.

     B.     All references herein, as applied to natural persons, shall be considered gender neutral.

     C.     Any right or power conferred or duty imposed upon any officer, employee, department or board of the city is subject to transfer by operation of law to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city. Any officer or enforcement person referenced herein shall have the authority to delegate enforcement duties in the manner allowed by procedures established by the city manager or designee.

     D.    No license or permit holder shall have any recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or the enforcement thereof.

     E.     This chapter does not relieve any license or permit holder of any requirement of any ordinance, rule, regulation or specification of city or other regulatory body. This chapter does not limit applicable health and safety laws or regulations established by the county of San Diego or the state of California.

     F.     This chapter, to the extent that it retains requirements established prior to January 1, 2010 related to the professionally recognized scope of practice of healing arts professionals licensed under California Business and Professions Code Section 500 et seq., shall remain in full force and effect. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.503)

 

8.20.040 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words or phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Building inspection” means the building inspection component of the Lemon Grove development services department.

     B.     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove, California.

     C.     “Certificate” means a valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council pursuant to the California Massage Therapy Act (California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.).

     D.    “Council” or “State Council” means the California Massage Therapy Council created by the California Legislature pursuant to the California Massage Therapy Act (California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.), as amended.

     E.     “County” means the county of San Diego, a political subdivision of the State of California.

     F.     “Health department” means the department of public health of the county.

     G.    “Independent contractor” means a massage therapist or massage practitioner who is not an employee of a massage establishment, but practices at the massage establishment as defined in applicable state law.

     H.    “License” means the business license to operate a massage therapy business required by this chapter.

     I.      “Massage” means the scientific manipulation of soft tissues. For the purpose of this chapter, “massage” and “bodywork” shall have the same meaning.

     J.      “Massage establishment” or “establishment” means a fixed location where massage is performed for compensation, excluding those locations where massage is only provided on an out-call basis.

     K.    “Massage practitioner” means a person who is certified by the State Council pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4604.2 and who administers massage for compensation.

     L.     “Massage therapist” means a person who is certified by the State Council pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 4604 and who administers massage for compensation.

     M.    “Permit” means the business license permit to engage in the business and certified by the State Council to perform the business activities regulated herein.

     N.    “Person” means a natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity. Nothing herein confers rights to a firm, partnership, association, corporation or other legal entity to receive a certification under Business and Professions Code Section 4604 or 4604.2.

     O.    “Solo provider” means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active certificate issued in accordance with the California Massage Therapy Act, and has no other employees or independent contractors. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.504)

 

8.20.050 License—Required—Issuance requirements.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of a massage therapy practice as defined in the California Massage Therapy Act, without the business license required by this chapter.

     B.     No business may advertise, or hold itself out to the public, as a massage business unless it meets the applicable requirements of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code including, but not limited to, Titles 17 (Zoning) and 18, (Citywide Regulations) and meet all of the requirements found under the California Massage Therapy Act, as amended.

     C.     Independent contractors of local massage therapy businesses shall each obtain a business license prior to operating within the city of Lemon Grove. Each independent contractor shall possess a state certificate as a massage practitioner or massage therapist in order to be eligible to receive a business license. Any independent contractor whose state certificate has been suspended or revoked shall not be able to practice massage therapy unless and until that independent contractor receives a new certificate or a reactivated certificate.

     D.    An applicant who is denied a business license may request a hearing under Chapter 5.08 (Uniform Permit Procedures). Failure to have a valid certificate issued by the California Massage Therapy Council shall be grounds for denial of a business license. Upon suspension or revocation of any certificate by the State Council, the certificate holder shall also be prohibited from practicing under any validly issued business license until reinstated as a certificate holder by the California Massage Therapy Council under the California Massage Therapy Act, as amended. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.505)

 

8.20.060 License—Application—Additional information.
     A.    The application for a license to operate a massage therapy establishment shall set forth the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address of each applicant and whether it will operate using independent contractors as massage practitioners and/or massage therapists. Each independent contractor shall be required to obtain a business license to practice massage therapy at a business in the city of Lemon Grove.

     B.     In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a license shall furnish the following information:

     1.     Proof of a valid and active certificate to practice as a massage practitioner or massage therapist in the state of California;

     2.     If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation, together with the names and residence addresses of each of its officers, and directors;

     3.     Any business entity, regardless of form, that has independent contractors who operate as massage practitioners or massage therapists within the city shall submit a list of independent contractors that work with the business entity within thirty days of contracting with the independent contractor to practice in Lemon Grove or operate from the business location within the city; and

     4.     An independent contractor shall list the location(s) of businesses where the independent contractor practices massage therapy in the city of Lemon Grove. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.506)

 

8.20.070 Other business license regulations.
     To the extent they are applicable, the provisions of Title 5 (Business Taxes, Licenses, Permits and Regulations) govern the businesses authorized under this chapter. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014)

 

8.20.080 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this chapter whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee or operator, or acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massages or conducts a massage establishment or practices the giving or administering of any of the services defined in Section 8.20.040 without first obtaining the necessary permit or license shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and/or infraction as determined by the city attorney.

     B.     Any owner, operator, manager or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a massage practitioner or massage therapist, as defined in this chapter, who is not in possession of a valid, unrevoked permit, or who allows such massage technician to perform, operate or practice within such place of business, is guilty of a misdemeanor and/or infraction as determined by the city attorney.

     C.     Any owner, operator or manager shall require that all employees and independent contractors possess a valid certificate to practice as a massage practitioner or massage therapist. Any business found to be operating with an employee or independent contractor who does not possess a valid state certificate shall be in violation of the requirements of this chapter.

     D.    Enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be governed by the procedures established under Title 1 (General Provisions) of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. All remedies listed therein are cumulative, in addition to any other remedies available under the general laws of the state, may be utilized to remedy violations of this municipal code. Upon any finding (administrative or legal) that any person is practicing massage therapy without a valid license from the city of Lemon Grove or the state of California, the massage establishment or solo provider shall lose their business license granted hereunder subject to the applicable appeal process. (Ord. 424 §§ 1, 2, 2014; prior code § 66.524)

Chapter 8.21 TATTOO PARLORS AND MOBILE TATTOO VEHICLES
8.21.010 Statement of purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of tattoo parlors and mobile tattoo vehicles operating in the city of Lemon Grove to prevent communicable disease, which may be spread through improper tattooing techniques. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.020 Definitions.
     The following terms contained in this chapter shall have the following meanings:

     “Approved” means acceptable to the health officer of the county of San Diego.

     “Aseptic technique” means practices which prevent and hinder the transmission of disease producing micro-organisms from one person or place to another person or place.

     “Biohazardous waste” means any of the following:

     1.     Laboratory waste, including, but not limited to, specimen cultures from medical and pathological laboratories, cultures and stocks of infectious agents from research and industrial laboratories, wastes from the production of biological agents, discarded live and attenuated vaccines, and culture dishes and devices used to transfer, inoculate and mix cultures or material which may contain infectious agents and may pose a substantial threat to health;

     2.     Recognizable fluid blood elements and regulated body fluids, and containers and articles contaminated with blood elements or regulated body fluids that readily separate from the solid portion of the waste under ambient temperature and pressure. Regulated body fluids are cerebrospinal fluid, synovial fluids, pleural fluid, peritoneal fluid, pericardial fluid, and amniotic fluid;

     3.     Sharps, which are objects or devices having acute rigid corners, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to hypodermic needles, blades and slides;

     4.     Contaminated animal carcasses, body parts, excrement and bedding of animals including materials resulting from research, production of biologicals, or testing of pharmaceuticals which are suspected of being infected with a disease communicable to humans;

     5.     Any specimens sent to a laboratory for microbiological analysis;

     6.     Surgical specimens including human or animal parts or tissues removed surgically or by autopsy;

     7.     Such other waste materials that result from the administration of medical care to a patient by health care providers and are found by the administering agency or the local health officer to pose a threat to human health or the environment. If there is a difference in opinion between the administering agency and the local health officer, the local health officer’s view will prevail.

     “Department” means the San Diego County department of health services.

     “Enforcement officer” means the health officer of the county of San Diego or designees, the deputy director of environmental health services or his/her assistant deputies, designees and employees, or the city’s code enforcement officer.

     “Mobile tattoo vehicle” means a nonpermanent, mobile tattoo establishment, operating at locations remote from the permanent tattoo establishment, from which a tattoo artist does tattooing for a fee or for other consideration.

     “Permit” means an annual permit issued to a tattoo parlor or mobile tattoo vehicle by the deputy director of environmental health services.

     “Single service” means one-time, one-person use.

     “Tattoo artist” means a person who engages in tattooing.

     “Tattoo parlor establishment” means any permanent premises where a tattoo artist does tattooing for a fee or for other consideration.

     “Tattooing” means any method of placing designs, letters, scrolls, figures, symbols, or any other marks upon or under the skin with ink or colors, by the aid of needles or instruments. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.030 Customers.
     A.    No tattooing shall be done on skin surfaces which have rash, pimples, boils, infections or manifest any evidence of unhealthful conditions.

     B.     No tattoo shall be administered to any person under the age of eighteen years of age.

     C.     No tattooing shall be performed on any person who has a history of jaundice or hepatitis infection within the previous thirty days. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.040 Operator.
     A.    The operator shall be free of communicable diseases and have no pustular skin lesions.

     B.     The operator shall not smoke during the tattoo operation.

     C.     The operator shall wear a clean, light-colored, short-sleeved smock during the tattoo operation.

     D.    The operator shall wear disposable gloves during the tattooing operation. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.050 Aseptic procedure—Treatment of skin.
     A.    Before working on a customer, the tattoo artists shall cleanse their hands and arms in the following manner:

     1.     Thoroughly scrub hands and fingernails with water, soap and a hand brush. The upper arms to the elbow shall be scrubbed with soap;

     2.     Rinse hands and upper arm with running water;

     3.     Rinse hands with an approved antiseptic solution such as seventy percent alcohol; and

     4.     Hands and arms may be dried with clean, individual, single-use towels.

     B.     The area of the customer’s skin to be tattooed shall be prepared by:

     1.     Washing with water and soap. A sterile hand brush, in conjunction with water and soap, shall be used to produce a clean skin area;

     2.     After washing of the skin surface, shaving shall be done with a new single-service blade. The blade shall be discarded, in the proper manner, after use. Reusable blade holders shall be sterilized in an autoclave after each use. If disposable blade holders are used, they may be used on one customer only and then shall be disposed in an approved manner;

     3.     Following shaving, the skin shall be prepared by thoroughly washing with soap, followed by gentle scrubbing of the skin with seventy percent isopropyl alcohol or Betadyne three times, using a separate sterile gauze pad each time;

     4.     Petroleum jelly to be used for stencils shall be dispensed from a disposable, single-use collapsible tube or container, approved by the health officer, and shall be applied on the area to be tattooed with sterile gauze, sterile tongue blade or sterile applicator stick. The container shall be discarded following a single use.

     C.     During the tattoo operation, dyes, inks and bodily fluids shall be removed with sterile material and properly disposed of at the end of the tattoo operation.

     D.    The tattooed skin surface shall be treated in the following manner:

     1.     The tattooed skin surface shall be washed with a sterile gauze saturated with seventy percent alcohol solution.

     2.     The tattooed skin surface shall be allowed to air dry.

     3.     The tattooed skin surface may be treated with Bacitracin ointment applied with a sterile applicator from single-use tubes of ointment. Unused portions of the ointment shall be discarded.

     4.     The tattooed skin surface shall be loosely covered with a dry sterile gauze dressing with adhesive to permit free circulation of air. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.060 Sterilization of tattoo pigments and instruments.
     A.    All pigments, dyes and equipment shall be steam sterilized in an autoclave with at least fifteen pounds pressure per square inch (two hundred fifty-one degrees Fahrenheit) for at least fifteen minutes. Autoclaves shall not be overloaded. Equipment shall be loosely packed in the autoclave. There shall be sufficient equipment on hand in each establishment to handle twenty-four hours tattooing without having to resterilize.

     B.     Instruments and equipment that shall be steam sterilized shall include, but not be limited to:

Charcoal

Needles

Dyes, pigments

Paper towels, napkins

Needle tubes

Wiping cloths

     C.     All equipment shall be thoroughly cleaned before being sterilized. Instruments shall be cleaned with soap or detergents by use of a brush. Interior of needle barrels shall be brushed. After cleaning, equipment shall be thoroughly rinsed under running fresh tap water.

     D.    Each piece of equipment shall be individually wrapped with paper in an approved method for autoclaving. Metal foil may not be used. Tattooing needles shall be threaded through the metal tube that attaches to the tattooing vibrator and shall be placed in a glass (or plastic) test tube with a cotton plug for autoclaving. Gauze may be placed at bottom of test tube to prevent damage to needle tips. Wiping tissues shall be sterilized in a single pack to be used for one tattoo only and then be discarded.

     E.     All packs shall be marked with temperature recording tape or labels.

     F.     The packages in which equipment is sterilized shall be dated with date of autoclaving. Equipment shall not be used thirty days or more after autoclaving, without being resterilized.

     G.    Dyes or inks shall be used from squeeze bottle containers in which the dyes or inks have been sterilized in an autoclave. Dye shall be kept in a sterile condition and the dye bottles filled with dye shall be autoclaved at least once a week or more often, if necessary, to keep the dye in a sterile condition. Refilling of partially depleted squeeze bottle containers with dyes or inks shall necessitate subjecting the bottle and its contents to the sterilization procedure. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.070 Preparation of stencils.
     A.    Reusable stencils shall be sanitized by immersion in a chlorine solution containing no less than one hundred parts per million (ppm) of chlorine (one ounce of household bleach (five and one-quarter percent) with one quart of water). The sanitizing solution may not be used for more than thirty minutes after preparation.

     B.     The stencil shall be scrubbed with soap and a brush after use to remove all accumulations of carbon and Vaseline in the etched grooves of the stencil. The stencil shall be dried on a clean towel.

     C.     The dried stencil shall be sanitized by immersing in the chlorine solution, design side down for at least ten minutes.

     D.    The sanitized stencil shall be rinsed in tap water and may be air-dried or blot dried with clean, sterile paper towels. The stencil shall be stored in a clean folder or envelope.

     E.     Prior to use, each pre-cleaned stencil shall be wiped with a piece of sterile gauze soaked in seventy percent isopropyl alcohol. The stencil shall be allowed to air dry while other preparatory steps are being taken. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.080 Use of dyes and inks.
     A.    Dyes or inks shall be from an approved source of supply. The tattoo parlor permittee shall submit to the enforcement officer in writing, the source of the dyes and inks used in their establishment.

     B.     Dyes or inks to be immediately used in tattooing shall be dispensed from the sterile dye bottles into sterile paper cups. Upon completion of the tattooing, the paper cups and remaining dye shall be discarded in the appropriate manner. Any dye in which a needle was dipped shall not be used on another customer.

     C.     Styptics shall be single-use only. Styptic material shall be dispensed only from single-use containers, then discarded after use on one customer. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.090 Infections.
     All infections resulting from the practice of tattooing shall be reported to the health officer, by the person owning or operating the tattoo establishment. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.100 Records.
     A.    The permit holder shall maintain proper records of each customer. The records shall include the following information:

     1.     The date when the tattoo was applied;

     2.     The name, address and age of the customer;

     3.     The design of the tattoo and the location applied to the body;

     4.     The name of the tattoo artist.

     B.     The information required in subsection A of this section shall be permanently recorded, in ink or indelible pencil, in a bound book kept solely for this purpose. This book shall be available at reasonable hours for examination by the enforcement officer and shall be kept in the establishment for a minimum of six months. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.110 Tattoo parlors—Sanitation requirements.
     A.    The premises of a tattoo parlor shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary manner at all times, free from vermin or rodent infestation and excessive dust and dirt.

     B.     The walls and ceilings shall be easily cleanable, smooth-surfaced and light-colored. All walls and ceilings shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair.

     C.     The floor surfaces shall be of smooth, nonabsorbent material and constructed so as to be easily cleanable. The floors shall be kept in a clean condition and in good repair.

     D.    Adequate lighting and ventilation shall be provided.

     E.     Each tattoo establishment shall have a sink for the exclusive use of the tattoo artist for hand washing and preparing the customers for tattooing. The sink shall be supplied with hot and cold running water under pressure to a mixing-type faucet, a soap dispenser with soap, and single-use paper towels from a dispenser.

     F.     Water closet and hand basin shall be available on the premises for use by customers and tattoo artists. The plumbing fixtures and toilet room shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and in good repair.

     G.    All needles and instruments shall be stored in a manner so as to provide protection from contamination after sterilization. Adequate storage shall be provided for all needles and instruments.

     H.    Operating tables shall be constructed of metal or white enamel or porcelain finish, or stainless steel. The operating tables shall be separated from observers and waiting customers by at least ten feet.

     I.      No smoking shall be permitted in the tattooing area.

     J.      Adequate, approved containers shall be provided for the disposal of wastes.

     K.    Instruments, dyes, inks, pigments, carbon, stencils and other paraphernalia used in the tattoo parlor shall be stored exclusively in approved closed cabinets.

     L.     No animals shall be allowed in the tattoo parlor at any time. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.120 Disposal of biohazardous wastes.
     Potentially biohazardous waste materials generated by tattoo parlor establishments and mobile tattoo vehicles shall be disposed of in the following manner:

     A.    Sharps, which are objects or devices having acute rigid corner, edges, or protuberances capable of cutting or piercing, including, but not limited to, hypodermic needles, tattoo needles, blades, and slides shall be disinfected and disposed of, by one of the following methods:

     1.     By a cold disinfection method when used strictly in accordance to instructions, and which has been approved by the State Department of Health Services. The sharps disposed of in this manner may be disposed of via the municipal solid waste hauler. Prior to pick-up by the municipal solid waste hauler, the cold disinfection container shall be stored in a locked trash dumpster or a secured trash area to prevent tampering;

     2.     By disposal via a permitted biohazardous waste hauler or a state of California Authorized Medical Waste Hauler, who possesses a permit from the appropriate regulatory agency;

     3.     By autoclaving the sharps to be disposed of for at least thirty minutes at fifteen pounds per square inch (psi) at a temperature of two hundred fifty-one degrees Fahrenheit, bound in packs with temperature sensitive indicating tape. Once sterilized, the sharps must be contained before disposal in the municipal landfill;

     4.     Other disposal methods approved by the State Department of Health Services or the local health officer.

     B.     Gauze, wipes, tissues, unused dyes and inks, and other nonsharp(s) used in a tattooing operation shall be contained and secured on site, to prevent unauthorized access. This material shall be disposed of, in the municipal landfill by a licensed solid waste hauler (general trash hauler). (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.130 Mobile tattoo vehicles.
     In addition to complying with the requirements of Sections 8.21.030 through 8.21.100, excepting 8.21.110(F), mobile tattoo vehicles and tattoo artists working from a mobile tattoo vehicle shall also comply with all of the following requirements:

     A.    Mobile tattoo vehicles, which do not have on-board sterilization equipment, shall have sufficient utensils and equipment on hand in each mobile tattoo vehicle to handle one day’s tattooing without having to resterilize.

     B.     Tattooing performed pursuant to this section shall be done only from an enclosed vehicle such as a trailer or mobile home. No tattooing of the skin shall be performed outside of the enclosed vehicle.

     C.     No animals shall be allowed in the mobile tattoo vehicle at any time.

     D.    The mobile tattoo vehicle shall be used only for the purposes of tattooing.

     E.     The mobile tattoo vehicle shall be equipped with a sink for the exclusive use of the tattoo artist for hand washing and preparing customers for tattooing. The sink shall be supplied with hot and cold running water under pressure to a mixing type faucet, a soap dispenser with soap and single-use paper towels from a dispenser. An adequate supply of potable water shall be maintained for the mobile tattoo vehicle at all times tattooing is being performed.

     F.     All liquid wastes shall be stored in an adequate storage tank with a capacity at least fifty percent greater than the capacity of the on-board potable water. Liquid wastes shall be disposed of at approved trailer dumpsites.

     G.    The mobile tattoo vehicle shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition free of vermin, at all times. Doors shall be self-closing and tight fitting. Openable windows shall have tight-fitting screens.

     H.    There shall be approved restroom facilities within two hundred feet of the mobile tattoo vehicle.

     I.      There shall be adequate light and ventilation in each mobile tattoo vehicle.

     J.      Mobile tattoo vehicles which are not associated with tattoo parlor establishments operating in the city of Lemon Grove shall maintain on-board steam sterilization equipment meeting the requirements of Section 8.21.060. All equipment requiring sterilization shall be sterilized using the on-board sterilization equipment. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.140 Plans.
     Every person proposing to construct a tattoo parlor establishment or mobile tattoo vehicle, shall file a copy of the plans thereof, with the appropriate plan review fee, prior to construction, with the deputy director of environmental health services, for review and written approval prior to commencing the work and in advance of the issuance of any building, plumbing or electrical permit. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.150 Inspection.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the enforcement officer may at all reasonable times enter all parts of a tattoo parlor establishment or mobile tattoo vehicle to make examination and investigation to determine the sanitary condition of the establishment or vehicle and whether this chapter or rules and regulations are being violated. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.160 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of operating a tattoo parlor establishment

or a mobile tattoo vehicle without first applying for and receiving approval of a permit from the deputy director of environmental health services. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.170 Application for permit.
     The permit required by this chapter shall be applied for and issued as prescribed in Chapter 5.08 of this code. Every person applying for a permit shall pay the annual permit fee set forth in Chapter 5.08 of this code. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.180 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     A.    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an misdemeanor.

     B.     Each day on which a violation occurs or continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 299, 2000)

 

8.21.190 Permit revocation or suspension.
     A.    In the event that the deputy director of environmental health services has determined that conditions exist or have existed in the past which indicate an inability or unwillingness to comply with the requirements of this chapter, a permit revocation or suspension hearing may be conducted. All matters relative to the permit revocation or suspension hearing action will be conducted pursuant to Chapter 5.08 of this code.

     B.     Hearing Officer. The hearing officer shall be a person designated by the deputy director of environmental health services. (Ord. 299, 2000)

Chapter 8.24 SMOKING IN PUBLIC AREAS (ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICES)
Note
*     Prior ordinance history: Ord. 218.

 

8.24.010 Findings and intent.
     A.    Credible studies have demonstrated that there are health concerns regarding the use of tobacco products and electronic smoking devices by users of the devices and bystanders.

     B.     The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has found that tobacco products do contain carcinogens and other harmful substances. Nicotine is contained in tobacco. Nicotine is a highly addictive neurotoxin included in the Proposition 65 list of Chemicals Known to the State to Cause Cancer or Reproductive Toxicity. Nicotine is known to cause birth defects. Nicotine is a component of the emissions from tobacco products and involuntarily exposes non-users to nicotine.

     C.     The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has reported that from 2011-2012, the use of electronic cigarettes by U.S. middle and high school students more than doubled.

     D.    Despite the potential use of electronic smoking devices as an aid to quitting smoking, the products are not approved for smoking cessation or treatment of any health concerns. An analysis by the FDA found that e-cigarettes do contain carcinogens, including nitrosamines as well as toxic chemicals such as diethylene glycol. Although electronic smoking devices do not produce the same smoke as conventional tobacco product cigarettes, they do produce a cloud of vapors containing unknown substances and sometimes produce unpleasant odors. The possible health effects of bystanders breathing or absorbing these vapors through their skin is unknown.

     E.     Nicotine is contained in most electronic smoking devices. Nicotine is a highly addictive neurotoxin included in the Proposition 65 list of Chemicals Known to the State to Cause Cancer or Reproductive Toxicity and is known to cause birth defects. Nicotine is a component of the emissions from electronic smoking devices containing nicotine and involuntarily exposes non-users to nicotine.

     F.     Scientific studies and FDA testing demonstrated that the solutions in electronic smoking devices contained toxic chemicals and that labeling often misrepresented nicotine content contained in the devices.

     G.    There are products approved by the FDA for smoking cessation. To date, scientific studies have not demonstrated the benefit of electronic smoking devices for smoking cessation. The FDA does not approve these devices for smoking cessation.

     H.    With certain exceptions, state law prohibits smoking inside an enclosed space at a place of employment.

     I.      The use of electronic smoking devices in locations where the smoking of tobacco is prohibited may cause confusion and uncertainty, and make it more difficult to enforce smoke free environments and other prohibitions on smoking tobacco.

     J.      The enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter is not intended to repeal the provisions of Ordinance number 218, enacted in 1994. By adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, Ordinance number 218 shall no longer be codified in the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Ordinance number 218 law that shall remain in effect but no longer be operative since the state of California has preempted the field of regulation with the enactment of Labor Code Section 6404.5. Under Labor Code Section 6404.5(g), Ordinance number 218 shall become operative if the state repeals the tobacco restriction provisions of Labor Code Section 6404.5.

     K.    It is the intent of the city council in enacting the ordinance that amends Chapter 8.24 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code to provide for the public health, safety and welfare, by prohibiting the use of electronic smoking devices where state law or regulation prohibits the use and smoking of tobacco products under Labor Code Section 6404.5. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as hereafter set out, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is clearly intended:

     “Electronic smoking device” is defined as an electronic and/or battery operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances. “Electronic smoking device” includes any such electronic smoking device, whether manufactured, distributed, marketed, or sold as an electronic cigarette, an electronic cigar, an electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, or any other product name or descriptor. “Electronic smoking device” does not include any product specifically approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for use in mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease.

     “Enclosed space” is defined as set forth in state law, Labor Code Section 6404.5 and includes lobbies, lounges, waiting areas, elevators, stairwells, and restrooms that are a structural part of the building.

     “Place of employment” is defined as set forth in state law, Labor Code Section 6404.5.

     “Smoking” or “smoke” for the purpose of this chapter is also defined as the use of an electronic smoking device intended to emulate smoking, which permits a person to inhale vapors, mists or aerosol that may or may not contain nicotine. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.030 Prohibition on use of electronic smoking devices in an enclosed space at a place of employment and other locations.
     A.    Enclosed Spaces at Places of Employment. No person shall engage in the smoking of an electronic smoking device in the city of Lemon Grove in an enclosed space at a place of employment, as defined in Labor Code Section 6404.5 or this chapter, whichever provision is operative. The prohibition in this section shall not apply to any place that is not defined as an enclosed space or a place of employment or any place that is otherwise excepted from the smoking prohibitions in Labor Code Section 6404.5 or to any place of employment in a public building owned, leased or operated by another governmental jurisdiction.

     B.     Other Locations Where Smoking Tobacco is Prohibited by State Statute or Regulation. No person shall engage in the smoking of an electronic smoking device in any other location where smoking tobacco is prohibited by any state statute or regulation. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.040 Violations and enforcement.
     Any violation of the prohibition set forth in Section 8.24.030 is an infraction, punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars for a first violation, two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year, and five hundred dollars for a third and for each subsequent violation within one year. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.050 Separate violation for each incident.
     Each incident in violation of Section 8.24.030 shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.060 Enforcement authority.
     The city attorney and the sheriff are authorized to administer and enforce this chapter. The city attorney and the sheriff may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.070 Nonretaliation.
     No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable according to Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.080 Other applicable laws.
     This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

 

8.24.090 Severability.
     If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions, clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this ordinance are declared to be severable. (Ord. 430 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 8.28 ABANDONED VEHICLES, VEHICLE AND EQUIPMENT REPAIR AND STORAGE
8.28.010 Findings and declarations.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled and inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, is found to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly permitted in this chapter, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.101)

 

8.28.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Delegated officers” means the community development director and those appointed by the director to enforce this chapter.

     B.     “Hearing officer” means the community development director or the director’s designated deputy.

     C.     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained, and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel. “Highway” includes street.

     D.    “Inoperative vehicle” means any vehicle, or part thereof, which is either disabled, unlicensed or unregistered, or from which an essential or legally-required part is removed, or which, because of collision damage, vandalism, deterioration or method of storage is incapable of safe and legal operation on public highways.

     E.     “Notice of intention to abate” means that form used to provide notice of public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles, or parts thereof, from private or public property.

     F.     “Public property” does not include highway.

     G.    “Vehicle” means a device by which any person or property may be propelled, moved or drawn upon a highway, except a device moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. The definition of “vehicle” shall include, but shall not be limited to, any automobile, truck, recreational vehicle, camper, camper trailer, unmounted camper, trailer coach, motorcycle, tractor or other farm or construction vehicle, and similar conveyance. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.102)

 

8.28.030 Regulations not exclusive.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes, and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the county, the state, or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 72.104)

 

8.28.040 Administration and enforcement—Removal authorized.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, under normal circumstances, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced according to the city’s current code enforcement policy by the community development director. In the enforcement of this chapter, the community development director and the director’s deputies, assistants and employees may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle and to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.105)

 

8.28.050 Administration and enforcement—Franchise authorized to remove.
     When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove, or cause the removal of, a vehicle, or parts thereof, declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.106)

 

8.28.060 Assessment of administrative costs.
     The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs, excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle, or parts thereof, under this chapter. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.107)

 

8.28.070 Notice of intention to abate—Service.
     When the city finds that the application of its current code enforcement policy is inadequate to resolve a violation of the provisions of this chapter, it may apply the enforcement procedures set forth in Sections 8.28.070 through 8.28.150 as follows:

     A.    Notice of intention to abate and remove a vehicle, or parts thereof, shall be given at least ten days before such abatement and removal. Such notices shall contain a statement of the hearing rights of the owner of the property on which the vehicle is located and the owner of the vehicle. The statement shall include notice to the property owner that he may appear in person at a hearing or may present a sworn written statement denying responsibility for presence of the vehicle on the land with his reasons for such denial in lieu of appearing.

     B.     The notice of intention to abate shall be mailed by registered or certified mail to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record when the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are available to determine ownership. Said notice may also be served in person, and the notice forms shall also contain an acknowledgment space for signature where notices are issued in person by delegated officers. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.108)

 

8.28.080 Notice of intention to abate—Copy to Highway Patrol.
     A copy of the notice of intention to abate shall, at the time such notice is issued, be given to the State Highway Patrol, identifying the vehicle, or parts thereof, proposed for removal. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.109)

 

8.28.090 Request for hearing by landowner or vehicle owner—Removal and costs.
     A.    Within ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate, the owner of the vehicle, or the owner of the land on which such vehicle is located, may request a hearing. Said request shall be made in writing to the delegated officer. If the owner of the land on which the vehicle is located submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his land within such time period, this statement shall be construed as a request for hearing which does not require the presence of the owner submitting such request.

     B.     If a request is not received within such period, the delegated officer shall have the authority to remove the vehicle. The cost of removal and disposal of any such vehicle and the administrative cost thereof may then be charged against the person who is determined to be responsible for the maintenance of the vehicle as a public nuisance. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.110)

 

8.28.100 Hearing procedure.
     A.    Whenever a request is made for a hearing pursuant to Section 8.28.090, the delegated officer shall schedule such hearing within fifteen calendar days of the date the request is received. The hearing shall be conducted by the hearing officer who shall hear such facts and testimony he deems pertinent prior to rendering a decision, which facts and testimony may relate to the condition or status of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on said private or public property, and may be in the form of oral testimony or written statements.

     B.     The hearing officer shall make findings whether the vehicle constitutes a public nuisance and whether the property owner on whose land the vehicle is located consented to the placement of the vehicle or acquiesced in his presence. The hearing officer shall notify each party of his findings and of the right to a full public hearing before the city council.

     C.     If the party who requested the hearing objects to the findings of the hearing officer, he may appeal said decision to the city council in writing within ten days of notification of said findings.

     D.    In the event the hearing officer determines the vehicle constitutes a nuisance and no appeal is taken within such time, the delegated officer may immediately remove the vehicle. Except as provided in Section 8.28.120, the delegated officer shall thereafter charge the costs of administration and removal of the vehicle against the person or persons who are determined to be responsible for the maintenance of the nuisance. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.111)

 

8.28.110 Appeal—Council action.
     A.    In the event of an appeal pursuant to Section 8.28.110, public hearings shall thereafter be held by the city council on the question of abatement, said hearings to be scheduled by the community development director within twenty days of the date of the notice of appeal. The city council shall hear all facts and testimony it deems pertinent. The facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the circumstances concerning its location on the said private property or public property and may be in the form of oral testimony or written statements. The city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land with his reasons for such denial.

     B.     The city council may impose such conditions and take such other action as it deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. It may delay the time for removal of the vehicle, or parts thereon, if, in its opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council may find that a vehicle, or parts thereof, has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property, and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as provided in Section 8.28.140 and determine the administrative costs and the costs of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or parts thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle, or parts thereof, and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle if available at the site. Unless otherwise stated in the order of removal, the vehicle, of parts thereof, may be removed by the abatement officer immediately following said order. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.112)

 

8.28.120 Landowner not assessed costs.
     In any case wherein a final determination is made by the hearing officer or the city council that the vehicle was placed on land without the consent of the landowner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such cost from such owner. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.113)

 

8.28.130 Disposal.
     Any vehicles removed pursuant to this chapter may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler’s yard, or any site determined by the city to be suitable for such disposal. After a vehicle has been removed pursuant to this chapter, it shall not be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.114)

 

8.28.140 Notification of Department of Motor Vehicles.
     Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle, or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.115)

 

8.28.150 Failure to pay costs.
     If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 8.28.090 are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 25845 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Said assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.116)

 

8.28.160 Unlawful activities.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of, any inoperative vehicle or any other licensed or unlicensed vehicle, or parts thereof, which are being serviced, repaired, assembled, disassembled, modified or restored, or which are in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition, upon any private property or public property, not including highways within the city, except as follows:

     A.    On a property zoned for, or developed for, residential use when any such vehicle, or parts thereof, are completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or when such vehicle, or parts thereof, are completely shielded from view from other public or private property by legally installed and maintained solid fencing, existing shrubbery, a building or equivalent screening acceptable to the community development director; or

     B.     When any such vehicle, while awaiting repairs is stored or parked on private property occupied by a licensed vehicle repair business:

     1.     Enclosed within a building, or

     2.     Outdoors when completely shielded as described in Section 8.28.160(A), or

     3.     Outdoors on a paved parking area, without shielding, for a period not to exceed one hundred

days, when vehicles are not visibly damaged or dismantled and appear, in all respects, in good repair and capable of legal operation on public streets;

     C.     When any such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, licensed junkyard, or licensed vehicle impound yard subject to such conditions as were imposed by the city as a condition of the approval of the establishment of such facility;

     D.    On a residential property, when emergency or minor repairs and short-term or temporary parking of such vehicle, owned or leased by the person residing on the property, are conducted for an aggregate period not exceeding twenty-four hours in any continuous period of forty-eight hours exclusive of the screening otherwise required by this section. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.117)

 

8.28.170 Failure or refusal to remove a misdemeanor.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 242, 1995; prior code § 78.118)

 

8.28.180 Attorneys’ fees.
     Pursuant to California Government Code Section 25845(c), the city may elect to seek recovery of its own attorneys’ fees in any action, administrative proceeding, or special proceeding to abate a nuisance. In the event the city makes such election, the prevailing party shall be entitled to recover attorneys’ fees. In no event shall an award of attorneys’ fees to the prevailing party exceed the amount of reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the city in the action or proceeding. (Ord. 336 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 8.32 SECURITY ALARM SYSTEMS
8.32.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “City Security Alarm Ordinance.” (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.020 Purpose and intent.
     The city council finds and declares that:

     A.    Inadequately regulated security alarm systems present a danger to public health and safety and adversely impacts the provision of emergency services;

     B.     The volume and frequency of nuisance alarms are conditions which have persisted so as to become hazardous and causing a serious drain upon limited police services and equipment needed at other locations;

 

     C.     The unnecessary waste of tax dollars through responses to nuisance alarms must be reduced;

     D.    Every residence and business property is entitled to the safety and protection afforded by local law enforcement; and

     E.     The necessity for the provisions and prohibitions contained in this chapter contained and enacted is declared to be a matter of public policy in the pursuance of security and promoting the public health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents. (Ord. 382 § 1, 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

     A.    “Alarm system” means any device designed for the detection of an unauthorized entry on the premises or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act or both, and when activated emits an audible or silent signal or message and to which police are expected to respond. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only and supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and otherwise known as a proprietary alarm. Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in the definition.

     B.     “Person” means a person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization, company or a governmental political unit.

     C.     “Alarm agent” means and includes any person who is self-employed or employed directly or indirectly by an alarm business operator whose duties include, but are not limited to: selling, maintaining, installing, monitoring, demonstrating or causing others to respond to an alarm in or on any building, place or premises. This definition shall not apply to local safety officers as defined in Government Code Section 20019.4.

     D.    “Alarm business operator” means and includes any business operated for any consideration whatsoever, engaged in the installation, maintenance, alteration, or servicing of alarm systems or which corresponds to such alarm systems. “Alarm business operator,” however, shall not include a business which merely sells from a fixed location or manufacture alarm systems unless such business services, installs, monitors or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises.

     E.     “Alarm user” means any person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by its agents, employees, representatives or immediate family an alarm system in the county.

     F.     “Audible alarm” means an alarm system designed to emit an audible sound outside of the protected premises to alert persons of an unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act.

     G.    “Direct dial device” means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of the alarm system automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response.

     H.    “Nuisance alarm” means the activation of an alarm system due to other than an intrusion on the premises or the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act, which the alarm system is designed to detect. Any activation of an alarm system caused by any malfunction of telephone line circuits or violent natural catastrophic conditions does not constitute a nuisance alarm. (Ord. 382 §§ 2, 3, 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.040 Registration required.
     A.    Alarm Business Operators. No person shall operate an alarm business in the county without registering his name and filing with the issuing officer a copy of his valid state license as required by the state. No fee or application shall be required for such registration.

     B.     Alarm Agents. No person shall operate or shall be employed as an alarm agent in the county without registering his name and filing with the issuing officer a copy of his valid state identification card as required by the state. No fee or application shall be required for such registration. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.050 Permits required.
     A.    No person shall own, lease, rent, use or make available for use an alarm system without an alarm permit issued by the city. A separate alarm permit shall be required for each separate alarm system at a specified location and shall be valid only for that specified location. An alarm permit is non-transferable to any new location or alarm user.

     B.     An application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the city within thirty days of installation of an alarm system. Each application shall be on a form provided by the city and approved by the city and the San Diego County sheriff. It shall be the responsibility of the alarm permit holder to notify the city, in writing, of any changes to any information on the application within ten days of such changes occurring.

     C.     The city shall issue an alarm permit unless it finds that good cause exists to deny the alarm permit. Good cause to deny the alarm permit shall include, but not be limited to, installation of unreliable or otherwise faulty alarm system equipment, the failure of the alarm user to pay permit fees or penalty fees on any system operated by the alarm user, or factors which demonstrate that the public health and/or safety would be endangered by the issuance of the alarm permit.

     D.    Alarm permits shall remain valid indefinitely. Alarm permits shall expire automatically upon a change in alarm user or a change in address location of the alarm system. An alarm permit may be revoked pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.32.160. Within ten days of the expiration of an alarm permit, a new alarm permit is required by filing an application with the proper fee. Upon completion of the conditions of revocation of an alarm permit pursuant to Section 8.32.160, a new application may be submitted to the city with proof of completion of the conditions of revocation. (Ord. 382 §§ 4,5, 2009; Ord. 181, 1990; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.060 Permit fees.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, every person applying for an alarm permit shall at the time of filing the application pay a fee of seventy-five dollars for each alarm permit. (Ord. 382 § 6, 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.070 Unauthorized use unlawful.
     It is unlawful to use an alarm system other than for purposes specifically stated in the application as required by Section 8.32.050(B) of this chapter. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.080 Direct dial device prohibited.
     No alarm system shall be equipped with either a direct dial device or any direct line equipment which when activated will automatically dial a telephone number in or signal directly any office of the sheriff’s department. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.090 Audible signal—Time limit enforced.
     An audible alarm system shall terminate the emission of its audible signal within thirty minutes of its being activated, and the sheriff or his representative shall have the right to take such steps as may be necessary and reasonable to disconnect any activated alarm. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.100 Responsibility of owner and agent to inform.
     It shall be the responsibility of the alarm business operator or the alarm agent or both to inform their respective alarm system users of the provisions of this chapter. An alarm business operator may obtain the necessary permits for the alarm user. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.110 Repairs.
     For every audible alarm system, the owner may post the name and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service twenty-four hours a day. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.120 Maintaining public nuisance alarm.
     An alarm user with an alarm permit shall not operate an alarm system which generates more than two nuisance alarms, as defined in Section 8.32.030(H), in any six-month period. The first two false alarms in any six month period shall be considered accidental and no penalty fees shall be charged. The alarm user of the alarm system shall be notified in writing after each false alarm occurrence. The following penalty assessments shall be assessed for each false alarm in excess of two in any six-month period:

Third false alarm, fifty dollars;

Fourth false alarm, one hundred dollars;

Fifth false alarm, one hundred fifty dollars; and

Each additional false alarm, two hundred dollars. (Ord. 382 § 7, 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.130 Determination of nuisance.
     The cause for activating an alarm system shall be determined by the sheriff. Upon a determination by the sheriff that the cause for activating an alarm system is not due to an intrusion on the premises or the commission or intended commission of an unlawful act, the sheriff will report the violation to the city. (Ord. 382 § 8, 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.160 Permit revocation when.
     A.    The following shall be grounds for revocation of any alarm permit issued pursuant to this chapter:

     1.     Any false statement on the alarm permit application;

     2.     Failure to notify the city of any changes in the permit application information within the time limits provided by Section 8.32.050(B);

     3.     Failure to pay a fine imposed by Section 8.32.120 within thirty days of demand;

     4.     Four violations or more of Section 8.32.120 within any three hundred sixty day period.

     B.     Following revocation of such permit, the alarm system may not be used until a new application is filed and a new permit is issued. A new permit will only be issued upon a determination by the city that the underlying causes of the revocation as specified in subsection (A) of this section have been fully remedied, removed, or otherwise corrected. (Ord. 382 § 10. 2009; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.170 County held harmless.
     The county shall be under no duty or obligation to a permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1982)

 

8.32.180 Applicability limited.
     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to alarm systems used by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insured institutions, or to alarm systems affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers, recreational vehicles and aircraft. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.190 Governmental entities exempt.
     The provisions of this chapter do not apply to municipal, county, state and federal agencies. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.32.200 Confidentiality.
     To the extent authorized by state law, the information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 8.36 PEEP SHOW ESTABLISHMENTS
8.36.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of the council that the operation of peep show establishments, as defined in this code, should be regulated for the protection of the public from the perils of fire and hazards to health. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.020 Definitions.
     A.    “Peep show establishment” means any place in which a peep show device is operated.

     B.     “Peep show device” means an aperture through which may be viewed images that are exhibited by means of the projection or internal electronic reflection of motion picture film or slides, or both. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.030 Permit required.
     No person shall operate a peep show device unless a permit for the operation of the device has been issued by the city treasurer and remains in effect in conformity with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.040 Permit term.
     No permit for a peep show device shall be issued by the city treasurer for a period in excess of six months. The expiration dates of the permit shall be June 30th and December 31st of each year. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.050 Permit fee.
     Every person owning or operating a peep show device shall pay a fee of thirty-five dollars per six month’s period for each peep show device. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.060 Permit application—Investigation fee.
     All applications for a permit or for the renewal of a permit, shall be accompanied by an investigation fee in the sum of one hundred twenty dollars. The investigation fee is nonrefundable, and in the event such permit is denied, the fee shall become the property of the city. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.070 Permit application—Investigation required.
     Every applicant shall file an application for a permit, or for the renewal of a permit, with the city treasurer upon the form to be provided by the city treasurer. Immediately upon the receipt of an application the city treasurer shall deliver the application to the city manager or his delegate. The city manager or his delegate shall cause to be made an investigation of the application to determine that:

     A.    The applicant did not knowingly make a material misstatement in the application for a permit or for the renewal of a permit; and

     B.     The operation pursuant to the issuance or renewal of a permit will be in compliance with the building, fire, electrical, plumbing and health requirements as set forth in this code. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.080 Permit issuance or denial.
     If, upon investigation, the city manager or his delegate finds that the operation pursuant to the issuance or renewal of a permit will be in compliance with the requirements described in Section 8.36.070, the permit shall be granted or renewed. Any application for a permit or for the renewal of a permit may be denied if, after the applicant has been given the opportunity for a hearing as described in Section 8.36.100, the city manager or his delegate finds that the operation pursuant to the issuance or renewal of a permit will not be in compliance with the requirements described 8.36.070. The city manager or his delegate shall file a report of the approval or denial of the application with the city treasurer within thirty days of the receipt of the application. If the application for a permit or for the renewal of a permit is denied, the notification and reasons for denial shall be set forth in writing and sent to the applicant by means of registered mail, certified mail, or hand delivery. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.090 Permit suspension or revocation when.
     A.    Any permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked if, after the permittee has been given the opportunity for a hearing as described in Section 8.36.100, the city manager or his delegate find that:

     1.     The permittee knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit for the renewal of a permit; or

     2.     The permittee violated any one of the requirements as set forth in this code which define building, fire, electrical, plumbing, or health standards.

     B.     In the event that a permit is suspended or revoked, the notification of suspension or revocation, as well as the reasons therefor, shall be set forth in writing and sent to the permittee by means of registered mail, certified mail, or hand delivery. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.100 Permit hearing.
     In the event that the city manager or his delegate has evidence that any of the requirements described in Sections 8.36.070 or 8.36.090 have not been complied with, he shall set forth in writing and send to the applicant or permittee, by means of registered mail, certified mail, or hand delivery, notice that within a period of not less than five days from the date of posting of the notice, a hearing shall be conducted to determine the existence of any facts which constitute grounds for the denial of a permit renewal, the suspension of a permit, or the revocation of a permit. The notification shall include the date, time, and place of the hearing as well as a statement of the facts relevant to the case. The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The applicant or permittee may have the assistance of counsel or

may appear by counsel and shall have the right to present evidence. In the event that the applicant or permittee fails to appear at the hearing, the evidence of the existence of facts which constitute grounds for the denial of a permit or permit renewal, the suspension of a permit or the revocation of a permit, shall be considered unrebutted. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.110 Permit denial—Appeal.
     Within ten days after the date of posting the notification that an application for a permit has been denied, a permit suspended or revoked or a renewal denied, the applicant or permittee may file with the city clerk a written request for a public hearing before the city council. Upon the filing of such request, the city clerk shall set a time and place for the hearing and shall notify the appellant thereof. The hearing shall be held within thirty days after the request is filed. At the hearing any person may present evidence in opposition to, or in support of, appellant’s case. At the conclusion of the hearing the city council shall either grant or deny the appeal and the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.120 Reapplication after revocation.
     A person who has had a permit for a peep show establishment or device revoked or denied may reapply for a permit upon correcting the violations of the law which were the basis for the permit revocation or refusal. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.130 Permit to be affixed to device—Non-transferable.
     No person shall operate a peep show device unless each such device is plainly marked with a serial number and shall have attached thereto a distinguishing tag, sign, permit, or other marker, issued by the city treasurer upon the granting or renewal of a permit which shall bear a permit number identifying the peep show device as a particular device permitted pursuant to the terms of this code. Such permit shall be affixed in a conspicuous location on each device and shall remain thereto until a new or different permit has been issued therefor. No permit shall be transferable from one person to another or from one device to another. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.140 Wall construction requirement.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless any wall or partition which is situated so as to create a room, enclosure or booth in which any peep show device is located is constructed of not less than one-hour fire-resistive material. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.150 Minimum aisle width.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the width of the aisles in any room where a peep show device is located is less than forty-two inches. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.160 Minimum doorways.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless there are no fewer than two doorways of a width no less than thirty-six inches which provide ingress or egress from any room in which a peep show device is located; provided, however, that one doorway shall be sufficient in the event the fire chief should so determine. Doorway or doorways shall be unlocked during business hours. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.170 Lighted exit signs required.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless over every doorway which provides egress from any room in which a peep show device is located, an internally illuminated exit sign with letters at least five inches in height is maintained. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.180 Patron view of doorway required.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless each peep show device located in such establishment is situated so as to permit the person using the peep show device to have a constantly unobstructed view of the doorways which provide the ingress to or egress from the establishment. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.190 Minimum lighting requirements.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment unless a light level of no less than ten foot candles at floor level is maintained in every portion of the establishment to which the public is admitted. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.200 Maximum occupancy load.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of persons in any room or partitioned portion of a room where a peep show device is located exceeds one person per thirty square feet. The maximum occupancy load permitted in any room in which a peep show device is located shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted, at the entrance to said room. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.210 Maximum number of devices.
     No person shall operate a peep show establishment in which the number of peep show devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in which a peep show device is located. The maximum number of peep show devices permitted in any room or partitioned portion of a room in a peep show establishment shall be conspicuously posted by the operator, and shall remain posted at the entrance to the room. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1983)

 

8.36.220 Free access to city manager or delegate required.
     No person shall deny the city manager or his delegate free access to a peep show establishment for purposes of a reasonable inspection to enforce compliance with building, fire, electrical, or plumbing regulations. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1991)

 

8.36.230 Injunctive relief.
     In addition to the legal remedies provided for in this code, the operation of any peep show establishment in violation of the terms of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be, by the city, enjoined. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1991)

 

8.36.240 Violation—Penalty.
     Violation of the provisions of this chapter is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of five hundred dollars and imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1991)

 

8.36.250 Variance.
     The city manager, or his delegate, is empowered in the administration of this chapter to permit such variance or deviation from the regulations of this chapter as will effectuate the purpose and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 97 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 8.40 BATHHOUSES
8.40.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases are used, they shall mean:

     A.    “Bathhouse” means any establishment any establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, or carries on any business of providing Turkish, Russian, Swedish, Finnish, hot air, vapor, electric cabinet, steam sweat, mineral, salt, sauna, fomentation, alcohol, shower, tub or sponge baths, soaking facilities such as a spa, or baths of any kind whatsoever. Any establishment carrying on or permitting any combination of massage and bathhouse shall be deemed a massage establishment and not a bathhouse. “Bathhouse” shall not include hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or establishments where a person provides baths pursuant to his or her unrevoked certificate to practice the healing arts under the laws of the state. “Bathhouse” shall not include establishments primarily providing physical fitness services, except where cubicles, rooms or booths are provided for use by individual patrons of such establishments.

     B.     “Person” means any natural person, firm, association, club, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation, company, or any other entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.020 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate, maintain or keep within the boundaries of the city any bathhouse without an annual permit therefor issued by the city. The permit, or any renewal thereof, may be denied if the bathhouse operation as proposed does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, and all other applicable laws, including, but not limited to, applicable building and fire codes. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.030 Permit—Application required.
     Any person desiring a permit or renewal thereof required by this chapter shall make application to the city. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.040 Permit—Application requirements.
     The application for a permit to operate a bathhouse shall set forth the exact nature of the baths to be administered, the proposed place of business and facilities therefor, and the name and address of each applicant. In addition to the foregoing, any applicant for a bathhouse permit shall furnish the following information:

     A.    The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     B.     Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen years;

     C.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     D.    Two portrait photographs at least 2 x 2;

     E.     Business, occupation, or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

     F.     The bathhouse or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another county or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation;

     G.    All criminal convictions except minor traffic violations;

     H.    Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     I.      Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to deny to the sheriff the right to take fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained in this chapter be construed to deny the right of the sheriff to confirm the height and weight of the applicant;

     J.      If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation; the names and residence addresses of each of the officers, directors and each stockholder owning more than ten percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence address of each of the partners, including limited partners. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.050 Permit—Application fee.
     The annual nonrefundable application fee for the permit required by this chapter shall be one hundred dollars. Delinquent fees shall be collected in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.060 Permit—Facilities required.
     No permit to conduct a bathhouse shall be issued unless an inspection by the sheriff and the director of health services reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements:

     A.    Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths, and showers shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials.

     1.     For toilet rooms, toilet room vestibules and rooms containing bathtubs, there shall be a waterproof floor covering, which will be carried up all walls to a height of at least six inches. Floor shall be covered up on base with at least 3/4 inch cover. The walls of all toilet rooms and rooms containing bathtubs shall be finished to a height of six feet from a smooth, nonabsorbent finish surface of Keene cement, tile, or similar material.

     2.     Steam rooms and shower compartments shall have approved waterproof floors, walls and ceilings.

     3.     Floors of wet and dry heat rooms shall be adequately pitched to one or more floor drains properly connected to the sewer. (Exception: dry heat rooms with wooden floors need not be provided with pitched floors and floor drains.)

     4.     A source of hot water shall be available within the immediate vicinity of dry and wet heat rooms to facilitate cleaning.

     B.     Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations, and every bathhouse shall provide at least one water closet. When five or more employees and patrons of each sex are on the premises at the same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided. A single water closet per sex shall be provided for each twenty employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time. Urinals may be substituted for water closets in the toilet facility for males after one water closet has been provided; provided, however, that there shall be at least one water closet for each sixty employees or patrons of the male sex. All toilet rooms shall be equipped with self-closing doors opening in the direction of ingress to the toilet rooms. Toilets shall be designated as to the sex accommodated therein.

     C.     Lavatories or wash basins provided with both hot and cold running water shall be installed in either the toilet room or the vestibule. Lavatories or wash basins shall be provided with soap in a dispenser and with sanitary towels.

     D.    All portions of bathhouse establishments and baths shall be provided with adequate light and ventilation by means of windows or skylights with an area of not less than 1/8 of the total floor area, or shall be provided with approved artificial light and a mechanical operating ventilating system. Areas of the bathhouse, other than those areas provided only to individual patrons, shall at all times during bathhouse operation have a direct illumination level of at least fifteen footcandles of light measured thirty inches above the floor. When windows or skylights are used for ventilation, at least one-half of the total required window area shall be operable.

     To allow for adequate ventilation, cubicles, rooms, and areas provided for patrons’ use not served directly by a required window, skylight, or mechanical system of ventilation shall be constructed so that the height of partitions does not exceed seventy-five percent of the floor-to-ceiling height of the area in which they are located. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.070 Operating requirements.
     All bathhouse permittees shall comply with the following operating requirements:

     A.    Every portion of a public bathhouse, including appliances, apparatus and personnel, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.

     B.     All employees shall be clean and wear clean outer garments, whose use is restricted to the bathhouse. Provision for separate dressing rooms for each sex must be available on the premises, with individual lockers for each employee. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be self-closing.

     C.     All bathhouses shall be provided with clean laundered sheets and towels in sufficient quantities and shall be laundered between consecutive uses thereof and stored in an approved sanitary manner. No towels or sheets shall be laundered or dried in any public bathhouse unless such establishment is provided with approved laundry facilities for such laundering and drying. Approved receptacles shall be provided for the storage of soiled linens and paper towels.

     D.    Wet and dry heat rooms, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use.

     E.     Provide educational programs for patrons in accordance with standards promulgated by the department of health services in consultation with the San Diego Regional Task Force on AIDS. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.080 Permit issuance—Terms and conditions.
     The city shall issue a bathhouse permit if all the requirements for a bathhouse described in this chapter are met and shall issue a permit to any person who has applied for a permit to operate a bathhouse unless the city finds:

     A.    That the operation as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would not comply with all applicable laws;

     B.     That the applicant or any other person who will be directly engaged in the management and operation of a public bathhouse has been convicted of:

     1.     An offense involving conduct which requires registration pursuant to Section 290 of the Penal Code,

     2.     An offense involving the use of force and violence upon the person of another that amounts to a felony,

     3.     An offense involving sexual misconduct with children,

     4.     An offense as defined under Sections 311, 647, subdivision (a), 647a, 315, 316, or 318 of the Penal Code of the state of California,

     5.     The city shall disregard any conviction mentioned in subsections (a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section if it finds that the applicant has fully completed any sentence imposed because of such conviction and has fully complied with any conditions imposed because of such conviction, which conviction has occurred at least three years prior to the date of application and the applicant has not subsequently been convicted of any of the crimes herein mentioned nor has suffered any subsequent felony convictions involving the use of force of violence on the person of another. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.090 Register to be maintained.
     The operator of a bathhouse must maintain a register of all persons employed as an employee of a bathhouse, which register shall be available for inspection at all times during regular business hours. The register shall contain the following information for each employee:

     A.    Name and residence address;

     B.     Social security number and driver’s license number, if any;

     C.     Employee’s height, weight, color of eyes and hair;

     D.    Written evidence that the employee is over the age of eighteen years;

     E.     Business, occupation or employment of the employee for the three years immediately preceding the date of beginning employment with the bathhouse;

     F.     The city shall have the right to take fingerprints and photographs of an employee and the right to confirm the information contained in the register. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.100 Employment of under age persons prohibited.
     It is unlawful for the owner, proprietor, manager or any other person in charge of any bathhouse to employ any person under the age of eighteen years. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.110 Permit void upon sale or transfer.
     Upon sale, transfer or relocation of a bathhouse, the permit therefor shall be null and void. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.120 Permit to specify current information.
     No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall operate under the name or conduct his business under any designation or in any location not specified in his permit. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.130 Daily register required.
     Every person who engages in or conducts a public bathhouse as defined in this chapter shall keep a daily register, approved in form by the sheriff, of the number of patrons admitted, their hour of arrival and their hour of departure. The daily register shall at all times during business hours be subject to inspection by the department of health services and by the sheriff and shall be kept on file for one year. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.140 Access required.
     No service enumerated in Section 8.40.010(A) of this chapter may be carried on within any cubicle, room, or booth, or in any area within a bathhouse by whatever designation whatsoever which is fixed with a door capable of being locked. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.150 Private rooms prohibited.
     No private room, as hereinafter defined, shall be maintained within any bathhouse. “Private room” shall mean any enclosed space large enough for more than one person to enter with a door capable of being locked from the inside, unless one or more of the following applies:

     A.    There is an opening no less than five feet for more than six feet above the floor through which the full exterior of the enclosure is viewable from the exterior; or

     B.     The enclosure is not made available for use by patrons of the establishment; or

     C.     No more than one person at a time is allowed to enter the enclosure, the occupancy restriction is conspicuously posted on the entrance to the enclosure, and there are no openings between any adjoining enclosures through which physical contact between persons in adjoining enclosures is possible. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.160 Monitoring of customers—Cause for expulsion.
     A.    No person shall operate a bathhouse unless employee monitors are provided for the exclusive and sole purpose of observation of activity on the bathhouse premises. Two monitors shall be provided for any floor or portion of a floor open to patrons, provided, however, that the bathhouse operator may, in the alternative, provide one monitor for each twenty patrons based on the average hourly patronage for the bathhouse during the preceding calendar month, calculated for the hours that the bathhouse is open, provided that at least one monitor shall be on duty at all times that the bathhouse is open. The average number of patrons during each hour shall be calculated from the daily register required by the provisions of Section 8.40.130. Such monitors shall survey the entire portion of the bathhouse open to patrons every fifteen minutes.

     B.     The bathhouse operator shall immediately expel from the premises any and all persons observed causing the maximum occupancy requirements of this chapter to be violated, any and all persons committing any crime on the premises, or any and all persons engaged in high risk sexual activity on the premises. For the purposes of this chapter, “high risk sexual activity” means:

     1.     The placing of the male penis on or into the anus, vagina or mouth of another person;

     2.     The placing of the mouth of one person on the anus, vagina or penis of another person;

     3.     The contact of feces or urine of one person with any part of the body of another person; or

     4.     The entry of any part of the body of one person into the anus or vagina of another person. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.170 Display of permit required.
     Every person to whom or for whom a permit shall have been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall display the permit in a conspicuous place in a bathhouse so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.180 Health and sanitation requirements and regulations.
     Every bathhouse shall be maintained and operated in a clean and sanitary manner. All bathhouses shall comply with all applicable building, health, zoning and fire laws of the county. In addition, the sheriff and the director of the department of health services, may, after a noticed public hearing, adopt and enforce reasonable rules and regulations not in conflict with, but to carry out, the intent of this chapter. All bathhouse operators holding a valid permit shall be given written notice of the public hearing, including a copy of the proposed regulations, at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. In addition, notice of the public hearing and a summary of the proposed regulations shall be published in an appropriate newspaper of general circulation one time at least ten days prior to the public hearing. The rules and regulations shall include reasonably necessary requirements for educational programs and other measures for the prevention and control of the spread of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS) and other infectious or communicable diseases. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.190 Regular inspections required.
     The sheriff and the department of health services shall from time to time, and at least once a month, make an inspection of each bathhouse for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are complied with. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.200 Permit nontransferable.
     No bathhouse permit shall be transferred from person to person or from one location to another. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.210 Unlawful activities grounds for revocation.
     It is unlawful for any person to give or administer any bath or baths as defined herein, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this chapter, which violate the provisions of this chapter or the regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter or which violate any state or local laws or ordinances. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for revocation of the permit granted hereunder. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.220 Violation—Penalty.
     Every person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

 

8.40.230 Denial, suspension or revocation of permit.
     Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the sheriff on proof of violation by the permittee of any provisions of state law, this chapter, county ordinances or any rule or regulation adopted and approved pursuant to Section 66.621, or in any case where the sheriff on advice from the director of health services determines the bathhouse is being managed, conducted, or maintained without regard for the public health, or the health of patrons or customers, or without due regard to proper sanitation or hygiene. Where a permit is denied or a permit renewal is denied, or where a permit is suspended or revoked by the sheriff, such denial, suspension, or revocation may be appealed by the permit applicant or permittee in accordance with the provisions of the Uniform Licensing Procedure set forth in Chapter 5.08 of this code. (Ord. 149 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 8.44 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
8.44.010 Findings and purpose.
     The city council finds and declares:

     A.    Hazardous substances and hazardous wastes present in the community may pose acute and chronic health hazards to individuals who live and work in the county, and who are exposed to such substances as a result of fires, spills, industrial accidents, or other types of release or emission;

     B.     The people who live and work in this county have a right and need to know of the use and potential hazards of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to exposure to such materials;

     C.     Basic information on the location, type, quantity and the health risks of hazardous materials used, stored, or disposed of in the county is not now available to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, planners, elected officials, and residents;

     D.    It is the intent of the city council that this chapter recognize the community’s right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the county and that it establish an orderly system for the provision of such information including appropriate education and training for use of information;

     E.     It is further the intent of the city that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide the information essential to firefighters, health officials, health care providers, planners, elected officials and residents in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a way that the statutory privilege of trade secrecy is not abridged. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows:

     A.    “Carcinogen” means a substance or agent which can cause cancer. For purposes of this chapter, carcinogens are chemicals for which there is sufficient evidence of carcinogenicity as specified in guidelines prepared by the International Agency for Research on Cancer and the National Cancer Institute and are listed on the list of hazardous substances established by the director of industrial relations pursuant to Section 6380 of the Labor Code.

     B.     “Chemical name” means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Service.

     C.     “Common name” means any designation or identification such as code name, code number, trade name, or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name.

     D.    “Disclosure form” means the written request for information prepared by the health officer pursuant to Section 8.44.070.

     E.     “EPA waste stream code” means the identification number assigned pursuant to the regulations of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to specific types of hazardous waste.

     F.     “Establishment” means a single business operation conducted on the same or contiguous parcels of property under the same ownership or entitlement to use.

     G.    “Hazardous material” means any hazardous substance or hazardous waste.

     H.    “Hazardous substance” means any substance or product:

     1.     For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare an MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 of the Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; or

     2.     Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, of the Code of Federal Regulations as maintained and updated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.

     I.      “Hazardous waste” means hazardous or extremely hazardous waste as defined by Section 25115 and 25117 of the Health and Safety Code and set forth in Title 22 of the California Administrative Code.

     J.      “Handle” means to generate, treat, store, or dispose of a hazardous waste in any fashion.

     K.    “MSDS” means material safety data sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the Labor Code.

     L.     “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership, association, city, county or district.

     M.    “Proprietary information” means information regarding compounds or ingredients used in a process or production which do not qualify as trade secrets but which provides an industry or business with a competitive advantage.

     N.    “Release” means any spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, injecting, escaping, leaching, dumping, or disposing into the environment.

     O.    “Reproductive toxins” means a substance or agent which can affect reproductive functions causing birth defects, spontaneous abortions, impaired spermatogenesis, reduced fertility and/or intra uterine growth retardation, and appears on the list of hazardous substances prepared by the director of industrial relations pursuant to Section 6380 of the Labor Code.

     P.     “Sensitive hazardous materials” means hazardous materials recognized by the health officer which if deliberately misused would present an imminent threat to public health and safety.

     Q.    “SIC code” means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to specific type of business.

     R.     “Use” means and includes the handling, processing, or storage of a hazardous substance.

     S.     “User” means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.030 Designation of hazardous materials subject to review.
     The city council upon recommendation of the health officer may add materials to or exempt materials from the designation as a hazardous material, carcinogen or reproductive toxin. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.040 Hazardous materials advisory committee.
     The health officer shall establish an advisory committee representing health care providers, industry, labor, fire suppression, law enforcement, community and environmental interests. The purpose of the committee shall be to advise the health officer on the implementation of this chapter, including effective methods of public information and education. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.050 Hazardous substance disclosure form—Filing requirements.
     A.    Based on SIC Codes and similar classifications, the health officer shall identify the establishments which are potential users of hazardous materials.

     B.     Every person who owns or operates an establishment that is identified by the health officer as a potential user shall complete, within thirty days of receipt from the health officer, a form requesting the following information:

     1.     Name;

     2.     Address;

     3.     Type of business;

     4.     Whether the person uses or handles hazardous materials.

     C.     Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must annually submit a completed disclosure form to the health officer by September 1st of each year.

     D.    Within thirty days of any:

     1.     Major change in the use of new hazardous materials in reportable quantities;

     2.     Change of business address;

     3.     Change of business ownership; or

     4.     Change of business name;

the user shall submit a disclosure form detailing the new use or handling or other appropriate information. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.060 Maintenance of files—Requirements.
     A.    The health officer shall maintain files for at least thirty years of all disclosure forms received and provide for a data bank of generic MSDS health and safety information. These files shall be open to the public for inspection and reproduction during normal business hours. The disclosure forms shall be filed by street address.

     B.     Any person may request information regarding hazardous materials at an establishment from the county department of health services. In situations involving potential or actual exposures the department shall within two working days of the person’s request, examine the records of any establishment made available or submitted pursuant to Section 8.44.070(C) of this chapter to obtain the information requested. The department shall release the information to the requesting person within five working days or the person’s request consistent with the requirements of Section 8.44.110 of this chapter. In the event of a medical emergency, the department shall take all measures necessary to obtain the information immediately.

     C.     In situations involving nonimminent public health concerns, or requests for large amounts of information, the department shall provide the information within a reasonable period of time, given the nature and extent of the request. The department may collect fees to recover costs for providing information under this subsection. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.070 Disclosure form—Contents.
     A.    The disclosure form shall be prepared by the health officer with the assistance, if necessary, of fire personnel, the department of community development, and other interested parties. The disclosure form shall include requests for the following:

     1.     A listing of the chemical name or any common name of each carcinogen or reproductive toxin used by the person completing the disclosure form;

     2.     A listing of the chemical name, or common names of every hazardous substance used by the person completing the disclosure form;

     3.     A listing of every hazardous waste handled by the person completing the disclosure form;

     4.     The maximum amount of each and every hazardous material disclosed in subdivisions 1, 2 and 3 of this subsection, which is stored at any one time by the user over the course of the year. Quantities are to be reported within specified ranges;

     5.     An indication that the user possesses appropriate discharge permits for any intentional releases of the hazardous materials disclosed in subdivisions 1, 2 or 3 of this subsection into the air, water, sewers, or land to enable the community to understand the sources, quantity and content of hazardous material releases.

     B.     The health officer may accept forms required by state or federal law in lieu of portions of the disclosure form specified in this section provided that such state or federal forms contain equivalent information.

     C.     Any person who is required to maintain and make available an MSDS pursuant to California Administrative Code, Title 8, Section 5194 shall make such document available to the health officer upon request within two working days.

     D.    Upon request, all users must provide information beyond that specifically requested in the disclosure form to the health officer, if the health officer determines that such information is necessary to protect health and safety or the environment. Such additional information shall be subject to the trade secret provisions of Section 8.44.110. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.080 Emergency response information requirements.
     A.    Each establishment shall provide the health officer with a list of names, addresses, and phone numbers (office and home) of all persons qualified and authorized to act as an emergency contact.

     B.     When necessary, the health officer may request additional information on how and where hazardous materials are stored, for the purpose of distribution to fire departments and other emergency response teams that may be called upon to provide emergency services in connection with the handling and use of hazardous materials.

     C.     All emergency response information submitted or made available to county agencies pursuant to this section shall be kept confidential and shall not be disclosed to the public unless required by compelling circumstances constituting an imminent danger to public health. The city council finds and declares that this information, were it accessible to the general public, may be potentially used to sabotage, destroy, or otherwise damage industrial facilities. The city council further declares pursuant to Government Code Section 6255, that the public interest served by not making such information public, clearly outweighs the public interest served by the disclosure of such information. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.090 Disclosure—Exemptions.
     A.    A substance designated as a hazardous substance by this chapter solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials, shall be exempt from the requirement that these materials be listed on the disclosure form.

     B.     Hazardous substances contained only in consumer products packaged for distribution to, and use by, the general public shall be exempt from disclosure under this chapter.

     C.     Any person using or handling a hazardous material in amounts not exceeding five hundred pounds or fifty-five gallons, whichever is the lesser, in any month in one location, shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the health officer upon approval by the city council has provided notice that he or she has changed the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific class of acutely or extremely hazardous materials in response to public health concerns. This exemption shall not apply to laboratories involved in chemical synthesis and production. Known carcinogens or reproductive toxins of any quantity shall not be exempted pursuant to this subsection unless used or intended to be used for medical or therapeutic purposes. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.100 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Any person who, upon receiving written notice from the health officer, fails to comply with the provisions of Section 8.44.050 is guilty of a misdemeanor. Each day on which a failure to file occurs shall be considered a separate violation.

     B.     Such person may also be civilly liable for injuries to persons or property caused by the failure to comply with Section 8.44.050. (Ord. 116 §1, 1985)

 

8.44.110 Confidentiality.
     A.    If a user believes that a request for informa-

tion made by either the disclosure form or pursuant to subsections C and D of Section 8.44.070 involves the release of a trade secret, the user shall stamp, mark or designate the information as a trade secret and shall submit the information requested to the health officer.

     B.     The health officer shall protect from disclosure any and all trade secrets coming into his or her possession, as defined in subsection (d) of Section 6254.7 of the Government Code and Section 1060 of the Evidence Code, when requested in writing by the user.

     C.     Any information reported to or otherwise obtained by the health officer, or any of his or her representatives or employees, which is exempt from disclosure pursuant to subsection B of this section, shall not be disclosed to anyone except an officer or employee of the county, the state, or the United States of America, in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health, or to contractors with the county or medical service providers and their employees, if in the opinion of the health officer such disclosure is necessary for the satisfactory performance of their duties.

     D.    For the purposes of this section, fire and emergency response personnel and county health personnel operating within the jurisdiction of the county shall be considered employees of the county.

     E.     Information certified by appropriate officials of the United States, as necessarily kept secret for national defense purposes, shall be accorded the full protection against disclosure as specified by such official or in accordance with the laws of the United States.

     F.     1.        The health officer upon his or her own initiative or upon receipt of a request for the release of information designated as a trade secret by a user, shall determine whether any or all of the information so submitted is properly designated as a trade secret.

     2.     If the health officer determines that the information is not a trade secret, the health officer shall notify the user by certified mail.

     3.     The user shall have fifteen days after receipt of notification to provide the health officer with a complete justification and statement of the grounds on which the trade secret privilege is claimed. This justification and statement shall be submitted by certified mail.

     4.     The health officer shall determine whether such information is protected as a trade secret within fifteen days after the receipt of the justification and statement or, if no justification and statement is submitted, within thirty days of the original notice. The health officer shall notify the user and any party who has requested the information, of that determining. The final notice shall also specify a date, not sooner than fifteen days after the date of mailing of the final notice, when the information shall be made available to the public.

     5.     Prior to the date specified in the final notice, a user may institute an action in an appropriate superior court for a declaratory judgment as to whether such information is subject to protection under subsection A of this section and the information shall not be disclosed pending final judgment in such action.

     G.    The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required pursuant to this chapter to the health officer.

     H.    A user may designate, when appropriate, information made available to the health officer by either the disclosure form or pursuant to subsections C and D of Section 8.44.070 as proprietary information regarding sensitive hazardous materials. The health officer will disclose this information only to health care providers or other individuals, including, but not limited to, neighborhood residents, after the health officer determines that this information is needed for legitimate health concerns.

     I.      In situations involving extremely sensitive materials, such as national defense work, which are normally protected by elaborate security systems, the health officer may issue a variance to omit the listing of certain hazardous substances from the disclosure form to protect such information from

inadvertent disclosure, provided that the user satisfies the following requirements:

     1.     The user must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the health officer that there is potential for misuse if the hazardous substances or information regarding them are obtained by the public;

     2.     The user must indicate on the appropriate place on the discharge form that a hazardous substance is being omitted from the form;

     3.     The user must provide the following information from the MSDS for each hazardous substance omitted: fire and explosive hazard data, reactivity data, spill or leak procedures, special protection information, and special precautions;

     4.     The user must agree to an inspection of all facilities by the health officer to ensure that all materials are being handled in a safe manner;

     5.     The user must make provisions to allow for immediate independent twenty-four-hour access to the hazardous materials records of the establishment by the health officer;

     6.     The user must establish to the health officer’s satisfaction that an emergency coordinator will be available on a twenty-four-hour basis to supply information on hazardous materials at the establishment to the health officer;

     7.     The user must keep at least one listing of hazardous substances omitted from the disclosure form at a separate location from the establishment;

     8.     The user may be required to pay a higher permit fee to cover the extra costs of additional inspections and administrative procedures required by the above requirements.

     J.      Any officer or employee of the city or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to material the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who knowing that disclosure of the material is prohibited, knowingly and willfully discloses the material in any manner to any person known not to be entitled to receive it, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Any contractor with the city and any employee of such contractor, who has been furnished information as authorized by this section, shall be considered to be an employee of the city for purposes of this section.

     K.    The city council finds and declares, pursuant to the Government Code Section 6255, that the public interest served by not making information regarding trade secrets, proprietary information, and sensitive hazardous materials public clearly outweighs the public interest served by the disclosure of such information to members of the general public, except as provided by this section. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.120 Fees.
     The board of supervisors may establish a schedule of fees to be paid by persons using or handling hazardous materials which is sufficient to cover the costs to the county of administering this chapter and conducting investigations to ensure compliance. The schedule of fees shall include a provision for collection of delinquency fees. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

 

8.44.130 Enforcement authority.
     The health officer is authorized and empowered to enforce the provisions of this chapter and to inspect such activities as are regulated in this chapter for the purpose of determining compliance with this chapter. No person shall obstruct or interfere with the health officer in his or her performance of these duties. The health officer shall be empowered to make such arrests and issue citations pursuant to Penal Code Sections 836.5 and 833.7 for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 8.48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL
Note
*     Prior ordinance history: Ords. 318, 316 and 223.

 

8.48.010 Title, purpose and intent.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Lemon Grove Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Ordinance.” The purposes of this chapter are as follows:

     A.    To establish requirements for discharges into the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), receiving waters, and the environment;

     B.     To protect, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), life, property, receiving waters, aquatic life, and the environment from loss, injury, degradation, or damage by discharges from within the city’s jurisdiction;

     C.     To protect the MS4 from damage; and

     D.    To meet the requirements of state and federal law and the California Regional Water Quality Control Board (RWQCB) Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, as may be amended (MS4 Permit). (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall be applicable when the following words or phrases are used hereafter in this chapter (including use in the city of Lemon Grove’s Best Management Practices Manual), whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized.

     “Authorized enforcement official” means the city manager of the city of Lemon Grove or any designee of the city manager of the city of Lemon Grove who is responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the directors, their management staff and designees.

     “Basin plan” means the comprehensive water quality control plan for the San Diego Basin, adopted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region in July 1975, and all subsequent amendments.

     “Best management practices (BMPs)” mean schedules of activities, pollution treatment practices or devices, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and educational practices, maintenance procedures and other management practices or devices to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to stormwater, receiving waters or the MS4. Best management practices also include, but are not limited to, treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal or drainage from raw materials storage. Best management practices may include any type of pollution prevention and pollution control measure, approved by the city and consistent with the MS4 Permit, that can help to achieve compliance with this chapter.

     “BMP Manual” or “Manual” means the city’s BMP Manual adopted by resolution and amended from time to time by the city council. The applicable version of the BMP Manual for a development shall be the version in effect at the time of final approval of the permit or other entitlement applicable to the improvement.

     “Channel” means a natural or improved watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conveys continuously or intermittently flowing water.

     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove.

     “Contamination,” as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, is an impairment of the quality of waters of the state by waste

to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. “Contamination” includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste whether or not waters of the state are affected.

     “County” means the county of San Diego.

     “Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activity.

     “Directors” means the directors of the city’s development services department and the public works department.

     “Discharge” when used as a verb, means to allow pollutants to directly or indirectly enter stormwater, or to allow stormwater or non-stormwater to directly or indirectly enter the MS4 or receiving waters, from an activity or operations which one owns or operates. When used as a noun, “discharge” means the pollutants, stormwater and/or non-stormwater that is discharged.

     “Discharger” means any person or entity engaged in activities or operations or owning facilities, which will or may result in pollutants entering stormwater, the MS4, or receiving waters; and the owners of real property on which such activities, operations or facilities are located; provided however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

     “Erosion” refers to any process in which land is diminished or worn away due to wind, water, or glacial ice. Often the eroded debris (silt or sediment) becomes a pollutant via stormwater runoff. Erosion occurs naturally but can be intensified by land clearing activities such as development, farming, road building, and timber harvesting.

     “Groundwater” means subsurface water that occurs beneath the water table in soils and geologic formations that are fully saturated.

     “Illegal connection” means a pipe, facility, or other device connected to the MS4 or receiving waters, which has not been reviewed and authorized by the city; or a permitted/authorized pipe, facility, or other device, which conveys illegal discharges.

     “Illegal discharge” means any discharge to the MS4 or receiving waters that is prohibited by this chapter. This includes, but is not limited to, discharges of non-stormwater that are not exempt discharges listed in Section 8.48.050, discharges of irrigation runoff to the MS4, any discharge from an illegal connection and any discharge that contains additional pollutants due to the absence of a required BMP or the failure of a BMP. Discharges that require a RWQCB permit that has not been issued or has not been acknowledged by the discharger to be applicable are illegal discharges. Discharges regulated under an applicable NPDES permit are illegal discharges for purposes of this chapter unless compliance with all applicable permit and storm water pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) conditions is maintained.

     “Infiltration” means the process of percolating stormwater or non-stormwater into the soil.

     “Infiltration BMPs” means any structural treatment BMP designed primarily to percolate water into the subsurface, such as an infiltration trench or infiltration basin. An infiltration BMP may include filtering prior to or during infiltration. BMPs that infiltrate some water but which are designed primarily to retain water or to treat water, such as retention basins, constructed wetlands, or filtering swales are not infiltration facilities.

     “Land development activity” means construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction of any public or private projects.

     “Land disturbance activity” means any activity, requiring a grading permit that moves fifty cubic yards of soils or substantially alters the pre-existing vegetated or man-made cover of any land. This includes, but is not limited to, grading, digging, cutting, scraping, stockpiling or excavating of soil; placement of fill materials; paving, pavement removal, exterior construction; substantial removal of vegetation where soils are disturbed including, but not limited to, removal by clearing or grubbing; or any activity which bares soil or rock or involves streambed alterations or the diversion or piping of any watercourse. Land disturbance activity does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or the original purpose of the facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities (i.e., land disturbances) required to protect public health and safety.

     “Land owner” means the holder of legal title to the land, and other persons or entities who exercise control over a land development project pursuant to rights granted in a purchase agreement, joint venture agreement, development agreement, or long-term lease.

     “Low impact development” or “LID” means a stormwater management and land use development strategy that emphasizes conservation and the use of on-site natural features integrated with engineered, small-scale hydrologic controls to more closely reflect pre-development hydrologic functions.

     “Maintenance of a BMP” means periodic action taken to maintain the as-designed performance of a BMP, and includes, but is not limited to, repairs to the BMP as necessary, and replacement of the BMP by an equally effective or more effective BMP at the end of its useful life.

     “Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” means the technology-based standard established by Congress in the Clean Water Act Section 402(p)(3)(B)(iii) that municipal dischargers of urban runoff must meet. MEP generally emphasizes pollution prevention and source control BMPs primarily (as the first line of defense) in combination with treatment methods serving as a backup (additional lines of defense). MEP is an acceptability standard for BMPs. When BMPs are required to meet this standard, the BMPs must be the most effective set of BMPs that is still practicable. A BMP is effective if it prevents, reduces or removes the pollutants that would otherwise be present in runoff due to human activity. A BMP is practicable if it complies with other regulations as well as stormwater regulations; is compatible with the area’s land use, character, facilities and activities; is technically feasible (considering area soil, geography, water resources and other resources available); is economically feasible; and provides benefits that are reasonable in relation to costs.

     “Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)” means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains): (1) owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish, district, association, or other public body (created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes, storm water, or other wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer district, flood control district or drainage district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal organization, or designated and approved management agency under Section 208 of the CWA that discharges to waters of the United States; (2) designated or used for collecting or conveying storm water; (3) which is not a combined sewer; (4) which is not part of the publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as defined at 40 CFR 122.26.

     “MS4 Permit” refers to RWQCB Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES Permit No. CAS0109266, as may be amended.

     “Natural drainage” means a natural swale or topographic depression, which gathers and/or conveys runoff to a permanent or intermittent watercourse or water body.

     “New development” means land disturbing activities; structural development, including construction or installation of a building or structure, the creation of impervious surfaces; and land subdivision.

     “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to the MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater.

     “NPDES permit” means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the SWRCB, or the RWQCB.

     “Nuisance” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 17.08.030 and/or applicable state law.

     “Pollutants” shall mean any agent that may cause or contribute to the degradation of water quality such that a condition of pollution or contamination is created or aggravated.

     “Pollution,” as defined in the Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act, is the alteration of the quality of the waters of the state by waste, to a degree which unreasonably affects either of the following: (1) the waters for beneficial uses; or (2) facilities that serve these beneficial uses. “Pollution” may include contamination.

     “Post-construction stormwater management plan” is a report that documents how a priority development project complies with applicable BMP requirements for land development and redevelopment activities listed in the BMP Manual and Chapter 8.52 of the municipal code. Post-construction stormwater management plans are commonly referred to by titles such as Water Quality Technical Report (WQTR) and Storm Water Quality Management Plan (SWQMP).

     “Premises” means any building, lot parcel, land or portion of water whether improved or unimproved.

     “Priority development project” refers to new development and redevelopment project categories as more fully set forth in the BMP Manual and Chapter 8.52 of the municipal code.

     “Receiving waters” means all waters that are waters of the United States.

     “Redevelopment” means any construction, alteration or improvement at an already developed site. Redevelopment can include, but is not limited to, the expansion of building footprints, the addition or replacement of a structure, exterior construction and remodeling, replacement of existing impervious surfaces that are not part of a routine maintenance activity, and other activities that create additional impervious surface.

     “Runoff” means all flows in a MS4 including stormwater (wet weather flows) and non-stormwater (dry weather flows).

     “RWQCB” means the Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego Region.

     “Sediment” means soils or other surficial materials eroded and then transported or deposited by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. Sediment resulting from anthropogenic sources (i.e., human induced land disturbance activities) is considered a pollutant. Sediments can increase turbidity, clog fish gills, reduce spawning habitat, lower young aquatic organisms’ survival rates, smother bottom dwelling organisms, and suppress aquatic vegetation growth.

     “Source control BMP (both structural and non-structural)” means land use or site planning practices, or structures that aim to prevent urban runoff pollution by reducing the potential for contamination at the source of pollution. Source control BMPs minimize the contact between pollutants and urban runoff. Examples include roof structures over trash or material storage areas, and berms around fuel dispensing areas.

     “State general construction stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000002, and any amendments thereto.

     “State general industrial stormwater permit” means NPDES Permit No. CAS000001, and any amendments thereto.

     “Stop work order” means an order issued which requires that specifically identified activity or all activity on a site be stopped.

     “Stormwater” means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events.

     “Stormwater management” means the use of structural or non-structural BMPs that are designed to reduce urban run-off pollutant loads, discharge volumes, and/or peak discharge flow rates or velocities. When applied to the city or another municipality, stormwater management also includes planning and programmatic measures.

     “Stormwater management plan” means a plan, submitted on a city form or in a city-specific format in connection with an application for a city permit or other city approval, identifying the measures that will be used for stormwater and non-stormwater management during the permitted activity.

     “Structural BMP” means a BMP that relies on either a physical condition, other than an entirely natural and undisturbed condition, or on a constructed or installed device to reduce or prevent pollutants in stormwater discharges and authorized non-stormwater discharges. Constructed or enhanced BMPs that depend on natural materials and processes (e.g., constructed drainage swales or buffers, or constructed wetlands), and that require period maintenance to function as designed, are structural BMPs.

     “Structural post-construction BMP” means a structural BMP, other than a temporary construction-related BMP, put in place in connection with a land development or redevelopment project to prevent or reduce pollution of stormwater or receiving waters, or to prevent or reduce erosion downstream from the project. All treatment control BMPs are structural post-construction BMPs.

     “SWRCB” means the State Water Resources Control Board.

     “Watercourse” means a permanent or intermittent stream, creek, or other body of water, either natural or improved, which gathers or carries surface water.

     “Water quality standards” are defined as the beneficial uses (e.g., swimming, fishing, municipal drinking water supply, etc.) of water and the water quality standards adopted by the state or the United States Environmental Protection Agency to protect those uses.

     “Waters of the state” means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters within the boundaries of the state (State Water Code Section 10350(e)). The definition of the “waters of the state” is broader than that for the “waters of the United States” in that all water in the state is considered to be “waters of the state” regardless of circumstances or condition.

     “Waters of the United States” means water subject to the regulatory jurisdiction of the United States under the Federal Clean Water Act and applicable case law. In general, this includes “navigable” waters, waters tributary to “navigable” waters, and adjacent wetlands. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 389 § 1, 2010; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.030 General provisions.
     A.    Responsibility for Administration. This chapter shall be administered for the city of Lemon Grove by its authorized enforcement officials.

     B.     Effective Date. This chapter shall take effect on June 27, 2015.

     C.     Construction and Application. Interpretation of this chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall implement the requirements of the MS4 Permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. Stormwater and non-stormwater discharges regulated under a valid facility-specific NPDES permit or facility-specific RWQCB waste discharge requirements permit are not subject to this chapter, but shall instead be regulated exclusively by the RWQCB.

     D.    BMP Manual. The city may establish and adopt a written description of the runoff management measures and programs, including minimum BMPs, that the city will implement, or require to be implemented, to ensure compliance with this chapter. These documents shall be known collectively as the BMP Manual. Amendments to the BMP Manual shall be approved by resolution of the city council.

     E.     Severability and Validity. If any section of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this chapter should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.040 Discharge prohibitions.
     A.    Illegal Discharges. The discharge of pollutants, directly or indirectly, into the MS4 or receiving waters is prohibited, except as exempted in Section 8.48.050 of this chapter. The discharge of pollutants to stormwater, directly or indirectly into the MS4 or receiving waters, is prohibited, unless the applicable requirements of this chapter have been met.

     B.     Illegal Connection. The establishment of illegal connections is prohibited. The use of illegal connections is prohibited, even if the connection was established pursuant to a valid city permit and was legal at the time it was constructed.

     C.     Prevention of Illegal Discharges. Throwing, depositing, leaving, abandoning, maintaining or keeping materials or wastes on public or private lands in a manner and place where they may result in an illegal discharge is prohibited.

     D.    Violations of the MS4 Permit. It is unlawful for any person to cause, or threaten to cause, either individually or jointly any discharge into or from the MS4 that results in or contributes to a violation of the MS4 Permit. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.050 Exceptions to discharge prohibitions.
     A.    Permitted Discharges. Any discharge to the MS4 that is regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state pursuant to Division 7 of the California Water Code is allowed, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations.

     B.     Groundwater Discharges Typically Requiring Permits. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed if: (i) the discharger obtains coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2008-0002, or subsequent order) for discharges to surface waters other than San Diego Bay, and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the applicable NPDES permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; or (ii) the RWQCB determines in writing that coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG919002 (or subsequent permit) is not required. Otherwise, non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

     1.     Discharges from uncontaminated pumped groundwater;

     2.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year;

     3.     Discharges from water from crawl space pumps;

     4.     Discharges from water from footing drains when the system is designed to be located at or below the groundwater table to actively or passively extract groundwater during any part of the year.

     C.     Discharges from Water Lines. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from water line flushing and water main breaks are allowed if the discharges have coverage under NPDES Permit No. CAG679001 (RWQCB Order No. R9-2010-0003, or subsequent order), and the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of that NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. This category includes water line flushing and water main break discharges from water purveyors issued a water supply permit by the California Department of Public Health or federal military installations. Discharges from recycled or reclaimed water lines to the MS4 are allowed if the discharges have coverage under an NPDES permit, and the discharger is in compliance with the applicable NPDES permit and other applicable laws and regulations. Otherwise, discharges from water lines are illegal discharges.

     D.    Allowable Discharges. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from the following categories are allowed, unless an authorized enforcement official or the RWQCB identifies the discharge as a source of pollutants to receiving waters, in which case the discharge is considered an illegal discharge:

     1.     Discharges from diverted stream flows;

     2.     Discharges from flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

     3.     Discharges from foundation drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-stormwater discharges under unusual circumstances;

     4.     Discharges from footing drains when the system is designed to be located above the groundwater table at all times of the year, and the system is only expected to produce non-storm water discharges under unusual circumstances;

     5.     Discharges from rising groundwater;

     6.     Discharges from uncontaminated groundwater infiltration to the MS4;

     7.     Discharges from springs; and

     8.     Discharges from potable water sources, except as set forth in subsection C; and except that irrigation runoff discharges are considered illegal discharges and are not allowed.

     E.     Conditionally Allowed Discharges. Non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are allowed if they are addressed as follows. Otherwise, non-stormwater discharges from the following categories are illegal discharges:

     1.     Air Conditioning Condensation. Air conditioning condensation discharges shall comply with applicable BMPs identified in the BMP Manual.

     2.     Individual Residential Vehicle Washing. Wash water from individual residential vehicle washing must be directed to landscaped areas or other pervious surfaces, where feasible. Where discharges cannot be feasibly prevented, BMPs must be implemented in accordance with the BMP Manual. Non-commercial car washes, such as fundraisers and other similar activities, are not considered individual residential vehicle washing. Discharges from such activities are therefore considered illegal discharges.

     3.     Water from Swimming Pools.

     a.     Chlorinated Swimming Pool Water. Chlorine, algaecide, filter backwash, and other pollutants shall be eliminated prior to discharging swimming pool water to the MS4.

     b.     Saline Swimming Pool Water. Saline swimming pool water must be directed to the sanitary sewer, according to requirements for such discharges as required by the city engineer, or otherwise disposed of in a manner that does not result in a discharge to the city’s MS4.

     F.     Firefighting Activities. Non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 from firefighting activities are allowed if they are addressed as follows:

     1.     Non-Emergency Firefighting Discharges. Non-emergency firefighting discharges, including building fire suppression system maintenance discharges (e.g., sprinkler line flushing), controlled or practice blazes, training, and maintenance activities shall be addressed by BMPs to prevent the discharge of pollutants to the MS4.

     2.     Emergency Firefighting Discharges. BMPs are encouraged to prevent pollutants from entering the MS4. During emergencies, priority of efforts should be directed toward life, property, and the environment (in descending order). BMPs shall not interfere with emergency response operations or impact public health and safety.

     G.    Exemptions not Absolute. Notwithstanding the categories of non-stormwater discharges conditionally allowed by subsections A through F, if the RWQCB or the authorized enforcement official determines that any of these categories of otherwise conditionally allowed non-stormwater discharges are a source of pollutants to receiving waters, are a danger to public health or safety, or are causing a public nuisance, such discharges shall be prohibited from entering the MS4. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.060 Best management practice requirements for all dischargers.
     A.    Best Management Practices. Any person engaged in activities which may result in discharges to the MS4 shall, to the MEP, undertake all measures to reduce the risk of non-stormwater discharges and pollutant discharges. The following requirements shall apply:

     1.     Every person undertaking any activity or use of premises that may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illegal discharges, or non-stormwater discharges to the MS4 shall comply with BMP guidelines or pollution control requirements, as may be established by the authorized enforcement official. BMPs shall be maintained routinely throughout the life of the activity. Such BMPs include the minimum BMPs set forth in the BMP Manual.

     2.     An authorized enforcement official may require any business or operations that are engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to the MS4 to develop and implement a storm water pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program and the applicable minimum BMPs from the BMP Manual.

     3.     Each discharger that is subject to any NPDES permit shall comply with all requirements of all such permits. The discharger must also make reports submitted to the RWQCB or other permitting agency, including monitoring data, available to the city upon request.

     4.     Parties undertaking land disturbance activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Chapter 18.08.

     5.     Parties undertaking land development and redevelopment activities shall comply with all applicable requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Chapter 8.52.

     B.     Guidance Documents. Any authorized enforcement official under the supervision of the city engineer may prepare, disseminate and maintain guidance documents addressing the use of BMPs for specific activities or facilities, illegal connections, and illegal discharges. These guidance documents may set out additional compliance alternatives that, in specified circumstances, can provide the same environmental protection that is afforded by the BMPs required by this chapter or specified in the BMP Manual.

     C.     Significant Sources of Pollutants. Where an authorized enforcement official identifies a discharge that is in violation of Sections 8.48.040 and 8.48.050, an authorized enforcement official may order the discharger to install, implement, and maintain additional BMPs to prevent or reduce contamination in stormwater and non-stormwater to the MEP. Any such order shall specify a reasonable date by which those BMPs must be put in place. The failure to install, implement, or maintain additional BMPs as required by any such order is a violation of this chapter.

     D.    Collection and Use of Stormwater. An authorized enforcement official may modify any requirement imposed by this chapter to allow the on-site collection and use of stormwater, or the collection of stormwater for delivery to and use at city-designated sites, provided the modified requirements are enforceable and provide equivalent environmental protection. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.070 Additional requirements for land disturbance activity.
     A.    Permit Issuance. No land owner or development project proponent shall receive any city grading, clearing, building or other land development permit or equivalent approval required for land disturbance activity without first meeting the requirements of this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Chapter 18.08 with respect to the portion of the development project and the land disturbance activity to which the permit at issue would apply.

     B.     Owners and Operators Both Responsible and Liable. Persons or entities performing land disturbance activity (including, but not limited to, construction activities) in the city, and the owners of land on which land disturbance activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided, however, that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

     C.     Stormwater Management Plan. All applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land disturbance activity must be accompanied by a stormwater management plan, on a form or in a format specified by the city. The stormwater management plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the BMPs required by this chapter, the BMP Manual, and Chapter 18.08 for the activity at issue.

     D.    Agricultural Grading and Clearing. The BMP requirements imposed by this section for land disturbance activities apply to agricultural grading and clearing, whether or not a city-issued grading and clearing permit is required for that activity. Tilling or cultivating land exclusively for the purpose of growing plants or animals is not considered to be grading or clearing, provided all disturbed material remains on the same site, the tilling or cultivating will not block or divert any natural drainage way, and the land to be tilled or cultivated has been in agricultural production for at least one of the preceding five years. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.080 Additional requirements for all land development and redevelopment projects.
     A.    Application to Development and Redevelopment Projects. No land owner or development project proponent in the city shall receive any city grading, clearing, building or other land development permit required for land development activity or redevelopment activity unless the project meets or will meet the requirements of this chapter and the applicable requirements defined in the city’s BMP Manual and Chapter 8.52. For priority development projects, the project’s post-construction stormwater management plan must be approved prior to the issuance of such permits.

     B.     Owners and Developers Responsible and Liable. Developers, development project proponents, and land owners for land on which land development activity is performed, are dischargers for purposes of this chapter; provided however that a local government or public authority is not a discharger as to activities conducted by others in public rights-of-way.

     C.     Post-Construction Best Management Practices Required. Land development and redevelopment projects with the potential to add pollutants to stormwater or to affect the flow rate or velocity of stormwater runoff after construction is completed, shall be designed to include and shall implement post-construction BMPs to ensure that pollutants and runoff from the development will be reduced to the MEP, will not significantly degrade receiving water quality, and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of receiving water quality standards in accordance with the requirements defined in the BMP Manual and Chapter 8.52.

     D.    Land Development Associated with Agricultural Operations. The requirements imposed by Section 8.48.080 of this chapter for land development activities apply to such activities when they are associated with agricultural operations.

     E.     Post-Construction Stormwater Management Plan. All applications to the city for a permit or approval associated with a land development or redevelopment activity must be accompanied by a post-construction stormwater management plan on a form or in a format specified by the city. The plan shall specify the manner in which the discharger/applicant will implement the post-construction BMPs required by this chapter. The plan must address those aspects of the project that, at the time a complete application is submitted, are subject to further environmental review pursuant to Section 15162 of the California Environmental Quality Act. Post-construction BMPs for other aspects of the project need not be addressed in this plan.

     F.     Stormwater Management Plan Review Fee and Deposit. Fees for stormwater management plan review and deposit thereof may be adopted by resolution of the city council.

     G.    Control to the Maximum Extent Practicable. All dischargers engaged in land development and significant redevelopment activities shall install, implement and maintain post-construction BMPs as needed to prevent or reduce pollutant discharges in stormwater from land disturbance to the MEP. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

8.48.090 Maintenance of BMPs.
     A.    Existing Development. Dischargers shall maintain the BMPs they rely upon to achieve and maintain compliance with this chapter.

     B.     Structural Post-Construction BMPs. The owners and occupants of lands on which structural post-construction BMPs have been installed to meet the requirements of this chapter shall ensure the maintenance of those BMPs, and shall themselves maintain those BMPs if other persons or entities who are also obliged to maintain those BMPs (by contract or covenant, or pursuant to this chapter) fail to do so.

     C.     Maintenance Obligations Assumed by Contract or Other Agreement. Primary responsibility to maintain a BMP may be transferred through a contract or other agreement. If that contract provides that it will be submitted to the city pursuant to this chapter as part of a development permit application, and if that contract is so submitted, the person or entity accepting a maintenance obligation in such a contract or agreement will also be legally obligated to maintain that BMP pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Obligation to Maintain BMPs Not Avoided by Contracts or Other Agreements. For purposes of city enforcement, no contract or other agreement imposing an obligation to maintain a BMP can relieve a person or entity of any obligation to maintain a BMP imposed by this chapter.

     E.     Disclosure of Maintenance Obligations. Any developer who transfers ownership of land on which a BMP is located or will be located, or who otherwise transfers ownership of a BMP or responsibility for the maintenance of a BMP to another person or entity, shall provide clear written notice of the maintenance obligations associated with that BMP to the new or additional responsible party prior to that transfer.

     F.     Maintenance Plans for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development project or significant redevelopment project that requires a installation of structural post-construction BMPs shall provide to the city for review and approval prior to issuance of such permit, a plan for maintenance of all post-construction structural BMPs associated with the project. The plan shall specify the persons or entities responsible for maintenance activity, the persons or entities responsible for funding, schedules and procedures for inspection and maintenance of the BMPs, worker training requirements, and any other activities necessary to ensure BMP maintenance. The plan shall provide for servicing of all post-construction structural BMPs at least annually, and for the retention of inspection and maintenance records for at least three years.

     G.    Access for Maintenance. Structural post-construction BMPs shall be provided adequate access for long-term inspection and maintenance purposes.

     H.    Assurance of Maintenance for Land Development Projects. The proponents of any land development activity or redevelopment activity that requires a city permit shall provide to the city, prior to issuance of permits for the project, proof of a mechanism acceptable to the city which will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural post-construction BMPs associated with the proposed project. The proponents shall be responsible for maintenance of BMPs unless, and until, an alternative mechanism for ensuring maintenance is accepted by the city and becomes effective.

     I.      Security for Maintenance for Land Development Projects. If it is determined by the authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of a bond or other security to assure the maintenance of a BMP, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.100 Inspection and sampling.
     A.    Regulatory Inspections. The authorized enforcement official may establish inspection or certification programs to evaluate and enforce compliance with the requirements of this chapter. If entry for a regulatory inspection is refused by the facility owner or operator, or by the occupant of a residence, an inspection warrant shall be obtained prior to inspection.

     B.     Inspections of New Construction. When any new storm drain system or structural BMP is installed on private property as part of a project that requires a city permit, in order to comply with this chapter, the property owner shall grant the city permission to access the property at reasonable times and in a reasonable manner to ensure that the BMP is working properly. This includes the right to enter the property without prior notice for routine inspections, to enter as needed for additional inspections when the city has a reasonable basis to believe that the BMP is not working properly, to enter for any needed follow-up inspections, and to enter when necessary for abatement of a nuisance or correction of a violation of this chapter.

     C.     Scope of Inspections. Inspections may include all actions necessary to determine whether any illegal discharges or illegal connections exist, whether the BMPs installed and implemented are adequate to comply with this chapter, whether those BMPs are being properly maintained, and whether the facility or activity complies with the other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.110 Enforcement.
     Authorized enforcement officials may enforce this chapter and abate public nuisances as follows:

     A.    Administrative Authorities.

     1.     Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed in accordance with the provisions for administrative penalties set forth in this chapter. Administrative penalties may include the recovery of fines assessed against the city of Lemon Grove by the RWQCB. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in the LGMC shall also be applicable to this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein.

     2.     Cease and Desist Orders. Written and/or verbal orders may be issued to stop illegal discharges and/or remove illegal connections. If it is determined by an authorized enforcement official that the public interest requires the posting of bond or other security to assure the violation is corrected, such bond or security may be required by the authorized enforcement official.

     3.     Notice and Order to Clean, Test or Abate. Written and/or verbal orders may be issued to perform activities to comply with the BMP Manual, this chapter, or as directed by an authorized enforcement official where conditions warrant.

     4.     Public Nuisance Abatement. Violations of this chapter are deemed a threat to public health, safety, and welfare; and constitute a public nuisance. If actions ordered under subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section are not performed, the authorized enforcement official may abate any public nuisance pursuant to Chapter 1.14. City costs for pollution detection and abatement, if not paid in full by the discharger in addition to any other penalties, may be made a lien against the property in accordance with the abatement procedure.

     5.     Stop Work Orders. Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter, or other laws implemented through enforcement of this chapter, an authorized enforcement official may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any person engaged in the doing or causing such work to be done, and any such person shall immediately stop such work until authorized by the authorized enforcement official to proceed with the work.

     6.     Permit Suspension or Revocation. Violations of this chapter may be grounds for permit and/or other city license suspension or revocation in accordance with applicable sections of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     B.     Judicial Authorities.

     1.     Civil Penalties and Remedies. The city attorney is hereby authorized to file criminal and civil actions to enforce this chapter and to seek civil penalties and/or other remedies as provided in this section and in Section 8.48.120 of this chapter. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement procedures be pursued before such actions are filed.

     2.     Injunctive Relief. The city may enforce compliance with this chapter by judicial action for injunctive relief.

     3.     Arrest or Issue Citations. The assistance of a peace officer may be enlisted to arrest violators as provided in California Penal Code, and/or a citation and notice to appear as prescribed in the Penal Code, including Section 853.6 may be issued. There is no requirement that administrative enforcement remedies be used before such actions are taken. The immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code are applicable to authorized enforcement officials acting in the course and scope of their employment pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.120 Other acts and omissions that are violations.
     In addition to failing to comply with any of the other requirements, the following acts and omissions are violations of this chapter, whether committed by a discharger or by another person or entity:

     A.    Causing, Permitting, Aiding or Abetting Noncompliance. Causing, permitting, aiding, or abetting noncompliance with any part of this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter.

     B.     Concealment, Misrepresentation and False Statements. Any falsification or misrepresentation made to the city concerning compliance with this chapter, including any misrepresentation in a voluntary disclosure, any submission of a report that omits required material facts without disclosing such omission, and any withholding of information required to be submitted by or pursuant to this chapter in order to delay city enforcement action, is a violation of this chapter. Concealing a violation of this chapter is a violation of this chapter.

     C.     Failure to Promptly Correct Non-compliance. Violations of this chapter must be corrected with the time period specified by an authorized enforcement official. Each day (or part thereof) in excess of that period during which action necessary to correct a violation is not initiated and diligently pursued is a separate violation of this chapter. Notwithstanding the granting of any period of time to the discharger to correct the damage, the discharger shall remain liable for some or all of any fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, or by the RWQCB.

     D.    City Permits and Plans. Any failure to conform to an applicable city-required plan prepared pursuant to this chapter; any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions of a city-issued grading permit or grading plan prepared to secure such a permit; and any failure to comply with stormwater-related provisions in any other city permit or approval, is also a violation of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter a permit provision or condition of approval is “stormwater-related” if compliance with the provision or condition would have the effect of preventing or reducing contamination of stormwater or of moderating run-off flows rates or velocities, whether or not the provision or condition was initially imposed to promote those outcomes. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

 

8.48.130 Remedies not exclusive.
     Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.52 POST-CONSTRUCTION BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES DESIGN STANDARDS
8.52.010 Title.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the “Post-Construction Best Management Practices (BMP) Design Standards of the City of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.020 Statutory authority.
     A.    The municipal stormwater National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit (Order No. R9-2013-0001, NPDES No. CAS0109266, as may be amended, hereinafter referred to as “municipal permit”) issued to San Diego County, San Diego County Regional Airport Authority, the Port of San Diego, and eighteen cities by the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board (Regional Board) on May 8, 2013, requires the development and implementation of a program addressing urban runoff pollution issues in development planning for public and private projects.

     B.     The requirement to implement a program for development planning is based on federal and state statutes including: Section 402 (p) of the Clean Water Act, Section 6217 of the Coastal Zone Act Reauthorization Amendments of 1990 (“CZARA”), and the California Water Code. The Clean Water Act amendments of 1987 established a framework for regulating urban runoff discharges from municipal, industrial, and construction activities under the NPDES program. The municipal permit requires the adoption of a local BMP Design Manual that incorporates the minimum low impact development (LID) and BMP requirements developed in the Countywide Model BMP Design Manual. The BMP Design Manual shall be approved by resolution of the city council that will establish implementing regulations to this chapter and Chapter 8.48 (Stormwater Management and Discharge Control). (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.030 Purpose.
     The requirements of this chapter were developed to address post-construction urban runoff pollution from new development and redevelopment applications. The goal of this chapter is to establish requirements to ensure to the maximum extent practicable (MEP) that development does not increase pollutant loads from a project site or result in increased erosion in channels or streams downstream of the development. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.040 Applicability of chapter.
     The requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to the development plan approval process for discretionary development applications, and prior to issuing development permits for ministerial projects. All “development projects” must include control measures to reduce the discharge of stormwater pollutants to the MEP (Sections 8.52.100 through 8.52.130). Development projects are construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment, or reconstruction activities that have the potential to contact stormwater and contribute an anthropogenic source of pollutants or reduce the natural absorption and infiltration abilities of the land. Each development project is classified as either a “standard development project” or a “priority development project.” This chapter includes regulations that apply to all development projects as well as a separate suite of regulations that apply only to priority development projects. Projects that meet any of the criteria in Section 8.52.060 are not considered development projects and are not subject to the requirements of this chapter.

     The following types of development projects are considered priority development projects:

     A.    New development projects that create ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surfaces (collectively over the entire project site). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

     B.     Redevelopment projects that create and/or replace five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site on an existing site of ten thousand square feet or more of impervious surfaces). This includes commercial, industrial, residential, mixed-use, and public development projects on public or private land.

     C.     New and redevelopment projects that create and/or replace five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), and support one or more of the following uses:

     1.     Restaurants. This category is defined as a facility that sells prepared foods and drinks for consumption, including stationary lunch counters and refreshment stands selling prepared foods and drinks for immediate consumption (SIC code 5812).

     2.     Hillside Development Projects. This category includes development on any natural slope that is twenty-five percent or greater.

     3.     Parking Lots. This category is defined as a land area or facility for the temporary parking or storage of motor vehicles used personally, for business, or for commerce.

     4.     Streets, Roads, Highways, Freeways, and Driveways. This category is defined as any paved impervious surface used for the transportation of automobiles, trucks, motorcycles, and other vehicles.

     D.    New or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace two thousand five hundred square feet or more of impervious surface (collectively over the entire project site), and discharging directly to an environmentally sensitive area (ESA). “Discharging directly to” includes flow that is conveyed overland a distance of two hundred feet or less from the project to the ESA, or conveyed in a pipe or open channel any distance as an isolated flow from the project to the ESA (i.e., not commingled with flows from adjacent lands).

     E.     New development projects, or redevelopment projects that create and/or replace five thousand square feet or more of impervious surface, that support one or more of the following uses:

     1.     Automotive Repair Shops. This category is defined as a facility that is categorized in any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes: 5013, 5014, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.

     2.     Retail Gasoline Outlets (RGOs). This category includes RGOs that meet the following criteria:

     a.     Five thousand square feet or more; or

     b.     A projected average daily traffic (ADT) of one hundred or more vehicles per day.

     F.     New or redevelopment projects that result in the disturbance of one or more acres of land and are expected to generate pollutants post-construction. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.050 Applicability of Chapter 8.48.
     The provisions of Chapter 8.48 (Stormwater Management and Discharge Control), including the definitions and enforcement provisions, shall be applicable to this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.060 Limited exclusion.
     The following activities are not considered “development projects,” and the requirements of this chapter do not apply to them:

     A.    Replacement of impervious surfaces that are part of a routine maintenance activity, such as:

     1.     Replacing roof material on an existing building;

     2.     Rebuilding a structure to original design after damage from earthquake, fire or similar disasters;

     3.     Restoring pavement or other surface materials affected by trenches from utility work;

     4.     Resurfacing existing roads and parking lots, including slurry, overlay, and restriping;

     5.     Routine replacement of damaged pavement, including full depth replacement, if the sole purpose is to repair the damage;

     6.     Constructing new sidewalk, pedestrian ramps or bike lanes on existing roads (within existing street right-of-way);

     7.     Restoring a historic building to its original historic design.

     B.     Repair or improvements to an existing building or structure that do not alter the size:

     1.     Plumbing, electrical and HVAC work;

     2.     Interior alterations including major interior remodels and tenant build-out within an existing commercial building;

     3.     Exterior alterations that do not change the general dimensions and structural framing of the building (does not include building additions or projects where the existing building is demolished). (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.070 Administration—Limitations.
     Interpretation of this chapter shall assure consistency with the purpose and intent of this chapter and shall implement the requirements of the MS4 permit. This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate or annul any other chapter, rule or regulation, statute, or other provision of law. The requirements of this chapter should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this chapter imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other chapter, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall take precedence. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.080 Administration—Provisions for BMP design standards requirements.
     The requirements of this chapter shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to approval of discretionary permits. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the requirements of this chapter shall be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to the issuance of any ministerial permits. City departments carrying out public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring the requirements of this chapter are incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans prior to bidding for construction contracts, or equivalent. For public projects, the requirements of this chapter must be incorporated into the project design and shown on the plans before allowing the project to commence. In addition, all projects, both public and private, shall submit a post-construction BMP plan documenting how the project design complies with the requirements of this chapter before permits are issued for private projects and before public projects are allowed to commence. The city of Lemon Grove BMP Design Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as an implementing regulation of this chapter and Chapter 8.48, shall be available on the city’s website. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.090 Administration—Implementation.
     All development projects shall implement source control and site design BMPs. Furthermore, priority development projects shall implement structural pollutant control BMPs. The final determination of the applicability and feasibility of all BMPs in this chapter shall be made by the development services director. The stormwater BMPs shall adhere to the requirements of this chapter, and shall be correctly designed so as to remove pollutants to the MEP. Priority projects must also be designed so that runoff rates and durations are controlled to maintain or reduce downstream erosion conditions and protect stream habitat. Design criteria and procedures for hydromodification management are identified in Section 8.52.130 and shall be further set forth in the city of Lemon Grove BMP Design Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as an implementing regulation of this chapter and Chapter 8.48. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.100 General requirements for stormwater BMPs.
     All development projects must meet the following requirements:

     A.    On-site BMPs shall be located so as to remove pollutants from runoff prior to its discharge to any receiving waters, and as close to the source as possible.

     B.     Structural BMPs shall not be constructed within the waters of the U.S.

     C.     On-site BMPs shall be designed and implemented with measures to avoid the creation of nuisances or pollutions associated with vectors (e.g., mosquitoes, rodents, or flies). (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.110 Requirements to implement site design and source control stormwater BMPs.
     All development projects must implement LID site design BMPs and source control BMPs as described below.

     A.    Site design performance standards define minimum requirements for how a site must incorporate LID site design BMPs, including the location of BMPs and the use of integrated site design practices. The following site design practices must be implemented at all development projects, where applicable and feasible:

     1.     Maintenance or restoration of natural storage reservoirs and drainage corridors (including topographic depressions, areas of permeable soils, natural swales, and ephemeral and intermittent streams).

     a.     Development projects that propose to disturb water bodies shall also comply with all applicable requirements of other agencies, including, but not limited to, the US Army Corps of Engineers, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, and the San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board;

     2.     Buffer zones for natural water bodies (where buffer zones are technically infeasible, the project applicant shall include other buffers such as trees, access restrictions, or similar measures);

     3.     Conservation of natural areas within the project footprint including existing trees, other vegetation, and soils;

     4.     Construction of streets, sidewalks, or parking lot aisles to the minimum widths necessary, provided public safety is not compromised;

     5.     Minimization of the impervious footprint of the project;

     6.     Minimization of soil compaction to landscaped areas;

     7.     Disconnection of impervious surfaces through distributed pervious areas;

     8.     Landscaped or other pervious areas designed and constructed to effectively receive and infiltrate, retain and/or treat runoff from impervious areas, prior to discharging to the MS4;

     9.     Small collection strategies located at, or as close as possible to, the source (i.e., the point where stormwater initially meets the ground) to minimize the transport of runoff and pollutants to the MS4 and receiving waters;

     10.   Use of permeable materials for projects with low traffic areas and appropriate soil conditions;

     11.   Landscaping with native or drought tolerant species; and

     12.   Harvesting and using precipitation.

     B.     The following source control BMPs must be implemented at all development projects where applicable and feasible:

     1.     Prevention of illicit discharges into the MS4;

     2.     Storm drain system stenciling or signage;

     3.     Protection of outdoor material storage areas from rainfall, run-on, runoff, and wind dispersal;

     4.     Protection of materials stored in outdoor work areas from rainfall, run-on, runoff, and wind dispersal;

     5.     Protection of trash storage areas from rainfall, run-on, runoff, and wind dispersal; and

     6.     Additional BMPs to control discharges of pollutants from the following sources, as applicable:

     a.     On-site storm drain inlets,

     b.     Interior floor drains and elevator shaft sump pumps,

     c.     Interior parking garages,

     d.     Need for future indoor and structural pest control,

     e.     Landscape/outdoor pesticide use,

     f.      Pools, spas, ponds, decorative fountains, and other water features,

     g.     Food service,

     h.     Refuse areas,

     i.      Industrial processes,

     j.      Outdoor storage of equipment or materials,

     k.     Vehicle and equipment cleaning,

     l.      Vehicle and equipment repair and maintenance,

     m.    Fuel dispensing areas,

     n.     Loading docks,

     o.     Fire sprinkler test water,

     p.     Miscellaneous drain or wash water,

     q.     Plazas, sidewalks, and parking lots.

     Detailed requirements for selection of appropriate site design and source control BMPs shall be further set forth in the city of Lemon Grove BMP Design Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as an implementing regulation of this chapter and Chapter 8.48. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.120 Selection of stormwater treatment facilities.
     All priority development projects must implement on-site structural BMPs to control pollutants in stormwater that may be discharged from a project as follows:

     A.    Each priority development project must implement LID BMPs that are designed to retain (i.e., intercept, store, infiltrate, evaporate, and evapotranspire) on-site the pollutants contained in the volume of stormwater runoff produced from a twenty-four-hour 85th percentile storm event (design capture volume).

     1.     If implementing BMPs to retain the full design capture volume on-site for a priority development project is not technically feasible, then the priority development project may utilize biofiltration BMPs. Biofiltration BMPs must be designed to have an appropriate hydraulic loading rate to maximize stormwater retention and pollutant removal, as well as to prevent erosion, scour, and channeling within the BMP, and must be sized to:

     a.     Treat one and one-half times the design capture volume not reliably retained on-site; or

     b.     Treat the design capture volume not reliably retained on-site with a flow-thru design that has a total volume, including pore spaces and pre-filter detention volume, sized to hold at least three-fourths times the portion of the design capture volume not reliably retained on-site.

     Detailed requirements for proper selection and sizing of structural BMPs shall be further set forth in the Lemon Grove BMP Design Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as an implementing regulation of this chapter and Chapter 8.48. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.130 Hydromodification management BMP requirements.
     Priority development projects must implement on-site BMPs to manage hydromodification that may be caused by stormwater runoff discharged from a project as follows:

     A.    Post-project flow rates and durations must meet the following criteria:

     1.     For flow rates ranging from ten percent, thirty percent or fifty percent of the pre-development two-year runoff event (0.1Q2, 0.3Q2, or 0.5Q2) to the pre-development ten-year runoff event (Q10), the post-project discharge rates and durations shall not deviate above the pre-development rates and durations by more than ten percent over and more than ten percent of the length of the flow duration curve. The specific lower flow threshold will depend on the erosion susceptibility of the receiving stream for the project site. Guidelines for selection of the appropriate lower flow threshold are provided in the San Diego Hydromodification Management Plan.

     2.     For flow rates ranging from the lower flow threshold to Q5, the post-project peak flows shall not exceed pre-development peak flows. For flow rates from Q5 to Q10, post-project peak flows may exceed pre-development flows by up to ten percent for a one-year frequency interval. For example, post-project flows could exceed pre-development flows by up to ten percent for the interval from Q9 to Q10 or from Q5.5 to Q6.5, but not from Q8 to Q10.

     B.     Each priority development project must avoid critical coarse sediment yield areas identified in the Watershed Management Area Analysis or implement measures that allow critical coarse sediment to be discharged to receiving waters, such that there is no net impact to the receiving water.

     C.     At the development services director’s discretion, the city may exempt a priority development project from the hydromodification management BMP performance requirements described in this section where the project discharges stormwater runoff to:

     1.     Existing underground storm drains discharging directly to water storage reservoirs, lakes, enclosed embayments, or the Pacific Ocean;

     2.     Conveyance channels whose bed and bank are concrete lined all the way from the point of discharge to water storage reservoirs, lakes, enclosed embayments, or the Pacific Ocean; or

     3.     An area identified by the copermittees as appropriate for an exemption by the optional Watershed Management Area Analysis. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.140 The fifty percent rule of applicability for redevelopment projects.
     If the priority development project is a redevelopment project, the structural BMP performance requirements and hydromodification management requirements apply to redevelopment priority development projects as follows:

     A.    Where redevelopment results in the creation or replacement of impervious surface in an amount of less than fifty percent of the surface area of the previously existing development, then the structural BMP performance requirements for priority development projects apply only to the creation or replacement of impervious surface, and not the entire development; or

     B.     Where redevelopment results in the creation or replacement of impervious surface in an amount of more than fifty percent of the surface area of the previously existing development, then the structural BMP performance requirements for priority development projects apply to the entire development. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.150 Using efficient irrigation systems and landscape design.
     Development projects shall design the timing and application methods of irrigation water to prevent the runoff of excess irrigation water into the stormwater conveyance system. The following methods to reduce excessive irrigation runoff shall be considered, and incorporated and implemented where determined applicable and feasible by the development services director. (Detached residential homes may be exempted from these measures by the community development director as long as the project design includes methods to minimize runoff):

     A.    Employing rain shutoff devices to prevent irrigation after precipitation.

     B.     Designing irrigation systems to each landscape area’s specific water requirements.

     C.     Using flow reducers or shutoff valves triggered by a pressure drop to control water loss in the event of broken sprinkler heads or lines.

     D.    Employing other comparable, equally effective, methods to reduce irrigation water runoff.

     Development projects must also meet all other irrigation and landscape design requirements of the municipal code, including water efficient landscaping regulations provided in Chapter 18.44. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.160 Shared and interim BMPs.
     The following requirements apply to shared and interim stormwater BMPs:

     A.    Shared stormwater BMPs shall be operational prior to the use of any dependent development or phase of development. The shared BMPs shall only be required to treat the dependent developments or phases of development that are in use;

     B.     Interim stormwater BMPs that provide equivalent or greater treatment than is required for the permanent structural BMPs may be implemented by a dependent development until each shared BMP is operational. If interim BMPs are selected, the BMPs shall remain in use until permanent BMPs are operational. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.170 Treatment control—Restrictions on use of infiltration BMPs.
     Infiltration devices shall comply with the criteria established in the Lemon Grove BMP Design Manual, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as an implementing regulation of this chapter and Chapter 8.48. These conditions do not apply to structural treatment BMPs which allow incidental infiltration and are not designed to primarily function as infiltration devices (such as grassy swales, detention basins, vegetated buffer strips, constructed wetlands, etc.). At a minimum, such infiltration BMPs must be in conformance with the design criteria listed below, unless the development project applicant demonstrates that one or more of the specific design criteria listed below are not necessary to protect groundwater quality. The design criteria listed below do not apply to small infiltration systems dispersed throughout a development project.

     A.    Runoff shall undergo pretreatment to remove both physical and chemical contaminants, such as sedimentation or filtration, prior to infiltration.

     B.     Pollution prevention and source control BMPs shall be implemented at a level appropriate to protect groundwater quality at sites where infiltration structural treatment BMPs are to be used.

     C.     Infiltration BMPs must be adequately maintained to remove pollutants in stormwater to the maximum extent practicable.

     D.    The vertical distance from the base of any infiltration structural treatment BMP to the seasonal high groundwater mark shall be at least ten feet or as determined on an individual, site-specific basis by the development services director. Where groundwater does not support beneficial uses, this vertical distance criterion may be reduced, provided groundwater quality is maintained.

     E.     The soil through which infiltration is to occur shall have physical and chemical characteristics (such as appropriate cation exchange capacity, organic content, clay content, and infiltration rate) which are adequate for proper infiltration durations and treatment of urban runoff for the protection of groundwater beneficial uses.

     F.     Infiltration structural treatment BMPs shall not be used for areas of industrial or light industrial activity and other high threat to water quality land uses and activities as designated by the development services director, unless source control BMPs to prevent exposure of high threat activities are implemented, or runoff from such activities is first treated or filtered to remove pollutants prior to infiltration.

     G.    The horizontal distance between the base of any infiltration structural BMP and any water supply wells shall be one hundred feet or as determined on an individual, site-specific basis by the development services director. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.180 Maintenance mechanism to be in place before acceptance.
     Structural BMPs shall not be considered “effective,” and shall not be accepted as meeting the MEP standard, unless a mechanism is in place that will ensure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs. As part of project review, if a project proponent is required to include interim or permanent structural BMPs in project plans, and if the development services director does not provide a mechanism for BMP maintenance, the project proponent shall provide verification of maintenance requirements through such means as may be appropriate, at the discretion of the development services director, including, but not limited to, covenants, legal agreements, maintenance agreements, and/or conditional use permits. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.190 Maintenance mechanisms.
     A.    Public Equity Maintenance. The city council may approve a public or acceptable quasi-public entity (e.g., the County Flood Control District, or annex to an existing assessment district, an existing utility district, a state or federal resource agency, or a conservation conservancy) to assume responsibility for maintenance, repair and replacement of the BMP. Unless acceptable to the city council, public entity maintenance agreements shall ensure estimated costs are front-funded or reliably guaranteed, (e.g., through a trust fund, assessment district fees, bond, letter of credit or similar means). In addition, the city council may seek protection from liability by appropriate releases and indemnities. The city council shall have the authority to approve stormwater BMPs proposed for transfer to any other public entity within its jurisdiction before installation. The city council shall be involved in the negotiation of maintenance requirements with any other public entities accepting maintenance responsibilities within their respective jurisdictions; and in negotiations with the resource agencies responsible for issuing permits for the construction and/or maintenance of the facilities. The city council must be identified as a third party beneficiary empowered to enforce any such maintenance agreement within their respective jurisdictions.

     B.     Project Proponent Agreement to Maintain Stormwater BMPs. The city council may enter into a contract with the project proponent obliging the project proponent to maintain, repair and replace the stormwater BMP as necessary into perpetuity. Security may be required.

     C.     Assessment Districts. The city council may approve an assessment district or other funding mechanism created by the project proponent to provide funds for stormwater BMP maintenance, repair and replacement on an ongoing basis. Any agreement with such a district shall be subject to the public entity maintenance provisions above.

     D.    Lease Provisions. In those cases where the city holds title to the land in question, and the land is being leased to another party for private or public use, the city may assure stormwater BMP maintenance, repair and replacement through conditions in the lease.

     E.     Conditional Use Permits. For discretionary projects only, the city council may assure maintenance of stormwater BMPs through the inclusion of maintenance conditions in the conditional use permit. Security may be required.

     F.     Alternative Mechanisms. The city council may accept alternative maintenance mechanisms if such mechanisms are as protective as those listed above. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.200 Verification mechanisms.
     For discretionary projects, the city-approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the project’s permit, and shall be consistent with permits issued by resource agencies, before city approval of discretionary permits. For projects requiring only ministerial permits, the approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance shall be incorporated into the permit conditions before the issuance of any ministerial permits. In all instances, the project proponent shall provide proof of execution of an approved method of maintenance repair and replacement before the issuance of construction approvals. Public projects that are not required to obtain permits shall be responsible for ensuring that an approved method of stormwater BMP maintenance repair and replacement is executed prior to the commencement of construction. For all properties, the verification mechanism will include the project proponent’s signed statement, as part of the project application, accepting responsibility for all structural BMP maintenance, repair and replacement, until a city approved entity agrees to assume responsibility for structural BMP maintenance, repair and replacement. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

 

8.52.210 Maintenance requirements.
     A.    Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan. An O&M plan, prepared by the project proponent shall be included in the post-construction BMP plan for all priority development projects. The O&M plan identifies the designated party responsible for maintaining stormwater post-construction BMP(s) and describes typical maintenance activities and frequencies. Project proponents for all priority development projects shall also submit a completed storm water facilities maintenance agreement to assure ongoing long-term maintenance of all structural BMPs. The storm water facilities maintenance agreement runs with the land. Parties responsible for the O&M plan shall retain maintenance records for at least five years. These documents shall be made available to the city for inspection upon request at any time.

     B.     Access Easement/Agreement. The development services director may require the project proponent to submit a copy of an executed access easement that shall be binding on the land throughout the life of the project, until such time that the stormwater BMP requiring access is replaced. (Ord. 435 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 8.56 FIREWORKS
8.56.010 Fireworks regulation—Purpose.
     California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq., regulates fireworks and pyrotechnic devices and authorize local jurisdictions to require permits for the manufacture, possession, sale or discharge of fireworks. This chapter establishes fireworks regulations for the city in addition to those regulations contained in the municipal code and Title 19 California Code of Regulations, Chapter 6, as amended. (Ord. 421 § 3, 2014)

 

8.56.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     “Fireworks” has the same meaning as the term “fireworks” in Health and Safety Code Section 12511. The term “fireworks” includes, but is not limited to, devices designated by the manufacturer as fireworks, blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky-rockets, Roman candles, rockets, day-go bombs, sparklers, snap caps, party poppers, paper caps, chasers, fountains, smoke sparks, aerial bombs and fireworks kits. “Fireworks” does not include auto flares, paper caps that do not contain in excess of an average of twenty-five hundredths of a grain of explosive content per cap and toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns or other devices for use of these caps.

     “Fireworks kit” has the same meaning as the term “fireworks kit” in Health and Safety Code Section 12512 and means any assembly of materials or explosive substances, which is designed and

intended by the seller to be assembled by the person receiving the material or explosive substance, and when assembled, comes within the definition of “fireworks,” above.

     “Sell” means to sell, offer to sell, solicit the sale of, take orders for, give away, offer to give away, distribute or deliver. (Ord. 421 § 3, 2014)

 

8.56.030 Permits required for manufacture, possession, sale and discharge of fireworks.
     Except where otherwise expressly provided in this code, it is unlawful for any person to possess, store, offer for sale, expose for sale, sell at retail, or use or explode any fireworks without a public display permit. No person shall be granted a public display permit unless the display will be handled by or under the supervision of a state licensed pyrotechnic operator. (Ord. 421 § 3, 2014)

 

8.56.040 Seizure of illegal fireworks.
     The city of Lemon Grove fire department and the sheriff’s department shall seize, take, remove or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner, all fireworks being manufactured, offered for sale, possessed or being discharged in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 421 § 3, 2014)

Chapter 8.60 FALSE FIRE ALARMS
8.60.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter (False Fire Alarms) is to reduce the number of false fire alarms by ensuring proper maintenance of said systems, educating the public, preventing the waste of fire resources caused by responses to false alarms, and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 423 § 1, 2014)

 

8.60.020 Applicability.
     This chapter is applicable to all fire alarm systems in the city of Lemon Grove. After adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter by the city council, there shall be a three-month delay in enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. During this time, the enforcement officer shall issue warnings to educate the public of the need to properly maintain fire alarms to prevent a waste of public resources responding to false alarms. (Ord. 423 § 1, 2014)

 

8.60.030 Definitions.
     “Department response” means a fire department response that has occurred when the fire unit is dispatched by Heartland Dispatch or any other official emergency dispatching service in response to the activation of a fire alarm signal that summons the fire department.

     “False fire alarm” means the activation of a fire alarm signal that summons the fire department to respond in an emergency response mode due to nuisance, mechanical failure, malfunction, improper installation, lack of maintenance and/or testing.

     “Fire alarm” means any device or equipment that automatically transmits a signal to activate a municipal fire alarm system, which in turn, causes fire department notification and emergency response to any premises. (Ord. 423 § 1, 2014)

 

8.60.040 Enforcement.
     The fire marshal, or designee, shall be the responsible agent for ensuring that the provisions of this chapter are enforced. (Ord. 423 § 1, 2014)

 

8.60.050 Penalties.
     After two false alarm responses in thirty days or three false alarm responses in six months at any location, a false alarm fee will be charged at the rate approved in the city of Lemon Grove in the Master Fee Schedule. If no specific fee for fire alarms is established, the fire alarm fee charged shall be based on the fee charged for false alarms applicable to security alarms under Chapter 8.32 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 423 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 8.64 PROHIBITION OF RECREATIONAL MARIJUANA BUSINESSES
8.64.010 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall be used in this chapter as follows:

     A.    “Recreational marijuana business” or “business” means any facility or location, whether fixed or mobile, where recreational marijuana is made available, grown, processed or sold for any non-medicinal purpose.

     B.     “Recreational marijuana cultivation” or “cultivation” means the planting, growing, harvesting, drying or processing of marijuana plants or any part thereof, and any and all associated business and/or operational activities, either as a for profit or non-profit operation.

     C.     “Marijuana delivery” or “delivery” means the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilities the commercial delivery, transfer or transport of marijuana, marijuana edibles, and/or any marijuana products to or from any location within the jurisdictional limits of the city of Lemon Grove, and any and all associated business and/or operational activities, either as a for profit or non-profit operation. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2017; Ord. 437 § 2, 2016)

 

8.64.020 Recreational marijuana dispensaries as a prohibited use and/or activity.
     A recreational marijuana business as defined in Section 8.64.010 is prohibited in all zones within the city’s jurisdictional limits. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such use. This ban includes the cultivation, manufacture, transportation, storage, distribution, processing, sale of recreational marijuana, and associated activities. This chapter shall not regulate businesses with a valid conditional use permit issued pursuant to Chapter 17.28 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2017; Ord. 437 § 2, 2016)

 

8.64.030 Violations.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by means of administrative, civil, and/or criminal remedies. Such remedies are cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2017; Ord. 437 § 2, 2016)

 

8.64.040 Cultivation of marijuana as a prohibited use and/or activity.
     Except as specifically allowed under a valid permit issued pursuant to Chapter 17.32 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, marijuana cultivation by any person or entity, including clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in all zones within the city’s jurisdictional limits. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Any cultivation that takes place in violation of any provision of this chapter is unlawful, and is hereby declared a public nuisance. This prohibition includes the cultivation, manufacture, transportation, storage, distribution, sale of recreational marijuana, and associated activities. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any cultivation activity that is otherwise prohibited under California law. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, preclude any landlord from limiting or prohibiting marijuana cultivation by their tenants. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2017; Ord. 437 § 2, 2016)

 

8.64.050 Delivery of marijuana as a prohibited use and/or activity.
     Recreational marijuana delivery by any person or entity, including clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in the city. No permit, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. This prohibition includes the cultivation, manufacture, transportation, storage, distribution, sale of recreational marijuana and associated activities. Any delivery that takes place in violation of any provision of this chapter is unlawful, and is hereby declared a public nuisance. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any delivery activity that is otherwise prohibited under California law. Nothing herein prevents the use of public streets within the city of Lemon Grove by lawful businesses pursuant to state law. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2017; Ord. 437 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 8.70 TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSE
8.70.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to encourage responsible tobacco retailing and discourage violations of tobacco related laws that prohibit the sale or distribution of tobacco products, including all smoking materials as defined in Section 8.70.020, to minors. This chapter is not intended to expand or reduce the degree to which the acts regulated by federal or state law are criminally proscribed or to alter the penalty provided therefore. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.020 Definitions.
     When used in this chapter, the following definitions shall have the meanings given by this section, whether or not these words or phrases are capitalized:

     “Drug paraphernalia” shall have the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11014.5, as that section may be amended from time to time.

     “Electronic smoking device” means an electronic and/or battery-operated device, the use of which may resemble smoking, which can be used to deliver an inhaled dose of nicotine or other substances by delivering a vaporized or heated solution. Electronic smoking device includes any such device, whether manufactured, distributed marketed or sold as an electronic cigarette, an e-cigarette, an electronic cigar, electronic cigarillo, an electronic pipe, an electronic hookah, vaporizer, vape pen, heated tobacco product, or any product name or descriptor, including any component, part or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately. Electronic smoking device does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where that product is marketed and sold solely for such approved use.

     “Electronic smoking device paraphernalia” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juices, tips, atomizers, electronic smoking device batteries, electronic smoking device chargers and any other item specifically designed for the preparations, charging or use of electronic smoking devices.

     “Hearing officer” means the impartial hearing officer designated to serve in this capacity.

     “Itinerant tobacco retailing” means engaging in tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location.

     “License” means a tobacco retail license issued by the city pursuant to this chapter.

     “Licensee” means a person to whom a license has been issued.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has, or can have, sole or shared control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

     “Smoking materials” means tobacco products, electronic smoking device, electronic smoking device paraphernalia, and any other product containing tobacco or nicotine that releases gases, particles or vapors into the air as a result of combustion, heating, electrical ignition or vaporization, when the apparent or usual purpose is human inhalation of the byproducts.

     “Tobacco paraphernalia” includes cigarette papers or wrappers, blunt wraps, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item or instrument designed for the smoking, consumption, use or ingestion of tobacco products.

     “Tobacco product” means: (1) any product containing, made, or derived from tobacco or nicotine that is intended for human consumption, whether smoked, heated, chewed, absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, snorted, sniffed, or ingested by any other means, including, but not limited to: cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, snuff; and (2) any electronic smoking device. (3) Notwithstanding any provision of subsections (1) and (2) to the contrary, “tobacco product” includes any component, part, or accessory of a tobacco product, whether or not sold separately. “Tobacco product” does not include any product that has been approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration for sale as a tobacco cessation product or for other therapeutic purposes where such product is marketed and sold solely for such an approved purpose.

     “Tobacco retailer” means any person who sells, offers for sale, exchanges, or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia without regard to the quantity sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.

     “Tobacco retailing” shall mean selling, offering for sale, exchanging, or offering to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia without regard to the quantity sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.030 Requirement for tobacco retail license.
     A.    It shall be unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retail license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which tobacco retailing is to occur. No tobacco retail license will be issued to an authorized tobacco retailer at any location other than a fixed location. No license will be issued for itinerant tobacco retailing or tobacco retailing from vehicles.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining a tobacco retail license any status or right other than the right to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license, subject to compliance with all other applicable laws, regulations, and ordinances. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of any other provision of applicable law, including, without limitation, any condition or limitation on indoor smoking made applicable to business establishments by Labor Code Section 6404.5.

     C.     No person who is younger than the minimum age established by California law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing without the supervision of a person over the age of twenty-one. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.040 Applications procedure.
     A.    An application for a tobacco retail license shall be submitted to the city in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct a tobacco retailing business and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof. A proprietor proposing to conduct tobacco retailing at more than one location shall submit a separate application for each location.

     B.     All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the city and shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor.

     2.     The business name, address and telephone number of the fixed location for which a tobacco retail license is sought.

     3.     The name and mailing address authorized by each applicant to receive all license-related communications and notices (the “authorized address”). Failure to supply an authorized address shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

     4.     Whether or not any applicant has previously been issued a license pursuant to this chapter, or other permit, license or entitlement issued by the city to operate the business, that is or was at any time suspended or revoked, or whether the applicant has previously had a tobacco retail license issued by another jurisdiction denied, suspended or revoked, and, if so, the dates of such denial, suspension or revocation.

     5.     Such other information as the city manager deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter.

     6.     Any and all additional information required by the city to be included in a tobacco retail license application. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.050 Issuance and renewal of license.
     A.    Upon the receipt of an application for a tobacco retail license and the payment of a tobacco retail license fee, the city shall issue a license unless:

     1.     The application is incomplete or inaccurate.

     2.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at an address that appears on a license that is suspended, has been revoked, or is subject to suspension or revocation proceedings for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if either or both of the following apply:

     a.     The applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating that the applicant has acquired or is acquiring the premises or business in an arm’s length transaction. For the purposes of this subparagraph, an “arm’s length transaction” is defined as sale in good faith and for valuable consideration that reflects the fair market value in the open market between two informed and willing parties, neither under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for the primary purpose of avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter that occurred at the location, is presumed not to be an “arm’s length transaction.”

     b.     It has been more than three years since the most recent license for that location was revoked.

     3.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing by a proprietor for which or whom a suspension is in effect or by a proprietor which or who has had a license revoked, pursuant to this chapter.

     4.     The application seeks an authorization for tobacco retailing that is unlawful pursuant to this chapter, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state or federal law.

     5.     The city has information that the applicant or his or her agents or employees have violated any local, state, or federal tobacco control law at the location for which the license or renewal of the license is sought within the preceding thirty-day period.

     6.     The city has information that the applicant or his or her agent or employee has violated any local, state or federal tobacco control law, including this chapter, within the preceding twelve months.

     7.     The issuance of a tobacco retail license would be in conflict with any other city ordinance.

     B.     Beginning from the effective date of this chapter, all tobacco retailers have until December 31, 2019 to obtain a license. An application to renew such license shall be made no later than thirty days prior, but no earlier than sixty days prior to the expiration of the license. The city has no obligation to issue notification of impending expiration of any license. The applicant shall follow all of the procedures and provide all of the information required by Section 8.70.040. The city shall process the application according to the provisions of this section. A license may be renewed annually by submitting a tobacco retail license application to the city along with payment of the annual tobacco retail licensing fee; provided, however, a tobacco retail license that is suspended, has been revoked, or is subject to suspension or revocation proceedings shall not be renewed pending the final outcome of such suspension or revocation.

     C.     If the information required in the license application pursuant to any subsection of this chapter changes, a new tobacco retail license is required before the business may continue to act as a tobacco retailer. For example, if a proprietor to whom a license has been issued changes business location, that proprietor must apply for a new license prior to acting as a tobacco retailer at the new location. If the business is sold, the new owner must apply for a license for that location before acting as a tobacco retailer.

     D.    A tobacco retail license that is not timely renewed pursuant to this chapter shall be automatically suspended by operation of law. If not renewed, a license shall be automatically revoked six months after the renewal date. Additionally, civil, criminal and/or administrative citations may be issued during this interim period for failure to maintain the appropriate license. To reinstate the paid status of a license that has been suspended due to the failure to timely renew the license or pay the renewal fee, the tobacco retailer must:

     1.     Submit the license renewal application and fee plus a reinstatement fee of ten percent of the license renewal fee; and

     2.     Submit a signed affidavit affirming that he or she has not sold any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia during the period the license was suspended for failure to pay the license renewal fee. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.060 Display of license.
     Each license shall be prominently displayed in a publicly visible location at the licensed premises. Failure to properly display the license will result in the issuance of a citation. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.070 License fees.
     The fee for issuance or renewal of a tobacco retail license shall be established by resolution of the city council and shall be in addition to the city’s business license fee and any other license or permit fee imposed by this code upon the applicant. The tobacco retail license fee shall be paid to the city at the time the license application is submitted. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the cost of administration and enforcement of this chapter, including, for example, issuing a license, administering the license program, tobacco retailer education, tobacco retailer inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, and prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the regulatory program authorized by this chapter. All fees and interest upon proceeds of fees shall be used exclusively to fund the program. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.080 Licenses nontransferable and convey a limited, conditional privilege.
     A tobacco retail license is nontransferable and subject to the provisions of this section. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location within the city’s jurisdictional boundaries identified on the face of the license, subject to compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.090 License violations—Compliance monitoring.
     A.    It is a violation of a tobacco retail license for a tobacco retail licensee or his or her agents or employees to violate any local, state or federal tobacco-related law.

     B.     It is a violation of this chapter for any tobacco retail licensee or any of the licensee’s agents or employees to violate any local, state, or federal law regulating controlled substances or drug paraphernalia including, but not limited to, California Health and Safety Code Section 11364.7, as that section may be amended from time to time.

     C.     In addition to the provisions of this code, compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the San Diego County sheriff’s department. Any peace officer or municipal code compliance official also may enforce this chapter. The San Diego County sheriff’s department shall check compliance of each tobacco retailer at least one time per twelve month period and shall conduct additional compliance checks as warranted. The compliance checks shall be conducted to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is complying with tobacco laws regulating underage sales. The San Diego County sheriff’s department shall use youth decoys and comply with protocols for the compliance checks developed in consultation with the San Diego County department of health and human services and the San Diego district attorney. When appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other tobacco-related laws.

     D.    The city shall not enforce any tobacco related minimum age law against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of a person’s age (hereinafter “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

     1.     The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer; or

     2.     The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check funded in part by the San Diego County department of health and human services or funded in part, either directly or indirectly through sub-contracting, by the California Department of Health Services; or

     3.     The youth decoy has a letter of permission for such compliance check activity from the district attorney’s office. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.100 Suspension or revocation of license.
     A.    In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, and including the provisions of this code, a tobacco retail license may be suspended or revoked if the city finds, after notice to the tobacco retail licensee and opportunity to be heard, that the tobacco retail licensee or his or her agents or employees has or have violated any of the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, violations by a licensee at one location may not be accumulated against other locations of that same tobacco retail licensee, nor may violations accumulated against a prior tobacco retail licensee at a licensed location be accumulated against a new tobacco retail licensee at the same licensed location.

     1.     Upon a finding by the city of a first license violation within any three-year period, the city shall:

     a.     Issue a written warning to the licensee, including providing an educational notice about the nature of the violation; and

     b.     Assess a fine against the licensee for violation of this chapter.

     2.     Upon a finding by the city of a second license violation within any three-year period, the city shall:

     a.     Require the licensee to provide documentation to the city that all employees engaged in the retail sale of tobacco have received training in a city approved program within sixty days after the warning, or such other time as shall be set by the city; and

     b.     Assess an additional fine against the licensee for violation of this chapter.

     3.     Upon the finding by the city of a third license violation within any three-year period, the city may suspend or revoke the license.

     B.     A tobacco retail license shall be revoked if the city finds, after notice and opportunity to be heard, that any one of the conditions listed below exist. The revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new application for a tobacco retail license.

     1.     One or more of the bases for denial of a tobacco retail license under Section 8.70.050 existed at the time the tobacco retail license application was made or at any time before the tobacco retail license was issued.

     2.     The application is incomplete for failure to provide the information required by Section 8.70.040.

     3.     Any information contained in the application, including supplemental information, if any, is found to be false in any material respect.

     4.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is unlawful pursuant to this code, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other local, state or federal law.

     C.     In the event the city suspends or revokes a tobacco retail license, written notice of the suspension or revocation shall be served upon the tobacco retail licensee within five days of the suspension or revocation in a manner prescribed in Section 8.70.040. The notice shall contain:

     1.     A brief statement of the specific grounds for such suspension or revocation;

     2.     A statement that the tobacco retail licensee may appeal the suspension or revocation by submitting an appeal, in writing, in accordance with the provisions of Section 8.70.110, to the city, within ten calendar days of the date of the service of the notice; and

     3.     A statement that the failure to appeal the notice of suspension or revocation will constitute a waiver of all rights to an administrative appeal hearing, and the suspension or revocation will be final. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.110 Denial, suspension and revocation—Appeals.
     A.    Any tobacco retail license applicant or licensee aggrieved by the decision of the city in denying, suspending, or revoking a tobacco retail license, may appeal the decision, by submitting a written appeal to the city clerk within ten calendar days from the date of service of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation. The written appeal shall contain:

     1.     A brief statement of the specific action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contentions of the appellant;

     2.     A brief statement of the relief sought, and the reasons why it is claimed the protested action should be reversed or otherwise set aside;

     3.     The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses; and

     4.     The verification (by declaration under penalty of perjury) of at least one appellant as to the truth of the matters stated in the appeal.

     B.     The appeal hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer.

     C.     Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the city clerk shall transmit said appeal to the hearing officer who shall calendar it for a hearing. The hearing officer shall give the parties at least fifteen calendar days written notice of the time and place of the hearing either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal. Upon good cause, the hearing officer may grant one extension for the date of the hearing not to exceed fifteen days from the original date set for the hearing.

     D.    Only those matters or issues specifically raised by the appellant in the notice of appeal shall be considered in the hearing of the appeal.

     E.     Failure of any person to file a timely appeal in accordance with the provisions of this section shall constitute an irrevocable waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and a final adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof.

     F.     Following the hearing on the appeal by the hearing officer, the decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city manager or his or her designee. A decision of the city manager or his or her designee shall be the final decision of the city.

     G.    During a period of license suspension, the tobacco retail licensee must remove from public view all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia at the address that appears on the suspended or revoked tobacco retail license. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.120 Hearings—Generally.
     A.    At the time set for hearing, the hearing officer shall proceed to hear the testimony of material witnesses, the appellant, and other competent persons, including members of the public, respecting those matters or issues specifically listed by the appellant in the notice of appeal.

     B.     The proceedings at the hearing shall be electronically recorded. Either party may provide a certified shorthand reporter to maintain a record of the proceedings at the party’s own expense.

     C.     The hearing officer may, upon the request of the appellant or upon the request of the city, grant continuances from time to time for good cause shown, or upon his or her own motion. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.130 Conduct of hearing.
     A.    Hearings need not be conducted in accordance to the technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses. Government Code Section 11513, subsections (a), (b) and (c), or as such section may be amended from time to time, shall apply to hearings under this chapter.

     B.     Oral evidence shall be taken only upon oath or affirmation.

     C.     Irrelevant and unduly repetitious evidence shall be excluded.

     D.    Each party shall have these rights, among others:

     1.     To call and examine witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.

     2.     To introduce documentary and physical evidence.

     3.     To cross-examine opposing witnesses on any matter relevant to the issues of the hearing.

     4.     To impeach any witness regardless of which party first called the witness to testify.

     5.     To rebut evidence presented against the party.

     6.     To represent himself, herself, or itself, or to be represented by anyone of his, her, or its choice who is lawfully permitted do so.

     E.     In reaching a decision, official notice may be taken, either before or after submission of the case for decision, of any fact that may be judicially noticed by the courts of this state or that may appear in any of the official records of the city of any of its departments. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.140 Form and contents of decision of hearing officer—Appeal to city manager—Finality of decision.
     A.    If it is shown, by a preponderance of the evidence, that one or more bases exist to deny, suspend, or revoke the tobacco retail license, the hearing officer shall affirm the city’s decision to deny, suspend, or revoke the tobacco retail license. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall contain findings of fact and a determination of the issues presented.

     B.     The decision of the hearing officer shall inform the appellant that the decision may be appealed to the city manager by filing a written appeal with the hearing officer within ten days of receipt of the decision of the hearing officer. The written appeal shall be forwarded to the city manager upon receipt.

     C.     Within fifteen days of receipt of the written appeal, the city manager shall review the record of the hearing and issue a written decision to grant or deny the appeal. A decision of the city manager shall be final. The city manager shall provide appellant with a copy of his or her decision and that the time for judicial review is governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6, or as such section may be amended from time to time. Copies of the decision shall be delivered to the parties personally or sent by certified mail to the address shown on the appeal. The decision shall be final when signed by city manager and served as provided in this section. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.150 Enforcement.
     A.    In addition to any other remedy, any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each day a violation continues.

     B.     Any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action brought by the city attorney. The city may recover attorneys’ fees and costs of suit, including witness fees, in any civil action brought by the city attorney to remedy any violation of this chapter.

     C.     Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances subject to abatement by the city.

     D.    In addition to criminal sanctions and other remedies set forth in this chapter, civil and administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to Chapter 1.24 of this code against any person violating any provision of this chapter. Imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of administrative penalties imposed shall be conducted pursuant to Chapter 1.24 of this municipal code. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

 

8.70.160 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase in this chapter or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, that decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this chapter or any part thereof. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared unconstitutional, or invalid, or ineffective. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2018)

Title 9 PUBLIC WELFARE AND ELECTIONS
Chapter 9.08 ELECTION CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS
Chapter 9.12 CARDROOMS AND GAMBLING
Chapter 9.16 URINATION OR DEFECATION IN PUBLIC
Chapter 9.20 PUBLIC NUDITY
Chapter 9.24 NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
Chapter 9.26 POLICE SERVICES AT PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS
Chapter 9.28 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE
Chapter 9.32 PROHIBITION OF APPLICATION OF GRAFFITI TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND THE DEFACEMENT OF PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
Chapter 9.36 OBSTRUCTING FREE MOVEMENT, SOLICITING, CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Chapter 9.40 CURFEW—MINORS
Chapter 9.44 FIREARMS
Chapter 9.48 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL
Chapter 9.49 POLICE AND FIRE SERVICES AT PARTIES AND EVENTS AND SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITIES CONCERNING THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY MINORS OR JUVENILES
Chapter 9.50 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
Chapter 9.70 FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES ENGAGED IN ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST OR EXHIBITION OF SPEED

Chapter 9.08 ELECTION CAMPAIGN REGULATIONS
9.08.010 Purpose and intent.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to Article XI, Section 7 of the California Constitution, Section 22808 of the California Elections Code, and Section 81013 of the California Government Code. It is the intent of the city council of the city of Lemon Grove in enacting this chapter to supplement the provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974 (California Government Code Sections 81000 et seq.), as amended, and the regulations adopted by the Fair Political Practices Commission (California Code of Regulations, Title 2, Division 6, Sections 18110 through 18997) with regard to making and reporting of campaign Contributions and Expenditures. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of the Political Reform Act or the Fair Political Practices Commission regulations and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of the Political Reform Act and/or the Fair Political Practices Commission regulations shall prevail.

     In enacting this chapter, the city council finds and declares the following:

     A.    Monetary Contributions to political campaigns are a legitimate form of participation in the American political process, but the financial strength of certain individuals or organizations should not permit them to exercise a disproportionate or controlling influence on the election of Candidates. Candidates should perform their duties in an impartial manner, free from bias caused by their own financial interests or the financial interests of persons who have supported them.

     B.     Limiting Campaign Contributions and Expenditures in municipal elections helps ensure equal opportunities for all Candidates, promotes diversity among Candidates, and strengthens the community’s trust that their government is representative.

     C.     Lemon Grove can best preserve its sense of community, safeguard its local democracy, and effectuate its commitment to fair public process by limiting all campaign Contributions and Expenditures and requiring appropriate reporting requirements to ensure these limitations are enforced.

     D.    By enacting this chapter, the city council seeks to: (1) ensure that individuals have a fair and equal opportunity to participate in the municipal elective and governmental processes; (2) reduce the influence of large Campaign contributors with a specific financial stake in matters before city governmental bodies; (3) curtail overall Expenditures in Campaigns; (4) reduce potential for the fundraising advantage of incumbents and thus encourage competition for elective office; (5) improve the disclosure of Contribution sources in reasonable and effective ways; and (6) help maintain public trust in governmental and electoral institutions, and protect the integrity of the City Election process.

     E.     This chapter shall not apply to Contributions given to a Committee organized solely for the purpose of supporting or opposing the qualifications for the ballot or the adoption of one or more city measures. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.020 Definitions.
     The capitalized terms used in this chapter shall have the same definitions as specified in the Political Reform Act of 1974 (Government Code Sections 81000 et seq.) and the Fair Political Practices Commission regulations (California Code of Regulations, Title 2, Division 6, Sections 18110 et seq.), unless otherwise specified in this chapter. When used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be interpreted as follows, unless the text indicates a different meaning:

     A.    “Candidate,” as referred to in this chapter, only applies to Persons seeking an Elective City Office.

     B.     “City Election” means any primary, general, or special election, including recall election, held within the city of Lemon Grove for Elective City Office. Each general or special election is a separate City Election for purposes of this chapter.

     C.     “Committee” shall only mean a Candidate’s Controlled Committee or a Committee formed or primarily to support or oppose a Candidate, or a city general purpose Committee active only in the city, for purposes of all filing requirements in this chapter.

     D.    “Electioneering” means the visible display or audible dissemination of information that advocates for or against any Candidate or measure on the ballot.

     E.     “Elective City Office” means member of the city council, including the mayor.

     F.     “Enforcement Authority” shall mean the special counsel, officer, agent or organization designated by action of the city council to enforce the provisions of this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed as limiting the authority of any law enforcement agency or prosecuting attorney to enforce the provisions of this article under any circumstances where such law enforcement agency or prosecuting attorney otherwise has lawful authority to do so.

     G.    “Independent Committee” shall mean a Committee that receives Contributions or makes Expenditures for the purpose of influencing or attempting to influence a City Election, which is not made with the cooperation, consultation or in concert with, or at the request or suggestion of, any Candidate or his or her Committee, or any of their agents. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.030 Campaign statements and filing fees.
     A.    Campaign Statements. Each Candidate and each Committee shall be required to file those campaign statements required by the Political Reform Act of 1974 in the manner required by the Act. Campaign statements filed with the city clerk shall be a matter of public record. The city clerk shall, within three city business days of the date of filing, post copies of campaign statements online at the city’s website.

     B.     Late Filing of Campaign Statements. If any Person files a campaign statement after any deadline imposed, he or she shall, in addition to any other penalties or remedies established by this chapter, be liable to the city clerk in the amounts as set forth by state guidelines per calendar day until the statement is filed. The city clerk shall deposit any funds received under this section into the general fund of the city to defray the cost of City Elections.

     C.     Filing Fees. A filing fee of twenty-five dollars is established for a Candidate’s nomination papers for City Elective Office. The filing fee shall be paid to the city clerk by each Candidate for a City Elective Office at the time the Candidate’s nomination paper is filed with the city clerk, in addition to the Candidate statement fees determined in February of each odd numbered year. The city clerk shall de-posit all fees received into the general fund. All filing fees and Candidate statement fees are non-refundable. (Government Code Section 10228). (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.040 Campaign contributions—Limitations and disclosures.
     A.    Contributions by Persons to Candidates or Controlled Committees. No Person shall make any Contribution to a Candidate and/or the Candidate’s Controlled Committee, with respect to any single City Election, which will cause the total amount contributed by such Person to the Candidate and the Candidate’s Controlled Committee, when combined, to exceed one thousand dollars in a calendar year.

     B.     Acceptance or Solicitation by Candidates or Controlled Committees. No Candidate or Controlled Committee, including the Candidate’s campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any Contribution from any Person, with respect to any single City Election, which will cause the total amount contributed by such Person to the Candidate and the Candidate’s Controlled Committee, when combined, to exceed one thousand dollars in a calendar year.

     C.     Contributions by Candidates. The provisions of subsections A and B of this section shall not apply to contributions from a Candidate to his or her Controlled Committee nor to the expenditure, by the Candidate, of his or her personal funds on behalf of his or her candidacy.

     D.    Contributions to Committees. Contributions made to any Person or a Committee, and not to a Candidate or Controlled Committee, shall not be considered as Contributions to the Candidate or Controlled Committee, notwithstanding the fact that such Person or Committee supports the Candidate or uses the Contribution to bring about the nomination or election of the Candidate.

     E.     Anonymous Contributions. No Candidate or Controlled Committee, including the Candidate’s campaign treasurer, shall accept anonymous Contributions of one hundred dollars or more. No Person shall make a Contribution or loan for any other Person under an assumed name or under the name of any other Person.

     F.     Extensions of Credit. Extensions of credit for a period of more than thirty days are prohibited. Extensions of credit of more than one thousand dollars annually are prohibited. Provided, however, a Candidate may personally borrow an unlimited amount and such funds shall be considered a Contribution by the Candidate to himself or herself; provided, further, that such transaction is fully disclosed and documented in accordance with applicable law.

     G.    Candidate Loan to Campaign. If a Candidate is loaning the campaign money, such loan is required to be reported on Fair Political Practices Commission (FPPC) campaign filing forms in accordance with the applicable state law.

     H.    Cash Contributions. No Candidate or Controlled Committee, including the Candidate’s campaign treasurer, shall solicit or accept any cash Contribution from any Person totaling one hundred dollars or more. A cash Contribution shall not be deemed received if it is not negotiated or deposited, and is returned to the contributor before the closing date of the campaign statement on which the Contribution would otherwise be reported. If a cash Contribution, other than a late Contribution, as defined by Section 82036 of the Political Reform Act, is negotiated or deposited, it shall not be deemed received if it is refunded within seventy-two hours of receipt. In the case of a late Contribution, as defined by Section 82036 of the Political Reform Act, it shall not be deemed received if it is returned to the Contributor within forty-eight hours of receipt.

     I.      Contributions of One Hundred Dollars or More. All Contributions totaling one hundred dollars or more must be made by check, web portal, or electronic application which accepts Payments that are recordable. Contributions totaling one hundred dollars or more made by money order, cashier’s check, or traveler’s cheque are prohibited and must be returned to the contributor.

     J.      Identification of Contributors. No Contribution shall be deposited into a Candidate or Committee’s City Election campaign account totaling twenty-five dollars or more unless the full name, street address including zip code, are on file with the Candidate or Committee receiving the Contribution. For Contributions totaling one hundred dollars or more, the contributor’s occupation and employer’s name, or if self-employed, the name of the business of the Person making the Contribution, must also be recorded.

     K.    Family Contributions. Contributions by spouses shall be treated as separate contributions and shall not be aggregated. Contributions by children under eighteen years of age shall be treated as contributions attributed equally to each parent or guardian.

     L.     Applicability of Section to Candidate and Committees. The terms of this section are applicable to any Contributions made to a Candidate or Committee hereunder, whether used by such Candidate or Committee to finance a current campaign, to pay deficits incurred in prior campaigns or otherwise.

     M.    Adjustment for Cost of Living. The Campaign Contribution limits and Contribution acceptance and solicitation limits specified in subsections A and B of this section, shall be adjusted in February of each odd numbered year commencing in 2013 for changes in the Consumer Price Index (CPI) over the previous two-year period. The city clerk shall use the annual percent change in the CPI for All Urban Consumers (CPI-U) for the San Diego Metropolitan Area to determine the appropriate rate of increase or decrease. Adjustments made pursuant to this subsection shall be rounded to the nearest five dollars or other comparable cost of living index chosen by the city council. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.050 Identification of expenditures by independent committees.
     Independent Committees which make Expenditures for or against a Candidate shall indicate clearly on any Independent Expenditure material published, displayed, or broadcast the name of the Independent Committee and the fact that the material was paid for by an Independent Committee, and the true name of any Person on whose behalf the Independent Expenditure is made, if made as the agent or intermediary of another. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.060 Election campaign accounts.
     A.    City Election Campaign Account. Each Candidates’ campaign treasurer and every Committee, whether composed of the Candidate alone, another single individual, or otherwise, that receives or expends more than two thousand dollars, shall open only one checking account at a state or federally chartered bank, credit union, or savings and loan association. The account shall be identified as the City Election campaign account. The account number shall be provided to the city clerk in writing within ten days of the opening of such account. Any Committee that receives or expends more than two thousand dollars shall file with the city clerk a Statement of Organization Form (FPPC Form 410) not later than ten days following the opening of the City Election campaign account.

     B.     Deposits of Contributions. All campaign Contributions accepted by a campaign treasurer or Committee shall be deposited within five days of receipt into the Election campaign account by the campaign treasurer, Committee or authorized agent.

     C.     Funds in the Election campaign account shall not be considered for any purpose to be personal funds of a Candidate, campaign treasurer, or any other Person.

     D.    Surplus funds shall be disbursed according to the guidelines provided by the Political Reform Act and reported accurately.

     E.     Retention of Records. The Candidate, Committee or authorized agent thereof shall retain all campaign records for a period of five years, if unsuccessful, and indefinitely, if successful, after the election. This includes all receipts, and bank records. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.070 Enforcement Authority.
     A.    The Enforcement Authority appointed by the city council shall enforce the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Any Person who believes that a violation of any portion of this chapter has occurred may file a complaint with the Enforcement Authority by depositing such complaint in the office of the city clerk. The city clerk shall forward the complaint to the Enforcement Authority within three working days. If the Enforcement Authority determines that there is reason to believe a violation of this chapter has occurred, it shall make an investigation. Whenever the Enforcement Authority has reason to believe a willful violation of this chapter has occurred or is about to occur, it may institute such legal action at such time as it deems necessary to prevent further violations.

     C.     The Enforcement Authority shall have such investigative powers as are necessary for the performance of the duties prescribed in this chapter and may demand records of campaign Contributions and Expenditures at any time.

     D.    The Enforcement Authority shall determine whether required statements and declarations have been filed as required, and, if so, whether they conform with the requirements of this chapter.

     E.     The Enforcement Authority may enforce this chapter using civil, administrative, or criminal remedies in its discretion. The Enforcement Authority may seek administrative remedies pursuant to Chapter 1.24 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.080 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Any Person who knowingly violates any provision of this chapter may be prosecuted, either as an infraction or as a misdemeanor, at the discretion of the prosecutor. For purposes of this chapter, the district attorney of the county is the civil and criminal prosecutor. In addition to any other penalty provided by law, any willful or knowing violation of this chapter, done with intent to mislead or deceive, shall be punishable by a fine of not less than one thousand dollars per occurrence payable to the city clerk, who will deposit any funds received under this section into the general fund of the city to defray the costs of City Elections. The chairperson and/or treasurer of any Committee shall be both civil and criminally responsible for any violation of this Committee. These violations and penalties are in addition to any pursued by the state.

     B.     Any Person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be liable for civil and criminal actions brought by the Enforcement Authority and shall be liable for the reasonable attorneys’ fees and costs incurred by the Special Counsel in any civil proceeding filed to enforce these provisions.

     C.     All fines shall be deposited into the general fund of the city to defray the cost of City Elections.8.060 (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.090 Rules of construction.
     This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purposes. No error, irregularity, informality, neglect or omission of any officer in any procedure taken under this chapter which does not directly affect the jurisdiction of the city to control campaign Contributions and Expenditures shall avoid the effect of this chapter. This chapter shall be interpreted in a manner consistent with the Federal Constitution, State Constitution, and the California Political Reform Act (Government Code Section 81000 et seq.) including its implementing regulations, as amended. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

9.08.100 Election signs.
     In conjunction with Chapter 18.12 (Signs) of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, this section is specific to election signs.

     A.    All Candidates and Committees are required to obtain a sign permit at no cost to place signs of any kind within the city boundaries. The sign permit will provide the candidate with a list of city-approved locations to place signs, and a city staff contact and phone number.

     B.     All signs will follow the state guidelines on reporting “Paid for by Committee Name” at minimum and Committee Number issued by the Secretary of State will be included on all signs and mailing materials by all Candidates and Committees within the city boundaries.

     C.     Timing, Removal. Placement of signs shall be made no earlier than sixty days prior to the election. All signs shall be removed within five days after the election. If any sign is not removed within the specified time period, the city may remove and destroy or otherwise dispose of the sign without liability whatsoever to the city. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

 

 

9.08.110 Electioneering.
     It is unlawful for any Person to participate in Electioneering as a Candidate, for a Candidate, Committee or any other election campaign on city-owned property or at a city-hosted or city-sponsored event. This includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:

     A.    A display of a Candidate’s name, likeness, or logo.

     B.     A display of a ballot measure’s number, title, subject, or logo.

     C.     Buttons, hats, pencils, pens, shirts, signs, or stickers containing Electioneering information.

     D.    Dissemination of audible Electioneering information.

     E.     At vote by mail ballot drop boxes, loitering near or disseminating visible or audible Electioneering information. (Ord. 453 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 9.12 CARDROOMS AND GAMBLING
9.12.010 Gambling implements prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city to exhibit or expose to view any barred or barricaded house or room, or in any place built or protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to police officers, when three or more persons are present, any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan table or layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever; or for any person to visit or resort to any such barred or barricaded house or room or other place in the city, built or protected in a manner to make it difficult of access or ingress to peace officers, where any cards, dice, dominoes, fan-tan table or layout, or any such layout, or any gambling implements whatsoever are exhibited or exposed to view when three or more persons are present; or for any person in the city to become a visitor at any place for the practice of gambling in the city. (Prior code § 37.101)

 

9.12.020 Letting premises for gambling prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise knowingly to let or underlet, or transfer the possession of any premises for use by any person, or to permit any house, room, apartment or place owned by him or her or under his or her charge or control in the city to be used, in whole or in part, as a gambling house or place for playing, conducting, dealing, or carrying on any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value. (Prior code § 37.102)

 

9.12.030 Conducting houses for gambling prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, to keep, conduct or maintain within the city any house, room, apartment, or place used in whole or in part as a gambling house or a place where any game, not mentioned in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, is played, conducted, dealt, or carried on with cards, dice or other device for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value. (Prior code § 37.103)

 

9.12.040 Poker kitty prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city to conduct, carry on, deal, play or bet at or against any game of poker or draw poker for money, checks, chips, credit or anything of value, when such game of poker or draw poker is played with a kitty or takeout, or rake-off, or with, in connection with any device, scheme, or arrangement whereby a portion of the gains, losses, bets, or stakes of said game, or of any of the players thereat, is paid to, or taken out, or laid aside for the use or benefit of any person owning, managing, conducting, controlling, or having to control, conduct or management of the room, or apartment or place wherein or whereat such game of poker or draw poker is played, dealt, conducted or carried on. (Prior code § 37.104)

 

9.12.050 Betting on games prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person within the city to conduct, carry on, play at or bet upon any game played with cards, dice or other instruments for money or for anything of value whatsoever, or to bet with money or anything of value whatsoever at or upon the result of any of said games. (Ord. 190, 1991)

Chapter 9.16 URINATION OR DEFECATION IN PUBLIC
9.16.010 Prohibited.
     No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, sidewalk, alley, plaza, park, beach, public building or public-maintained facility, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This section shall not apply to urination or defecation which is done in any restroom or other facility designed for the disposal of human waste. (Ord. 60 § 1, 1980)

Chapter 9.20 PUBLIC NUDITY
9.20.010 Purpose.
     The presence of persons who are nude and exposed to public view in or on public rights-of-way, public parks, or any other public land, or in or on any private property open to public view from any public right-of-way, public beach, public park, or other public land, is offensive to members of the general public unwillingly exposed to such persons. Nudity, if it is to be permitted to be exposed to the public view, should be confined to a defined area. The provisions of this chapter are enacted for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, morals and general welfare of all persons of the city. (Prior code § 32.1001)

 

9.20.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    “Nude” means devoid of an opaque covering which covers the genitals, vulva, pubis, pubic symphysis, pubic hair, buttocks, natal cleft, perineum, anus, anal region, or pubic hair region of any person, or any portion of the breast at or below the upper edge of the areola thereof of any female person.

     B.     “Public place” means any public beach, park, street or waters adjacent thereto, or any place open to the public or exposed to public view, including specifically a view from any private residence or any portion of the real property in the immediate vicinity of such private residence, whether such place is publicly or privately owned. (Prior code §§ 32.1002, 32.1003)

 

9.20.030 Public nudity prohibited—Penalty.
     It is declared a public nuisance and unlawful for any person to appear, sunbathe, bathe, walk, disrobe or otherwise be nude in any public place. (Ord. 255 § 2, 1996; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.20.040 Chapter not to apply.
     A.    This chapter shall not apply to persons under the age of ten years.

     B.     This chapter shall not apply to persons engaged in a live theatrical performance, in a theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is predominantly devoted to theatrical performances.

     C.     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit any act or acts which are expressly authorized or prohibited by the Penal Code of the state. (Prior code §§ 32.1005, 32.1006, 32.1007)

Chapter 9.24 NOISE ABATEMENT AND CONTROL
Article I. General Provisions
9.24.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city council finds and declares that:

     A.    Inadequately controlled noise presents a growing danger to the health and welfare of the residents of the city;

     B.     The making and creating of disturbing, excessive, offensive or unusually loud noises within the jurisdictional limits of the city is a condition which has persisted and the level and frequency of occurrence of such noises continue to increase;

     C.     The making, creation or continuance of such excessive noises which are prolonged or unusual in their time, place, and use affect and are a detriment to the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, and prosperity of the residents of the city;

     D.    Every person is entitled to an environment in which the noise is not detrimental to his or her life, health, and enjoyment of property; and

     E.     The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this chapter is declared to be a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this chapter are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare, prosperity, peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. (Prior code § 36.401)

 

9.24.020 Definitions.
     Whenever the following words and phrases are used in this chapter, unless otherwise defined herein, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Average sound level” means a sound level typical of the sound levels at a certain place during a given period of time, averaged by the general rule of combination for sound levels, said general rule being set forth in American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meters § 1.4-1971. “Average sound level” also means equivalent continuous sound level.

     B.     “Commercial purpose” means and includes the use, operation or maintenance of any sound amplifying equipment for the purpose of advertising any business, or any goods, or any services, or for the purpose of attracting the attention of the public to, or advertising for, or soliciting patronage of customers to or for any performance, show, entertainment, exhibition, exhibition, or event, or for the purpose of demonstrating sound equipment.

     C.     “Construction equipment” means any tools, machinery or equipment used in connection with construction operations, including all types of special construction equipment as defined in the pertinent sections of the California Vehicle Code when used in the construction process on any construction site, regardless of whether such construction site be located on-highway or off-highway.

     D.    “Container” means any receptacle, regardless of contents, manufactured from wood, metal, plastic paper, or any other material, including, but not limited to, any barrel, basket, box, crate, tub, bottle, can or refuse container.

     E.     “Decibel” means a unit of measure of sound (noise) level.

     F.     “Disturbing, excessive or offensive noise” means:

     1.     Any sound or noise which constitutes a nuisance involving discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area;

     2.     Any sound or noise conflicting with criteria standards, or levels as set forth in this chapter for permissible noises;

     3.     Any sound or noise conflicting with criteria standards or levels established for Federal or State Government which are applicable in the county.

     G.    “Emergency work” means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service.

     H.    “Fixed source” means a machine or device capable of creating a noise level at the property upon which it is regularly located, including, but not limited to: Industrial and commercial process machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, air-conditioning apparatus or refrigeration machines.

     I.      “Motor vehicles” means any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the California Vehicle Code and shall specifically include, but not be limited to, mini-bikes and go-carts.

     J.      “Noise level” means sound level, and the terms may be used interchangeably herein.

     K.    “Noncommercial purpose” means the use, operation, or maintenance of any sound equipment for other than a commercial purpose. “Noncommercial purpose” means and includes, but shall not be limited to, philanthropic, political, patriotic, and charitable purposes.

     L.     “Nonstationary source” means a machine or device capable of being moved from place to place for occasional or temporary use at a given location, including, but not limited to, powered and manual construction equipment not used in connection with construction operations, powered lawn mowers, chain saws and soil tillers, but excluding motor vehicles.

     M.    “Person” means a person, firm, association, co-partnership, joint venture, corporation, or any entity, public or private.

     N.    “Powered model vehicles” means but shall not be limited to, airborne, waterborne, or landborne vehicles such as model airplanes, model boats, and model vehicles of any type or size which are not designed for carrying persons or property and which can be propelled in any form other than manpower or windpower.

     O.    “Sound amplifying equipment” means any machine or device, mobile or stationary, used to amplify music, the human voice, or any sound.

     P.     “Sound level” (noise level) means in decibels the quantity measured using the frequency weighting-A of a sound level meter as defined in subsection Q of this section.

     Q.    “Sound level meter” means an instrument for the measurement of sound which meets or exceeds the specifications contained in the most current edition of the American National Standard Specifications for Sound Level Meter.

     R.     “Sound truck” means any motor vehicle or other vehicle, regardless of motive power, whether in motion or stationary, having mounted thereon, built-in, or attached thereto any sound amplifying equipment other than a car radio or television.

     S.     Supplementary Definitions of Technical Terms. Definitions of technical terms not defined in this chapter shall be obtained from the most current edition of the American National Standard, Acoustical Terminology. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.24.030 Exemptions.
     A.    Emergency Work. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any emergency work as defined in Section 9.24.020(H); provided, that:

     1.     The director of community development has been notified in advance, if possible, or as soon as practical after said emergency; and

     2.     Any vehicle, device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to or connected with emergency work, is designed, modified, or equipped to reduce sounds produced to the lowest possible level consistent with effective operation of such vehicle, device, apparatus or equipment.

     B.     Sporting, Entertainment, Public Events. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     Those reasonable sounds emanating from authorized school bands, school athletic and school entertainment events;

     2.     Sporting, entertainment and public events which are conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the city, for which noise has been a consideration.

     3.     Those reasonable sounds emanating from a sporting, entertainment, or public event; provided, however, it is unlawful to exceed those levels set forth in Section 9.24.080 when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, unless a variance has been granted allowing sounds in excess of said levels. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.24.040 Display of permits.
     Any permit, certificate, or other notice required herein shall be displayed or maintained on the premises designated thereon. (Prior code § 36.423)

 

9.24.050 Enforcement.
     The community development director or his designee shall have primary responsibility for the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.24.060 Violations—Additional remedies.
     As an additional remedy, the operation or maintenance of any device, instrument, vehicle, machinery, or other item in violation of any provision of this chapter for which operation or maintenance causes discomfort or annoyance to persons of normal sensitivity, or which endangers the comfort, repose, health, or peace of residents in the area, shall be deemed and is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement summarily by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Prior code § 36.420)

 

Article II. Sound Level Requirements
9.24.070 Measurement.
     A.    Any sound or noise level measurement made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting and slow response pursuant to applicable manufacturer’s instructions; except, that for sounds of a duration of two seconds or less, the fast response shall be used and the average level during the course of the occurrence of the sound reported.

     B.     The sound level meter shall be appropriately calibrated and adjusted as necessary by means of an acoustical calibrator of the coupler-type to assure meter accuracy within the tolerances set forth in the most current standards for sound level meters.

     C.     For outside measurements, the microphone shall be not less than four feet above the ground, at least four feet distant from walls or other large reflecting surfaces, and shall be protected from the effects of wind noises by the use of appropriate wind screens, and the location selected shall be at any point on the affected property. In cases when the microphone must be located within ten feet of walls or similar large reflecting surfaces, the actual measured distances and orientation of sources, microphone and reflecting surfaces shall be noted and recorded. In no case shall a noise measurement be taken within five feet of the noise source.

     D.    For inside measurements, the microphone shall be at least three feet distant from any wall, ceiling or partition, and the average measurement of at least three microphone positions throughout the room shall be determined. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code § 36.403)

 

9.24.080 Fixed and nonstationary sources.
     A.    Unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, any single or combination of fixed source or nonstationary source type of equipment or machinery, except construction equipment used in connection with construction operations, that individually or collectively constitutes an identifiable sound source, in such a manner as to cause the average sound level at any point on or beyond the boundaries of the property on which the sound is produced to exceed by five decibels the noise level limits set forth in subsection B of this section, plus allowances for time duration in subsection C of this section.

     B.     Zone Ambient Noise Level Limits. “Noise level limit” or “sound level limit” referred to in this section means that noise level limit as determined from the table below:

 

Zone

Time

Avg.
Sound
Level

 

 

 

RL, RL/M, RM

7 AM to 7 PM

50

 

7 PM to 10 PM

45

 

10 PM to 7 AM

40

 

 

 

RM/H, RP

7 AM to 7 PM

60

 

7 PM to 10 PM

55

 

10 PM to 7 AM

50

 

 

 

All Commercial

 

 

Zones

7 AM to 7 PM

60

 

7 PM to 10  PM

55

 

10 PM to 7 AM

55

 

 

 

LI

Anytime

70

 

     The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two zoning districts shall be the arithmetic mean of the respective limits for the two districts. Fixed location public utility distribution or transmission facilities located on adjacent to a property line shall be subject to noise level limits of this section, measured at or beyond six feet from the boundary of the easement upon which the equipment is located.

     C.     Time Duration Correction Table. The time duration allowances set forth in the table below shall apply to those noise level limits set forth in subsection B of this section.

 

Allowances for Sound Levels Lasting Less Than an Hour

Duration

Allowable Decibels

Up to 30 minutes per hour (50%)

+3

Up to 15 minutes per hour (25%)

+6

Up to 10 minutes per hour (16%)

+8

Up to 5 minutes per hour (8%)

+11

Up to 2 minutes per hour (3%)

+15

 

     D.    Permissible construction noise level limits shall be governed by Section 9.24.120. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code § 36.404)

 

9.24.090 Motor vehicles.
     A.    Repairs of Motor Vehicles. It is unlawful for any person within the city to repair, rebuild, or test any motor vehicle in such a manner as to cause disturbing, excessive, or offensive noises as defined in Section 9.24.020(F).

     B.     On-highway. Violations for exceeding applicable noise level limits as to persons operating motor vehicles on a public street or highway in the city shall be prosecuted under applicable California Vehicle Code provisions and under Federal Regulation adopted pursuant to 42 U.S.C. 4905 (a) (1) (A), (B), and (C) (ii), (iii) for which enforcement responsibility is delegated to local governmental agencies.

     C.     Off-highway. Except as otherwise provided for in this chapter, it is unlawful to operate any motor vehicle of any type on any site other than on a public street or highway as defined in the California Vehicle Code in a manner so as to cause noise in excess of:

     1.     Those noise levels permitted for on-highway motor vehicles as specified in the table “35 miles per hour or less speed limits” contained in Section 23130 of the California Vehicle Code and as corrected for distances set forth below:

 

Corrections

 

Distance
(Feet)

Correction
(Decibels)

 

 

25

-6

28

-5

32

-4

35

-3

40

-2

45

-1

50 (Preferred Distance)

0

56

+1

63

+2

70

+3

80

+4

90

+5

100

+6

 

A measured noise level thus calibrated to the lane-to-microphone distance of fifty feet shall be deemed in violation of this section if it exceeds the applicable noise-level limit specified by this section.

     2.     Or in excess of those sound levels permitted in Section 9.24.080.

     D.    Emergency Vehicles. Nothing in this section shall apply to authorized emergency vehicles when being used in emergency situations.

     E.     Urban Transit Buses. Buses as defined in the California Vehicle Code shall at all times comply with the requirements of this section. (Prior code § 36.405)

 

9.24.100 Powered model vehicles.
     It is unlawful for any person to operate any powered model vehicle except between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m. and then only in such a manner so as not to emit noise in excess of those levels set forth in Section 9.24.080; however, if powered model vehicles are operated in public parks at a point more than one hundred feet from the property line, the noise level shall be determined at a distance of one hundred feet from the noise source instead of at the property line, and noises from powered model vehicles, measured at that distance in excess of the noise limits specified in Section 9.24.080, are prohibited. (Prior code § 36.406)

 

9.24.110 Refuse vehicles.
     No person shall operate, or permit to be operated, a refuse compacting, processing, or collection vehicle within the city which, when compacting, creates a sound level in excess of eighty decibels when measured at a distance of fifty feet from any point of the compacting vehicle, unless a variance has been applied for and granted pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 36.407)

 

9.24.120 Construction equipment.
     A.    Except for emergency work, it is unlawful for any person, including the city, to operate any single or combination of powered construction equipment at any construction site, except as outlined below:

     1.     It is unlawful for any person, including the city, to operate any single or combination of powered construction equipment at any construction site on Sundays on any day celebrating official state holidays. Notwithstanding the above, a person may operate powered construction equipment on the above-specified days between the hours of ten a.m. and five p.m. in compliance with subdivision 2 of this subsection at his residence or for the purpose of constructing a residence for him or herself, provided such operation of powered construction is not carried on for profit or livelihood. In addition, it is unlawful for any person to operate any single or combination of powered construction equipment at any construction site on Mondays through Saturdays except between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.

     2.     No such equipment, or combination of equipment, regardless of age or date of acquisition, shall be operated so as to cause noise at a level in excess of seventy-five decibels for more than eight hours during any twenty-four hour period when measured at or within the property lines of any property which is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes. These sound levels shall be corrected for time duration in accordance with the following table:

 

Total Duration

in 24 Hours

Decibel Level Allowance

Total Decibel Level

 

 

 

Up to 15 minutes

+15

90

Up to 30 minutes

+12

87

Up to 1 hour

+9

84

Up to 2 hours

+6

81

Up to 4 hours

+3

78

Up to 8 hours

0

75

 

     B.     In the event that lower noise limit standards are established for construction equipment pursuant to state or federal law, said lower limits shall be used as a basis for revising and amending the noise level limits specified in subsection A(2) of this section. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.24.130 Containers and construction material.
     It is unlawful for any person to handle or transport, or cause to be handled or transported, in any public place, any container or any construction material in such a way as to create a disturbing, excessive, or offensive noise as defined under Section 9.24.020(F). (Prior code § 36.411)

 

9.24.140 Signal device for food trucks.
     No person shall operate, or cause to have operated or used, any sound signal device, other than sound-amplification equipment, attached to a motor vehicle wagon or manually propelled cart from which food or any other items are sold which emits a sound signal more frequently than once every ten minutes in any one street block and with a duration of more than ten seconds for any single emission. The sound level of this sound signal shall not exceed ninety decibels at fifty feet. (Prior code § 36.412)

 

9.24.150 Multiple-family dwelling units.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to create, maintain, or cause to be maintained, any sound within the interior of any multiple-family dwelling unit which causes the average sound level of forty-five decibels to be exceeded in any other dwelling unit for a cumulative period of five minutes in any one hour, or fifty decibels for a cumulative period of one minute in any one hour, or fifty-five decibels at no time between the hours of ten p.m. of one day and seven a.m. of the following day. The monitoring procedures outlined under Section 9.24.070 shall be followed in enforcing this section. (Prior code § 36.413)

 

Article III. General Noise Regulations
9.24.160 Disturbing, excessive or offensive noises—Prohibited—Characteristics and conditions.
     A.    In the absence of objective measurement by use of a sound level, meter, additionally it is unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued, within the limits of the city any disturbing, excessive or offensive noise which causes discomfort or annoyance to reasonable persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

     B.     The characteristics and conditions which should be considered in determining whether a violation of the provisions of this section and Section 9.24.170 exists, include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     The level of the noise;

     2.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

     3.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

     4.     The level of the background noise;

     5.     The proximity of the noise to sleeping facilities;

     6.     The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

     7.     The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

     8.     The time of day or night the noise occurs;

     9.     The duration of the noise;

     10.   Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, or constant; and

     11.   Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. (Prior code § 36.414(a))

 

9.24.170 Disturbing, excessive or offensive noises—Certain acts enumerated.
     The following acts, among others, are declared to be disturbing, excessive and offensive noises in violation of this section and Section 9.24.160, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely:

     A.    Horns, Signaling Devices, etc. Violations for disturbing, excessive or offensive noises associated with the use or operation of horns, signaling devices, etc., on automobiles, motorcycles, or any other vehicle, except as provided in Section 9.24.140, shall be prosecuted under applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code.

     B.     Radios, Television Sets, Phonographs, and Similar Devices.

     1.     Uses Restricted. The use, operation, or permitting to be played, used or operated, any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, television set, or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area are declared to be disturbing, excessive or offensive noises.

     2.     Prima Facie Violations. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, television set, machine or similar device between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of fifty feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located, shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section and Section 9.24.160.

     C.     Loudspeaking Amplifiers for Advertising. The use, operation, or the permitting to be played, used or operated of any sound production or reproduction device or machine, including, but not limited to, radio receiving sets, phonographs, musical instruments, loudspeakers, and sound amplifiers, for commercial or business advertising purposes in, upon, over, or across any street, alley, sidewalk, park or public property in such a manner as to violate the provisions of this chapter is prohibited. This provision shall not be applicable to sound amplifying equipment mounted on any sound truck or vehicle for commercial or noncommercial purposes where the owner or operator complies with the following requirements:

     1.     The only sounds permitted are music or human speech.

     2.     Operations are permitted between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m., or after nine p.m. during public events and affairs of interest to the general public.

     3.     Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour, except when said truck is stopped by traffic the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each stop.

     4.     Sound shall not be issued within one hundred yards of hospitals, schools, churches, or courthouses.

     5.     The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous.

     6.     The volume of sound shall be controlled so that said volume is not raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility and so that the volume of sound shall not exceed a sound level of sixty-five decibels (on the A scale) at a distance of fifty feet from the sound amplifying equipment as measured by a sound level meter which meets the American National Standard ANSI S1.4-1971, or the latest revision thereof.

     7.     No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated unless the axis of the center of any sound reproducing equipment used is parallel to the direction of travel of the sound truck; provided, however, that any sound reproducing equipment may be so placed upon said sound truck as to not vary more than fifteen degrees from either side of the axis of the center of the direction of travel.

     8.     No sound truck with its amplifying device in operation shall be driven on the same street past the same point more than twice in a period of one hour.

     D.    Yelling, Shouting, etc. Disturbing or raucous yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity within the area for whatever reason, is prohibited.

     E.     Hawkers and Peddlers. The shouting or crying out of any peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of a neighborhood or persons of normal sensitivity is prohibited. This provision shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by outcry of merchandise, food and beverages at sporting events, parades, fairs, celebrations, festivals, circuses, carnivals and other similar special events for public entertainment.

     F.     Drums, Other Instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device of any kind for the purpose of attracting attention by the creation of noise within the city is prohibited. This provision shall not apply to any person who is a participant in a school band or legally authorized parade or who has been otherwise duly authorized by the county to engage in such conduct.

     G.    Animals and Fowl. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained, upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by any person of any animal or fowl which, by any frequent or long continued noise, causes annoyance or discomfort to persons of normal sensitivity in the vicinity is prohibited; provided, however, that nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to apply to occasional noises emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies, pounds, farm and/or agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals or fowl is permitted. The written affirmation by two persons having separate residences that a violation of this section disturbs the peace and quiet of said persons shall be a prima facie evidence of a violation of this section and Section 9.24.160.

     H.    Schools, Courts, Churches, Hospitals. The creation of any noise on any street, sidewalk or public place adjacent to any school, institution of learning (except recreational areas of schools), church, court or library, while the same are in use; or adjacent to a hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility, which noise interferes with the workings of such institution or which disturbs or annoys patients in the hospital, rest home, or long-term medical or mental care facility; provided, conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets, sidewalks or public places indicating the presence of a school, institution of learning, church, court, library, rest home or long-term medical or mental care facility, is prohibited.

     I.      Steam Whistles. The operation, use, or causing to be operated or used, any steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler is prohibited, except to give notice of the time to start or stop work or as a sound signal of imminent danger.

     J.      Engines and Motor Vehicles. Any disturbing or raucous noises caused off streets or highways by racing or accelerating the engine of any motor vehicle while moving or not moving, by the wilful backfiring of any engine and exhaust from the engine tailpipe or muffler, or from the screeching of tires, is prohibited. (Prior code § 36.414(b))

 

9.24.180 Burglar alarms.
     A.    Any building burglar alarm must have an automatic cutoff, capable of terminating its operation within thirty minutes of the time it is activated, unless such an alarm is located within an agricultural or estate zone. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any member of the sheriff’s department shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm during the period of its activation.

     B.     No owner of a motor vehicle shall have in operation an audible burglar alarm therein, unless such burglar alarm is capable of terminating its operation within fifteen minutes of the time it is activated. Notwithstanding the requirements of this provision, any member of the sheriff’s department shall have the right to take such steps as may be reasonable and necessary to disconnect any such alarm installed on a motor vehicle at any time during the period of its activation.

     C.     Any motor vehicle upon which a burglar alarm has been installed shall, when parked on a public highway or parking lot open to the public, prominently display the telephone number at which communication may be made with the owner of such motor vehicle. (Prior code § 36.415)

Chapter 9.26 POLICE SERVICES AT PARTIES, GATHERINGS OR EVENTS
9.26.010 Purpose and intent.
     The city finds and determines that the control of parties, gatherings or events on private property is necessary when such continued activity is determined to be a threat to the peace, health, safety or general welfare of the public. Police officers have been required to make several return trips to a location of a party, gathering or event in order to disperse uncooperative participants. The return of police officers to a location constitutes a drain of manpower and resources, often leaving other areas of the city without minimal levels of police protection. These conditions create a significant hazard to the safety of the police officers and to the public in general. (Ord. 200, 1991)

 

9.26.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Cost of second and subsequent responses” includes the salaries of the police officers, at the salary then in effect for each classification of each individual officers, for the amount of time actually spent responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event; appropriate overhead; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured officers, and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property. The cost shall not exceed five hundred dollars for a single incident.

     “Party” includes a gathering or event where a group of persons have assembled or are assembling on private property for a social occasion or social activity which may constitute a disturbance of the peace in violation of California Penal Code, Section 415.

     “Responsible person” is the person who owns the property where the party, gathering or event takes place and/or the person in charge of the premises and/or the person who organized the party, gathering or event. If the person responsible for the event is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor will jointly and severely be liable for the costs incurred for second and subsequent city responses.

     “Special security assignment” is the assignment of police officers and services during a second call to a location after the distribution of a written warning that the party, gathering or event violates the law. (Ord. 200, 1991)

 

9.26.030 First response.
     A.    During a first response to a disturbance of the peace occurring on private property, the responding officer(s) may among other things, deliver to the responsible person or persons a “Notice of violation: First response” which shall contain a message substantially as follows:

     This violation is given to you as a result of a first response of the City of Lemon Grove to a disturbance of the peace occurring in violation of Penal Code Section 415. You will be charged all city personnel and equipment expenses incurred as a result of any second or subsequent responses to this location.

     B.     The “Notice of violation: First response” may contain other information as deemed necessary by the city manager to accomplish the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 200, 1991)

 

9.26.040 Subsequent responses.
     A.    If the city is required to respond a second time to a disturbance of the peace and a “Notice of violation: First response” has been delivered to the responsible person or persons, then the city shall commence computing the response costs.

     B.     A statement of the charges incurred by the city in its second and subsequent responses shall be prepared and delivered to the responsible person or persons.

     C.     The amount of the charge shall be deemed a debt to the city of the responsible person or persons who shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, including reasonable attorney’s fees. (Ord. 200, 1991)

 

9.26.050 Billing.
     The sheriff’s captain shall notify the director of finance in writing, following the rendering of police services, the name and address of the person responsible for the cost thereof, and such other information as may be required. The director of finance shall thereafter cause the appropriate billings to be made. (Ord. 200, 1991)

 

9.26.060 Confidentiality.
     Information furnished and served pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to the public inspection and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter or pursuant to a court order. (Ord. 200, 1991)

Chapter 9.28 OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE
9.28.010 Obstruction of public ways.
     No person shall stand or sit on any crosswalk, sidewalk, or any other public street, highway, public park or arcade, shopping center or other property opened or dedicated to public use or to which the public is invited, so as in any manner to obstruct the free use thereof by the public or passage therein or thereon by pedestrians, or to hinder, molest or annoy any person or persons in passing along the same, or to obstruct the entrance of any public hall, public building or public park. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

9.28.020 Private property.
     No person shall camp, lodge, sleep or tarry overnight in or on any private property without permission of the owner or lessee of such property. (Prior code § 73.109)

 

9.28.030 Parking on highways and streets.
     No person shall sleep or recline in an automobile parked upon any public street or highway within the city for any period greater than two hours continuously. (Prior code § 73.110)

Chapter 9.32 PROHIBITION OF APPLICATION OF GRAFFITI TO PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY, AND THE DEFACEMENT OF PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY
Note
*     Prior history: Ord. 47.

 

9.32.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council through the adoption of this chapter, to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public and private property from acts of vandalism and defacement; especially, but not limited to, graffiti on privately and publicly owned property, which are inimical and destructive of the rights and values of private property owners as well as the total community. The city recognizes that graffiti, in particular, constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated to avoid detrimental impact city and its residents. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply in this chapter:

     “Aerosol paint container” means any aerosol container, regardless of the material from which it is made, which is adapted or made for the purpose of spraying paint or other substance capable of defacing property.

     “Deface” means the intentional altering of the physical shape or physical appearance of property.

     “Etching tool” means any scribe, engraving pen, glass gutter, etching pen, chemical pen or similar implement which is adapted to or made for the purpose of leaving permanent marks on glass, plastic or similar materials.

     “Felt tip marker” means any marker or similar implement with a tip which, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth inch.

     “Graffiti” includes, but is not limited to, any inscription, word, figure or design that is marked, etched, scratched, drawn, painted, pasted or otherwise affixed to or on any surface, regardless of the nature of the material of that structural component, to the extent that same was not authorized in advance by the owner thereof, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed by the council to be a public nuisance.

     “Graffiti implement” means an aerosol paint container, a felt marker or an etching tool.

     “Hearing officer” means the city manager or his/her designee.

     “Minor” means a person under eighteen years of age.

     “Police chief” means the captain or commanding officer of the Lemon Grove sub station of the county of San Diego sheriff’s department.

     “Property owner” means any person who owns, controls or possesses property or who has primary responsibility for the repair or maintenance of property. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.030 Antivandalism provision.
     A.    Unlawful to Apply Graffiti. It is unlawful for any person to apply graffiti on any public or privately owned property within the city.

     B.     Possession of Graffiti Implement by Minors. It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen years to have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while upon public property or upon private property without the consent of the owner of such private property, whose consent is given in advance, and whose consent shall be given as to the person’s presence while in the possession of a graffiti implement.

     The foregoing provision shall not apply while the person is attending, or traveling to or from a school at which the person is enrolled, if the person is participating in a class at the school which has, as a requirement of the class, the need to use graffiti implements.

     C.     Possession in Designated Public Places. No person shall have in his or her possession any graffiti implement while in any public park, playground, recreational facility or while loitering in or near an underpass, bridge abutment, storm drain and other similar types of infrastructure not normally used by the public except as may be authorized by the city.

     D.    Prohibition of Defacement. It is unlawful for any person to intentionally deface, alter, change, destroy, mutilate, remove, take down or take away any public property or any private property without the consent of the owner of such private property. A mistake as to the private property owner’s identity shall not be a defense to a violation of this section. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.040 Punishment provisions.
     A.    In lieu of, or as part of, requesting prosecution of a petition to declare a minor to be a ward of the court under Welfare and Institutions Code Section 602 of the State of California (including but not limited to, offenses which, in the opinion of the police chief, constitute a violation of this chapter), or in lieu of prosecuting a violation of this chapter as a crime against an adult, the police chief with the approval of (or according to rules and procedures approved by) the city manager, shall be authorized to offer said minor or adult an option to perform such community service as the police chief deems appropriate, but which community service shall, if offered at all, contain the following minimum elements:

     1.     The minor shall perform community service of at least twenty-four but not more than eighty hours.

     2.     At least one of the custodial parents, or if none, guardians, shall be in attendance and participate in assigned work at least fifty percent of the period of assigned community service.

     3.     The entire period of community service shall be performed under the supervision of a community service provider approved by the chief of police or city manager.

     4.     Reasonable effort shall be made to assign the subject minor to a type of community service that is expected to have the most rehabilitative effect on the minor. To the extent that the offense giving rise to the offer of community service constitutes a violation of this chapter, reasonable effort shall be made by the chief of police or designee to assign the minor to community service which constitutes the removal of graffiti as a significant part.

     B.     Monetary Penalties for Violation. Any and all violations of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a one thousand dollar fine and/or one year in jail. Any person convicted of an offense in violation of this chapter shall also be required to pay to the owner of the damaged property monetary restitution in the amount of pecuniary damage caused by the offense. If, however, property damage is in excess of five thousand dollars due to vandalism, then violation shall be treated as a felony, punishable under the provisions of Section 594 of the Penal Code of the State of California.

     C.     Parental/Guardian Liability. The parent(s) or guardian(s) of any minor child under the age of eighteen years who is living with the parent(s) or guardian(s) and who commits an offense in violation of this chapter shall be liable to the owner of the property for damages as specified in Section 9.32.040(B). In addition, if community service is assigned, parent(s) or guardian(s) will be required to participate with minor in accordance with Section 9.32.040(A). (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.050 Removal provision.
     A.    Declaration of Nuisance. The existence of graffiti within the city limits is a public and private nuisance, and may be abated according to the provisions and procedures herein contained.

     B.     Right of City to Require Removal. The city shall have the right to require property owner to remove graffiti in accordance with the following provisions:

     1.     Notice to Abate—Contents. If it is determined that a public nuisance, as defined in this chapter, exists on any lot or premise, or upon any sidewalk, parking or street adjacent to such lot or premise, the hearing officer shall cause a notice to be issued to abate such nuisance. Such notice shall be headed: “NOTICE TO ABATE GRAFFITI” in letters not less than one inch in length and which shall, in legible characters, direct the abatement of the nuisance and refer to this chapter for particulars. Notices served by means other than posting as provided by this chapter shall contain a description of the property in general terms reasonable sufficient to identify the location of the nuisance.

     2.     Notice to Abate—Service. The notice required by subsection (B)(1) of this section may be served in any of the following manners:

     a.     By personal service on the owner, occupant or person in charge of control of the property;

     b.     By regular mail addressed to the owner or person in charge and control of the property, at the address shown on the last available assessment roll, or as otherwise known;

     c.     By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of-way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. The newspaper advertisement shall be a general notice that property in the city has been posted in accordance with this chapter and contains a general statement of the effect of such postings. The date of the last such newspaper advertisement will be considered the notice date for computing the period of time required for abatement of graffiti by property owner.

     3.     Removal of Nuisance—Duty of owner. It shall be the duty of the owner, the agent of the owner, or the person in possession of any lot or premises in the city, within three days from the date of notification as provided in subsection (B)(1) of this section, to remove the nuisance as stated. In the event that the property owner elects to remove graffiti by painting over the graffiti, he or she shall do so in a manner which matches the surrounding paint to the greatest degree practicable, and to the satisfaction of the hearing officer or his/her representative.

     4.     Removal of Nuisance—Failure of owner—Action by city. If the owner fails or neglects to remove the nuisance as defined in this chapter within the time specified in this chapter, the hearing officer shall cause such nuisance to be abated. The abatement work may be done by city crews or by private contractor. The city shall have the right to remove said graffiti in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.32.060. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.060 Right of city to remove.
     A.    Use of Public Funds. Whenever the city becomes aware, or is notified and determines that graffiti is so located on public or privately owned property viewable from a public or quasi-public place within the city, the city shall be authorized to use public funds for the removal of same, or for the painting or repairing of same, but shall not authorize or undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than where the graffiti is located, unless the hearing officer determines in writing that a more extensive area is required to be repainted or repaired in order to avoid an aesthetic disfigurement to the neighborhood or community, or unless the property owner agrees to pay for the costs of repainting or repairing the more extensive area.

     B.     Provisions for Right of Entry on Private Property.

     1.     Securing Owner Consent. Prior to entering upon private properly or property owned by a public entity other than the city, for the purpose of removal of graffiti, the city shall attempt to secure the written consent of the property owner.

     2.     Failure to Obtain Owner Consent. If the city shall have requested consent to remove or paint over the offending graffiti and the property owner shall have refused consent for entry on terms acceptable

to the city consistent with the terms of this section, the city shall commence abatement and cost recovery proceedings for the removal of the graffiti according to the following procedure.

     a.     Abatement Notice and Conduct of Due Process Hearing. The hearing officer shall give not less than forty-eight hours notice, served in the same manner as summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure, to the property owner. The determination of the hearing officer after the due process hearing shall be final and not appealable. If, after the due process hearing, regardless of the attendance of the property owner or his or her respective agents, the hearing officer determines that the property contains graffiti viewable from a public or quasi-public place, the hearing officer shall give written notice (“eradication order”) that, unless the graffiti is removed within three days thereafter, the city shall enter upon the property, cause the removal, painting over, or such other eradication as the hearing officer determines appropriate (“eradication effort”), and shall provide the property owner thereafter with an accounting of the costs of such eradication efforts (“eradication accounting”).

     b.     Cost Hearing. If the property owner fails to request a hearing before the hearing officer on the eradication accounting, or if a cost hearing is conducted after due process has been extended to the property owner, and the hearing officer determines that all or a portion of the costs are appropriately chargeable to the eradication effort, such amount determined as appropriate by the hearing officer shall be due and payable by the property owner within thirty days. Any amount of eradication charges assessed by the hearing officer which are less than the total amount set forth in the eradication accounting shall be explained by written letter from the hearing officer to the city council.

     c.     Lien. If all or any portion of the assessed eradication charges remain unpaid after thirty days, pursuant to the authority created by law, including Government Codes Section 38773, et seq., such portion thereof as shall remain unpaid shall constitute and is hereby declared to constitute a lien on the property which was the subject matter of the eradication effort. The hearing officer shall present a resolution of lien to the city council, and upon passage and adoption thereof, shall cause a certified copy thereof to be recorded with the San Diego County recorder’s office. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.070 Ease of removal provisions.
     A.    Common Utility Colors and Paint-Type. Any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, cable and other utility operating in the city shall paint their above-surface metal fixtures with a uniform paint type and color for each utility which meets with the approval of the hearing officer.

     B.     Condition Encroachment Permits. All encroachments permits issued by the city may, among such other things, be conditioned upon: (1) the permittee shall apply an anti-graffiti material to the encroaching object of a type and nature that is acceptable to the hearing officer; (2) the immediate removal by the permittee of any graffiti; (3) the right of the city to remove graffiti or to paint the encroaching object; (4) the permittee shall provide city with sufficient matching paint and/or anti-graffiti material on demand for use in the painting of encroaching object containing graffiti; and (5) other design features including, but not limited to, (a) use of a protective coating to provide the effective and expeditious removal of graffiti, (b) use of additional lighting, (c) use of non-solid fencing, (d) use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive wall such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation, and (e) use of architectural design to break up long continued walls or solid areas. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.080 Prevention provisions.
     A.    Design of Graffiti-Attracting Surface. Any applicant for design review approval, conditional use permit, minor use permit, development agreement or other form of development or building permit shall, to the extent deemed feasible by the

director of community development, have designed

any existing or proposed building structures visible from any public or quasi-public place in such a manner to consider prevention of graffiti, including, but not limited to, the following: (1) use of a protective coating to provide for the effective and expeditious removal of graffiti; (2) use of additional lighting; (3) use of non-solid fencing; (4) use of landscaping designed to cover large expansive walls such as ivy or similar clinging vegetation; and (5) use of architectural design to break up long continuous walls or solid areas.

     B.     Retro-Fit Existing Graffiti-Attracting Surface.

     1.     At Property Owner’s Expense. Any property owner of land use other than single-family residential who has been given an abatement notice and due process hearing under Section 9.32.060(B)(2)(a) two times in one year, shall be required to retrofit the property, at the expense of the property owner of said lot, with such features or qualities as may be established by the city as necessary to reduce the attractiveness of the property for graffiti, or as necessary to permit more convenient or efficient removal thereof. In exercising the authority hereunder, the city shall not impose a cost on the property owner greater than three thousand dollars. To retrofit, the property owner will be notified and required to retrofit under the provisions of Section 9.32.060(B)(2)(a), except that the time frame for compliance of the eradication order shall be fourteen days.

     C.     Display and Sale of Graffiti Implements. It is unlawful for any person, firm or entity engaged in a commercial enterprise (“seller”) to display for sale, trade or exchange, any graffiti implement except in an area under the control of seller’s employee(s).

     The only two acceptable methods for displaying a graffiti implement for sale are:

     1.     In completely enclosed cabinet or other storage device which shall be permanently affixed to a building or building structure, and which shall, at all times except during access by authorized representatives, remain securely locked;

     2.     In an enclosed area behind a sales or service counter from which the public is precluded from entry. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

 

9.32.090 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The city council declare that it would have adopted each section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsection, clauses, phrases or portions be declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 210 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 9.36 OBSTRUCTING FREE MOVEMENT, SOLICITING, CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
Note
*     Prior history: Prior code §§ 38.101, 38.102 and 38.201.

 

Article I. Title and Definitions
9.36.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as “Obstructing Free Movement, Soliciting, Camping and Storage of Personal Property.” (Ord. 379 § 2, 2008)

 

9.36.015 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Aggressively” means behaving in a hostile manner.

     “Business” means any type of product, good, service, performance or activity which is provided or performed, or offered to be provided or performed, in exchange for money, labor, goods or any other form of consideration.

     “Camp” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities; to live temporarily in a camp facility or outdoors; to use camp paraphernalia.

     “Camp facilities” mean, but are not limited to, tents, huts or temporary shelters.

     “Camp paraphernalia” means, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

     “Coerce” means to force or bring about by force or threat.

     “Commercial parking area” means privately owned property which is designed or used primarily for the parking of vehicles and which adjoins one or more commercial establishments.

     “Employment” means services, industry or labor performed by a person for wages or other compensation or under any contract of hire, written, oral, express or implied.

     “Harass” means to irritate or torment persistently.

     “Hound” means to pursue relentlessly and tenaciously.

     “Intentionally block” means to walk, stand, sit, lie or place an object in such a manner as to block passage by another person or a vehicle, or to require another person or driver of a vehicle to take evasive action to avoid physical contact.

     “Intimidate” means to frighten into submission or obedience.

     “Maliciously” means a wish to vex, annoy, or injure another person, or an intent to do a wrongful act, established either by proof or presumption of law.

     “Park” means the same as defined in Section 12.20.030 of this code.

     A “person” means both individual persons and organizations.

     “Solicit” means any request, offer, enticement or action which announces the availability for or of employment, the sale of goods, or a request for money or other property; or any request, offer, enticement or action which seeks to purchase or secure goods or employment, or to make a contribution of money or other property. As defined herein, a solicitation shall be deemed complete when made whether or not an actual employment relationship is created, a transaction is completed, or an exchange of money or other property takes place.

     “Store” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, to place or leave in a location.

     “Street” means highway as defined in Section 12.04.005(E).

     “Threaten” means to express an intention to inflict bodily injury or damage.

     “Willfully,” means when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act, or make the omission referred to. It does not require any intent to violate law, or to injure another, or to acquire any advantage. (Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 379 § 1, 2008; Ord. 243 § 1, 1995)

 

Article II. Obstructing Free Movement
9.36.020 Obstructing any street, sidewalk, or other public place or on or in any place open to the public prohibited—Penalty—Exceptions.
     A.    No person shall willfully and maliciously obstruct the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk, or other public place or on or in any place open to the public.

     B.     Penalty. Any person who violates any provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as specified in Section 1.12.010 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     C.     Exceptions.

     1.     It is not intended that this section shall apply where its application would result in an interference with or inhibition of any exercise of the constitutionally protected right of freedom of speech or assembly;

     2.     The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons sitting on the curb portion of any sidewalk or street while attending or viewing any parade permitted under the provisions the Lemon Grove Municipal Code; and

     3.     Nor shall the provisions of this subsection apply to persons sitting upon benches or other seating facilities provided for such purpose by municipal authority or permitted under the provisions of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 379 § 1, 2008; Ord. 243 § 2, 1995)

 

Article III. Solicitation
9.36.030 Aggressive solicitation— Prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person on the streets, sidewalks or other places open to the public, whether publicly owned, to aggressively coerce, threaten, hound, harass or intimidate another person for the purpose of soliciting aid or donations.

     B.     For the purpose of this section, a person “aggressively coerces, threatens, hounds, harasses or intimidates another person” when:

     1.     The solicitor’s conduct would cause a reasonable person in the position of the solicitee to fear for his or her safety; or

     2.     The solicitor intentionally blocks the path of the solicitee; or

     3.     The solicitor persists in following the solicitee closely, and continues to demand money or other thing of value after the solicitee has rejected the solicitation by words or conduct.

     C.     For the purpose of this section, the following facts, among others, are relevant in deciding whether a reasonable person would have cause to fear for their safety:

     1.     The solicitor making physical contact with the solicitee; or

     2.     The proximity of the solicitor to the solicitee; or

     3.     The duration of the solicitation; or

     4.     The solicitor’s making threatening gestures or other threatening conduct, including closely following the solicitee. (Ord. 243 § 3, 1995)

 

9.36.050 Solicitation in unauthorized locations within commercial parking areas—Prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit, employment, business or contributions of money or other property, from a location within a commercial parking area other than an area within or served by such parking area which is authorized by the property owner or the property owner’s authorized representative for such solicitations. This section shall not apply to solicitation to perform employment or business for the owner or lawful tenants of the subject premises.

     B.     This section shall only apply to commercial parking areas where the following occurs:

     1.     The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area establishes a written policy which provides area(s) for the lawful solicitation of employment, business, or contributions of money or other property, in locations which are accessible to the public and do not interfere with normal business operations of the commercial premises;

     2.     A copy of said policy is submitted to the city manager to be maintained in city files; and

     3.     The owner or person in lawful possession of the commercial parking area has caused a notice to be posted in a conspicuous place at each entrance to such commercial parking area not less than eighteen by twenty-four inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height and not to exceed in total area, six square feet. The notice shall be in substantially the following form:

        “It is a misdemeanor to engage in the solicitation of employment, business or contributions of money or other property in areas of this commercial parking lot which are not approved for such activity by the property owner.”

(Ord. 243 § 3, 1995)

 

9.36.060 Soliciting persons in moving vehicles—Prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to distribute any printed or advertising matter to any person or persons who may be riding in any vehicle or conveyance of any character, while the same is in motion upon any public highway in the city. (Ord. 243 § 3, 1995)

 

9.36.070 Stopping vehicles to solicit—Prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to attempt to stop, or to stop, any person or persons who may be riding in any vehicle or conveyance of any character, while the same is in motion upon any public highway in the city for the purpose of soliciting business or for the purpose of distributing any printed advertising matter. (Ord. 243 § 3, 1995)

 

9.36.080 Soliciting patronage requires owner’s consent.
     It is unlawful for any person to solicit patronage for or on behalf of any person engaged in the business of transporting or transferring persons or property or baggage, or to solicit patronage for or on behalf of any hotel, lodginghouse, apartment house, café, restaurant or boardinghouse in or upon any railroad train or car within the city without the written consent of the owner of such railroad train or car. (Ord. 243 § 3, 1995)

 

Article IV. Camping and Storage of Personal Property
9.36.090 Camping—Prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to camp, occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in the following areas, except as otherwise provided:

     A.    Any street;

     B.     Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. (Ord. 243 § 4, 1995)

 

9.36.100 Storage of personal property in public places—Prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in the following areas, except as otherwise provided by resolution of the city council:

     A.    Any city park;

     B.     Any public street; and

     C.     Any public parking lot or public area, improved or unimproved. (Ord. 243 § 4, 1995)

 

9.36.110 Violation.
     Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars, or imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 243 § 4, 1995)

Chapter 9.40 CURFEW—MINORS
Note
*     Prior history: Prior code §§ 39.101 and 39.103

 

9.40.010 Liability of minor.
     The city council is concerned with the level of juvenile violence, juvenile gang activity, and juvenile crime in the city. The crimes being committed by juveniles include serious offenses such as murders, drive-by shootings, drug-related crimes and other gang-related activities. Juveniles are particularly susceptible by their lack of maturity and experience to participate in unlawful and gang-related activities and to be victims of older perpetrators of crimes. Recent local statistics regarding juvenile crime and victimization indicate that enforcement of a curfew for juveniles decreases the percentage of juvenile victimization and increases the number of arrests for violent crimes during curfew hours. The city council believes that having an enforceable juvenile curfew ordinance is critical to preserving the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 271, 1997)

 

9.40.020 Definitions for curfew provisions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows:

     “Curfew hours” mean the period from eleven p.m. any evening of the week, until five a.m. the following day.

     “Emergency” means the unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.

     “Establishment” means any privately owned place of business operated for a profit to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment.

     “Guardian” means

     1.     A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a minor; or

     2.     A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by the court.

     “Minor” means any person under eighteen years of age.

     “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, or stepparent of another person.

     “Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways, and the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transport facilities and shops.

 

     “Responsible adult” means a person, at least eighteen years of age, authorized by a parent or guardian to have the care and custody of a minor.

     “Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ. (Ord. 271, 1997)

 

9.40.030 Curfew restrictions.
     A.    It is unlawful for any minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

     B.     It is unlawful for any parent or guardian of a minor to knowingly permit, or by insufficient control, to allow the minor to remain in any public place or on the premises of any establishment within the city during curfew hours.

     C.     It is a defense to prosecution under subsections A and B of this section that the minor was:

     1.     Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian, or by a responsible adult;

     2.     On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent or guardian, or the responsible adult, without any detour or stop;

     3.     In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;

     4.     Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or coming home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;

     5.     Involved in an emergency;

     6.     On the sidewalk abutting the minor’s residence;

     7.     Attending an official school, religious, or recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the city, a municipal corporation, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by one or more adults and sponsored by the city, a municipal corporation, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor.

     8.     Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution; or

     9.     Emancipated pursuant to law.

     D.    Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, the enforcement officer shall ask the offender’s age and reason for being in the public place or on the premises of the establishment during curfew hours. The enforcement officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this chapter unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based on any responses and other circumstances, no defense under subsection C of this section is present or applicable.

     E.     Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 271, 1997)

 

9.40.040 Violation is a misdemeanor.
     Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months in the county jail, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Minors shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. (Ord. 271, 1997)

Chapter 9.44 FIREARMS
9.44.010 Discharge prohibited.
     Other than in the defense of person or property, it is unlawful for any person to shoot, fire or discharge any pistol, revolver, shotgun, rifle or any other firearm or device fired or discharged by explosives, or air gun or air rifle in any portion of the city. (Prior code § 33.104)

 

9.44.020 Peace officers excepted.
     Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any peace officer acting in the proper performance of his or her official duties. (Prior code § 33.106)

 

9.44.030 Possession on premises where public business is conducted.
     A.    No firearm, whether or not loaded or operable, and no explosive or explosive device whether or not operable, shall be brought into or possessed within any premises owned or leased by the city in which public business is conducted without the written permission of the city manager.

     B.     The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not be applicable to city employees or court personnel who use, possess or have custody of firearms, explosives and explosive devices in the course of their official duties.

     C.     The provisions of subsection A of this section regarding firearms shall not be applicable to any person exempted by state law from compliance therewith. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code § 33.109)

Chapter 9.48 CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL
9.48.010 Alcoholic beverage—Defined.
     “Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances. (Ord. 221 § 1, 1994)

 

9.48.020 Consumption in public places prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to consume an alcoholic beverage, or possess an open container of alcoholic beverage on any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parking lots, including private parking lots held open for public use, in any of the following areas indicated on the official zoning map of the city:

     1.     Central commercial zone;

     2.     General commercial zone;

     3.     Heavy commercial zone;

     4.     Light industrial zone;

     5.     Neighborhood commercial zone;

     6.     Limited commercial zone.

     B.     Any of the prohibitions set forth in this section shall not apply to any residential properties located within the nonresidential zones.

     C.     This section shall not apply to public parks where consumption of alcohol is regulated pursuant to Section 12.20.260. (Ord. 221 § 1, 1994)

 

9.48.030 Violation.
     Any person who knowingly or wilfully violates any of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 221 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 9.49 POLICE AND FIRE SERVICES AT PARTIES AND EVENTS AND SOCIAL HOST RESPONSIBILITIES CONCERNING THE CONSUMPTION OF ALCOHOL AND CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES BY MINORS OR JUVENILES
Note
*     Prior ordinance history: Ord. 326.

 

9.49.010 Definitions of words or phrases.
     Unless the context requires otherwise, the definitions set forth in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter.

     “Alcohol” means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced.

     “Alcoholic beverage” includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed or combined with other substances.

     “Controlled substances” or “illegal drugs” shall include all narcotics or drugs, the possession of which is illegal for adults, juveniles and/or minors under the laws of the state of California, as defined under the Penal Code, Health and Safety Code, and related statutes.

     “Enforcement services” includes the salaries and benefits of law enforcement and/or other code enforcement personnel for the amount of time actually spent in responding to, or in remaining at, the party, gathering or event and the administrative costs attributable to the incident; the actual cost of any medical treatment to injured law enforcement personnel and/or other code enforcement personnel; and the cost of repairing any damaged city equipment or property; and the cost arising from the use of any damaged equipment in responding to or remaining at the party, gathering or event.

     “Juvenile” means any person less than eighteen years of age.

     “Guardian” means: (1) a person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a juvenile; or (2) a public or private agency with which a juvenile has been placed by the court.

     “Minor” means any person less than twenty-one years of age.

     “Parent” means a person who is a natural parent, adoptive parent, foster parent or stepparent of another person.

     “Party, gathering or event” means a group of three or more persons who have assembled or are assembling for a party, social occasion or social activity.

     “Responsible party(ies)” or “person(s) responsible” includes, but is not limited to: (1) the person(s) who owns, rents, leases or otherwise has control of the premises where the party, gathering or event takes place; (2) the person(s) in charge of the premises; or (3) the person(s) who organized the event. If a person responsible for the event is a juvenile, then the parents or guardians of that juvenile will be jointly and severally liable for the costs incurred for enforcement services pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.020 Law enforcement and/or code enforcement services at parties, gatherings or events requiring a second response.
     Any person responsible for a loud or unruly event shall be civilly liable to the city for all costs incurred by the city arising out of a second response which is made by law enforcement or the fire department to such event where:

     A.    Law enforcement or the fire department initially responded to the event during the preceding twelve-hour period;

     B.     At the time of making such initial response, personnel from the law enforcement agency or fire department warned such responsible person(s), in writing, that the event was being conducted in an unlawful manner, and that if law enforcement or fire department personnel were required to respond a second time to the event, such person would be assessed a second response fee and/or be held responsible for the actual cost of enforcement services provided during the response; and

     C.     Following such initial response, law enforcement agents or the fire department were required to respond a second time to the event by reason of the fact that the event continued to be conducted in an unlawful manner, notwithstanding such written warning. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.030 Unsupervised consumption of alcohol or controlled substance by minor or juvenile at a private party, public place or place open to public.
     A.    Except as permitted by state law, no minor or juvenile shall consume in any public place or any place open to the public any alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance, or consume at any place not open to the public any alcoholic beverage and/or controlled substance.

     B.     A violation of this section shall constitute a misdemeanor or infraction punishable by a fine of up to one thousand dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not to exceed six months, or by both fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.040 Serving alcohol and/or controlled substances to minors or juveniles at parties, gatherings or events on private property.
     Except as permitted by Article 1, Section 4 of the Constitution of the state of California, no person shall knowingly permit a party, gathering or event at his or her place of residence or other private property, place, or premises under his or her control where alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs are being consumed by any individual who is known by the responsible parties to be a minor or juvenile. A violation of this section shall constitute an infraction punishable by fine as set forth in the city of Lemon Grove Infraction and Misdemeanor Bail Schedule per Section 1.12.010 of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code. This section shall not apply to conduct involving the use of alcohol that occurs exclusively between a minor or juvenile and his or her parent or legal guardian. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.050 Duty to inspect.
     The responsible party or parties who permits or allows a party, gathering or event as specified in Section 9.49.040 of this chapter has a duty to inspect the drivers license or other government issued identification card of each person who reasonably appears to be under the age of thirty in order to ensure that they are over the legal age for consuming alcohol. If the responsible party(ies) fails to inspect the identification of a person consuming alcohol, and the person is in fact a minor or juvenile, the responsible party has violated Section 9.49.040 of this chapter. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.060 Law enforcement, code enforcement services fees.
     A.    The person(s) responsible for the event shall be liable for the cost of providing law enforcement and/or code enforcement services in response to a party, gathering or event in which minors or juveniles have obtained, possessed or consumed alcoholic beverages. The law enforcement and/or code enforcement services fee shall include the cost of personnel and equipment. Such fee is deemed to be supplementary to all other applicable fines and penalties.

     B.     The amount of such fee charged shall be deemed a debt to the city of the person or persons receiving such services and if such person or persons be minors or juveniles, then the amount shall be deemed a debt of their parents or guardians. Any person owing money shall be liable in an action brought in the name of the city for recovery of the actual costs of enforcement. Actual costs shall include, in addition to the law and/or code enforce-

ment service fee, costs and expenses in bringing such recovery action, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees, witness fees and associated costs and expenses. Such costs and expenses shall be in addition to the applicable fines and penalties referenced in Sections 9.49.030 and 9.49.040, and any other fines and penalties provided by law. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

 

9.49.070 Reservation of legal options.
     The city does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs of enforcement services through other legal remedies or procedures. The procedure provided for in this chapter is in addition to any other statute, ordinance or law, civil or criminal. This chapter in no way limits the statutory authority of law enforcement, peace officers or private citizens to cite and/or make arrests for any criminal offense arising out of conduct regulated by this chapter. (Ord. 393 § 1, 2010)

Chapter 9.50 SPECTATORS PROHIBITED AT ILLEGAL SPEED CONTESTS OR EXHIBITIONS OF SPEED
9.50.010 Purpose.
     The council for the city of Lemon Grove finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 23109, motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibits of speed are more commonly known as street races or drag races.

     Streets within the city of Lemon Grove have been the site of continuing and escalating illegal street racing over the past several years. Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance, and interferes with the right of private business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the city of Lemon Grove. The illegal street races occur on a regular basis on various streets within the city. Hundreds of racers and spectators gather on these streets late at night and in the early morning hours, blocking the streets and sidewalks to traffic, forming a racetrack area, placing bets, and otherwise encouraging, aiding and abetting the racing process.

     Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians or vehicles parked or moving nearby. The racers drive quickly from street to street, race for several hours and then move to other locations upon the arrival of the police. Those who participate in this illegal activity are very sophisticated, using cell phones, police scanners and other electronic devices to communicate with each other to avoid arrest. They also use the Internet to provide information on where to race, and give advice on how to avoid detection and prosecution. Traffic accidents, property crimes and calls for police service have increased dramatically.

     In most cases, illegal street races attract hundreds of spectators. The mere presence of spectators at these events fuels the illegal street racing and creates an environment in which these illegal activities can flourish.

     This chapter makes evidence of specified prior acts admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend illegal street races, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense.

     This chapter is adopted to prohibit spectators at illegal street races with the aim of significantly

curbing this criminal activity. The division targets a very clear, limited population and gives proper notice to citizens as to what activities are lawful and what activities are unlawful. In discouraging spectators, the act of organizing and participating in illegal street races will be discouraged. (Ord. 314, 2002)

 

9.50.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest” or “illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

     “Preparations” for the illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed include, but are not limited to, situations in which: (1) a group of motor vehicles or individuals has arrived at a location for the purpose of participating in or being spectators at the event; (2) a group of individuals has lined one or both sides of a public street or highway for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (3) a group of individuals has gathered on private property open to the general public without the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof for the purpose of participating in or being a spectator at the event; (4) one or more individuals has impeded the free public use of a public street or highway by actions, words or physical barriers for the purpose of conducting the event; (5) two or more vehicles have lined up with motors running for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed; (6) one or more drivers is revving his or her engine or spinning his or her tires in preparation for the event; or (7) an individual is stationed at or near one or more motor vehicles serving as a race starter.

     “Spectator” means any individual who is within two hundred feet of an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, or at a location where preparations are being made for such activities, for the purpose of viewing, observing, watching or witnessing the event as it progresses. “Spectator” includes any individual within two hundred feet of the event without regard to whether the individual arrived at the event by driving a vehicle, riding as a passenger in a vehicle, walking or arriving by some other means. (Ord. 314, 2002)

 

9.50.030 Spectator at illegal speed contest or exhibitions of speed—Violation.
     A.    Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway or on private property open to the general public, without

the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof at an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of one thousand dollars.

     B.     Any individual who is knowingly present as a spectator, either on a public street or highway or on private property open to the general public, without the consent of the owner, operator or agent thereof, where preparations are being made for an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed is guilty of a misdemeanor subject to a maximum of six months in jail and a fine of one thousand dollars.

     C.     Exemption: Nothing in this section prohibits law enforcement officers or their agents from being spectators at illegal motor vehicle speed contests or exhibitions of speed in the course of their duties. (Ord. 314, 2002)

9.50.030

9.50.040          Relevant circumstances to prove a violation.

     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, to prove a violation of this chapter, admissible evidence may include, but is not limited to, any of the following:

     A.    The time of day.

     B.     The nature and description of the scene.

     C.     The number of people at the scene.

     D.    The location of the individual charged in relation to any individual or group present at the scene.

     E.     The number and description of the motor vehicles at the scene.

     F.     That the individual charged drove or was transported to the scene.

     G.    That the individual charged has previously participated in an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.

     H.    That the individual charged has previously aided and abetted an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.

     I.      That the individual charged has previously attended an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed.

     J.      That the individual charged previously was present at a location where preparations were being made for an illegal speed contest or exhibition of speed or where an exhibition of speed or illegal motor vehicle speed contest was in progress. (Ord. 314, 2002)

 

9.50.050 Admissibility of prior acts.
     The list of circumstances set forth in Section 9.50.040 is not exclusive. Evidence of prior acts may be admissible to show the propensity of the defendant to be present at or attend an illegal motor vehicle speed contest or exhibition of speed, if the prior act or acts occurred within three years of the presently charged offense. These prior acts may always be admissible to show knowledge on the part of the defendant that a speed contest or exhibition of speed was taking place at the time of the presently charged offense. Prior acts are not limited to those that occurred within the city of Lemon Grove. (Ord. 314, 2002)

Chapter 9.70 FORFEITURE OF NUISANCE VEHICLES ENGAGED IN ILLEGAL MOTOR VEHICLE SPEED CONTEST OR EXHIBITION OF SPEED
9.70.010 Purpose.
     The city council finds and declares that pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 23109, motor vehicles speed contests and exhibitions of speed conducted on public streets and highways are illegal. Motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed are more commonly known as street races or drag races. Streets and highways within the county of San Diego have been the site of continuing and escalating illegal street racing over the past several years. Such street racing threatens the health and safety of the public, interferes with pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creates a public nuisance and interferes with the right of private business owners to enjoy the use of their property within the county of San Diego. Illegal street racers accelerate to high speeds without regard to oncoming traffic, pedestrians or vehicles parked or moving nearby.

     The city council finds it is necessary and appropriate to take additional steps to protect public health and safety. This chapter is adopted to declare that vehicles used in violations of California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and (c) are a nuisance and will be forfeited to the city. The civil forfeiture of these nuisance vehicles will prevent the needless loss of life and property damage associated with illegal motor vehicle speed contests and exhibitions of speed. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.010

9.70.020          Definitions.

     “Days” means workdays not including weekends and holidays.

     “Illegal motor vehicle speed contest or illegal exhibition of speed” means any speed contest or exhibition of speed referred to in California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and 23109(c).

     “Immediate family” means father, mother, sister or brother.

     “Legal owner” means a person holding a security interest in a vehicle referred to in California Vehicle Code Section 370.

     “Registered owner” means a person registered by the Department of Motor Vehicles as the owner of a vehicle referred to in California Vehicle Code Section 505. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.030 Forfeiture of nuisance vehicles.
     A motor vehicle shall be declared a nuisance and forfeited subject to this division if:

     A.    It is used in violation of California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) and (c); and

     B. 1. It is driven by the registered owner of the vehicle at the time of the violation or the registered owner is a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the violation; or

     2.     It is driven by a member of the registered owner’s immediate family at the time of the violation, or a member of the registered owner’s immediate family is a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the violation; or

     3.     The driver or a passenger lives at the same address as the registered owner at the time of the violation; or

     4.     The driver or a passenger in the vehicle at the time of the violation has a prior contact in the vehicle, as determined by law enforcement records; and

     C.     The registered owner who is the driver or passenger at the time of the violation; or the driver or passenger who is a member of the registered owner’s immediate family at the time of the violation; or the driver or passenger who lives at the same address as the registered owner at the time of the violation or the driver or passenger at the time of the violation who has a prior contact in the vehicle has:

     1.     A previous misdemeanor or felony conviction for California Vehicle Code Section 2800.2(a) or 23104(a); or

     2.     A previous misdemeanor conviction for a violation of California Vehicle Code Sections 2800.1(a) or (b), or California Vehicle Code Sections 23103(a) or (b), or California Vehicle Code Sections 23109(a) or (c); or

     3.     A previous conviction for a violation of California Vehicle Code Section 22348(b). (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.030

9.70.040          Right to request a hearing.

     A registered or legal owner at the time of the violation may request a hearing pursuant to Section 9.70.050 of this chapter to determine the validity of the forfeiture action authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.050 Post-storage hearing.
     A.    The sheriff’s captain of the city substation (designated captain) shall provide the opportunity for a post-storage hearing to determine the validity of the storage to the persons who were the registered and legal owners of the vehicle at the time of impoundment. The hearing request shall be made not later than ten days after the date the vehicle was impounded. However, the hearing request shall be made within three days after the date the vehicle was impounded if personal service was provided to the registered or legal owner pursuant to Section 9.70.070 of this chapter and no mailed notice is required.

     B.     The post-storage hearing shall be conducted not later than two days after the date it was requested. The designated captain may authorize an officer or employee to conduct the hearing if the hearing officer is not the same person who directed the storage of the vehicle. Failure of either a registered or legal owner to request a hearing as provided in subsection A of this section or to attend a scheduled hearing shall satisfy the post-storage hearing requirement. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.050

9.70.060          Notice of forfeiture to legal and registered owners.

     A.    When a violation of California Vehicle Code Section 23109(a) or (c) occurs causing a vehicle to be subject to forfeiture under this chapter, the designated captain shall ascertain from the Department of Motor Vehicles the names and addresses of all legal and registered owners of the vehicle.

     B.     Within two days of impoundment, the designated captain shall send a notice of forfeiture by certified mail, return receipt requested, to all legal and registered owners of the vehicle proposed for forfeiture. The notice shall be sent to the addresses obtained from the Department of Motor Vehicles. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.070 Personal service of notice of forfeiture.
     If a legal or registered owner was personally served a notice of forfeiture at the time of the violation which caused a vehicle to be subject to forfeiture under this division, and the notice contains all the information required to be provided by Sections 9.70.080 and 9.70.090 of this chapter, no further notice is required to be sent to that owner. However, a notice shall still be sent to any other current legal or registered owners of record of the vehicle, if any. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.080 Contents of notice of forfeiture.
     The notice shall inform legal or registered owners of the vehicle that the vehicle will be declared a nuisance and forfeited to the city subject to this chapter, and will be sold or otherwise disposed of pursuant to Sections 9.70.170, 9.70.180 and 9.70.190 of this chapter. The notice shall also include instructions for filing a claim with the city attorney, and the time limits for filing a claim. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.090 Additional notice provisions for legal owners.
     The notice of forfeiture shall also inform any legal owner of its right to conduct the sale pursuant to Section 9.70.170 of this chapter. If notice was not sent to the legal owner within two days, the city shall not charge the legal owner for more than fifteen days’ impoundment when the legal owner redeems the impounded vehicle. No processing charges shall be imposed on a legal owner who redeems an impounded vehicle within fifteen days of the impoundment of that vehicle. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.090

 

9.70.100 Administrative forfeiture.
     If no claims are filed and served within fifteen days of the mailing of the notice pursuant to Section 9.70.060 of this chapter or within five days of personal service of the notice pursuant to Section 9.70.070 of this chapter, the city attorney shall prepare a written declaration of forfeiture of the vehicle to the city. A written declaration of forfeiture signed by the city attorney under this section shall be deemed to provide good and sufficient title to the forfeited vehicle. A copy of the declaration shall be provided on request to any person informed of the pending forfeiture pursuant to Sections 9.70.060 and 9.70.070 of this chapter. A claim that is filed and later withdrawn by the claimant shall be deemed to not have been filed. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.110 Claim opposing forfeiture and petition for forfeiture.
     If a claim is timely filed and served with the city attorney, then the city attorney shall file a petition for forfeiture with the appropriate Superior Court within ten days of the receipt of the claim. The city attorney shall establish an expedited hearing date in accordance with instructions from the court. The court filing fee established by the court, not to exceed fifty dollars, shall be paid by the claimant made payable to the San Diego Superior Court, but shall be reimbursed by the city if the claimant prevails. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.110

9.70.120          Judicial forfeiture proceedings.

     The filing of a claim within the time limit specified in Section 9.70.100 of this chapter is considered a jurisdictional prerequisite for initiating a forfeiture proceeding. A proceeding in the civil case is a limited civil case. The burden of proof in the civil case shall be on the city attorney by a preponderance of the evidence. All questions that may arise shall be decided and all other proceedings shall be conducted as in an ordinary civil action. A judgment of forfeiture does not require as a condition precedent the conviction of a defendant for the current violations which gave rise to the nuisance and caused these forfeiture proceedings to be initiated. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.130 Community property interest release.
     If at the time of the violation there is a community property interest in the vehicle to be forfeited, and at the time of the violation the vehicle is the only vehicle available to the registered owner’s immediate family that may be operated with a class C driver’s license, the vehicle shall be released to a registered owner or to the community property interest owner upon compliance with all of the following requirements:

     A.    The registered owner or the community property interest owner requests release of the vehicle and the owner of the community property interest submits proof of that interest; and

     B.     The registered owner or the community property interest owner submits proof that the vehicle is properly registered pursuant to the California Vehicle Code; and

     C.     All towing and storage charges and any administrative charges authorized pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22850.5 are paid; and

     D.    The registered owner and the community property interest owner signs a stipulated vehicle release agreement, as described in Section 9.70.140 of this chapter, in consideration for the nonforfeiture of the vehicle. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.140 Stipulated vehicle release agreement.
     A.    A stipulated vehicle release agreement shall provide for the consent of the signers to the automatic future forfeiture and transfer of title to the city of any vehicle registered to that person, if the vehicle is used in violation of California Vehicle Code Section 23109(a) or (c). The agreement shall be in effect for five years from the date of signing and shall be maintained by the designated captain.

     B      No vehicle shall be released pursuant to Section 9.70.130 of this chapter if the designated captain has on file a prior stipulated vehicle release agreement signed by that person within the previous five years. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.150 Vehicle title vesting in the city.
     All right, title and interest in the vehicle shall vest in the city upon commission of the act giving rise to the nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.160 Sale of forfeited vehicle after declaration of forfeiture.
     Any vehicle forfeited pursuant to this chapter shall be sold once a declaration of forfeiture is issued by the city attorney or an order of forfeiture is issued by a court, as the case may be, pursuant to Sections 9.70.100 and 9.70.120 of this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.170 Sale of forfeited vehicle by legal owner.
     A.    Any legal owner who is a motor vehicle dealer, bank, credit union, acceptance corporation or other licensed financial institution legally operating in this state, or the agent of that legal owner, may take possession and conduct the sale of the forfeited vehicle if the legal owner or agent notified the designated captain of its intent to conduct the sale within fifteen days of either the mailing of the notice pursuant to Section 9.70.060 of this chapter or personal service of the notice pursuant to Section 9.70.070 of this chapter. Sale of the vehicle after forfeiture pursuant to this chapter may be conducted at the time, in the manner and on the notice usually given for the sale of repossessed or surrendered vehicles. The proceeds of any sale conducted by or on behalf of the legal owner shall be disposed of as provided in Section 9.70.200 of this chapter. A legal owner’s notice to conduct the sale pursuant to this section may be presented in person, by certified mail, by facsimile transmission or by electronic mail.

     B.     The agent of a legal owner acting pursuant to this section shall be licensed, or exempt from licensure, pursuant to Chapter 11 (commencing with Section 7500) of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.170

9.70.180          Sale of forfeited vehicle.

     If the legal owner or agent of the owner does not notify the designed captain of its intent to conduct the sale as provided in Section 9.70.170 of this chapter, the city shall offer the forfeited vehicle for sale at public auction within sixty days of receiving title to the vehicle. Low value vehicles shall be disposed of pursuant to Section 9.70.190 of this chapter. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.190 Disposition of low-value vehicles.
     If the designated captain determines that the vehicle to be forfeited and sold pursuant to this chapter is of so little value that it cannot readily be sold to the public generally, the vehicle shall be conveyed to a licensed dismantler or donated to a charitable organization. License plates shall be removed from any vehicle conveyed to a dismantler pursuant to this

section. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.200 Distribution of sale proceeds.
     The proceeds of a sale of a forfeited vehicle shall be disposed of in the following priority:

     A.    To satisfy the towing and storage costs following impoundment, the costs of providing notice pursuant to Sections 9.70.060 and 9.70.070 of this chapter, the costs of sale and the unfunded costs of judicial proceedings, if any; then,

     B.     Upon satisfactory proof to the designated captain, to the legal owner in an amount to satisfy the indebtedness owed to the legal owner remaining as of the date of sale, including accrued interest or finance charges and delinquency charges, providing that the principal indebtedness was incurred prior to the date of impoundment; then,

     C.     To the holder of any subordinate lien or encumbrance on the vehicle, other than a registered or legal owner, to satisfy any indebtedness so secured if written notification of demand is received before distribution of the proceeds is completed. The holder of a subordinate lien or encumbrance, if requested, shall furnish reasonable proof of its interest and, unless it does so upon request, is not entitled to distribution pursuant to of this subsection.

     D.    To any other person, other than a registered or legal owner, who can reasonably establish an interest in the vehicle, including a community property interest, to the extent of his or her provable interest, if written notification is received before distribution of the proceeds is completed; then,

     E.     The remaining proceeds shall be transferred to the city via the city treasurer. (Ord. 323, 2003)

9.70.200

9.70.210          Accounting of sale proceeds.

     The person conducting the sale shall disburse the proceeds of the sale as provided in Section 9.70.200 of this chapter and shall provide a written accounting regarding the disposition to the designated captain and, on request, to any person entitled to a share of the proceeds or to any person validly claiming a share of the proceeds, as determined by the designated captain within fifteen days after the sale is conducted. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.220 Stolen vehicles.
     No vehicle shall be sold pursuant to this division if the designated captain determines the vehicle to have been stolen. In this event, the vehicle may be claimed by the registered owner at any time after impoundment, providing the vehicle registration is current and registered owner has no outstanding traffic violations or parking penalties on his or her driving record or on the registration record of any vehicle registered to the person. If the identity of the legal and registered owners of the vehicle cannot be reasonably ascertained, the vehicle may be sold. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.230 Innocent owner remedy.
     Any owner of a vehicle who suffers any loss due to the forfeiture of any vehicle pursuant to this division may recover the amount of the loss from the person who violated California Vehicle Code Section 23109(a) or (c), which gave rise to the nuisance under this division. (Ord. 323, 2003)

 

9.70.240 Towing and storage fees.
     A.    The designated captain is responsible for the costs incurred for towing and storage if it is determined that the driver at the time of impoundment did not violate California Vehicle Code Section 23109(a) or (c), and did not give rise to the nuisance.

     B.     Charges for towing and storage for any vehicle impounded pursuant to this division shall not exceed the normal towing and storage rates for other vehicle towing and storage conducted by the designated captain in the normal course of business. (Ord. 323, 2003)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS
Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.20 TURNING MOVEMENTS
Chapter 10.24 ONEWAY STREETS
Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
Chapter 10.32 LOADING AND UNLOADING
Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.40 PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
Chapter 10.44 BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
Chapter 10.48 VEHICLE USE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Chapter 10.52 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINALS

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
10.04.010 Title.
     This title shall be known as the “city traffic code.” (Prior code § 72.1)

 

10.04.020 Definitions.
     Whenever in this title the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Alley” means any highway, as defined in subsection E of this section, having a width of twenty-five feet or less and not provided with a sidewalk or sidewalks.

     B.     “Code” means the entire city code, unless some other code is specified.

     C.     “Council” means the city council of the city.

     D.    “Crosswalk” means either:

     1.     That portion of a roadway ordinarily included within the prolongation or connection of the boundary lines of sidewalks at intersections where the intersecting roadways meet at approximately right angles, except the prolongation of any such lines from an alley across a street; or

     2.     Any portion of a roadway distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface.

     E.     “Highway” means the entire width between boundary lines of every way set apart for public travel when any part thereof is open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

     F.     “Loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

     G.    Loading Zone, Bus. “Bus loading zone” means that space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of buses during loading and unloading of passengers.

     H.    Loading Zone, Passenger. “Passenger loading zone” means the space adjacent to a curb or edge of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers.

     I.      “Official traffic signals” means any device, whether manually, electrically or mechanically operated, by which traffic is alternately directed to stop and proceed, and which is erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction.

     J.      “Official traffic-control devices” means all signs, signals, markings and devices not inconsistent with this title, placed or erected by authority of a public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating, warning or guiding traffic.

     K.    “Park” means to stand or leave standing any vehicle, whether occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily, for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading of passengers or materials.

     L.     “Pedestrian” means any person who is afoot or is using a means of conveyance propelled by human power other than a bicycle.

     M.    “Road commissioner” means the public works director, or designee. For duties requiring professional expertise, the road commissioner may call upon professional employees or contractors to perform the necessary work under the supervision and control of the road commissioner of the city.

     N.    “Roadway” means that portion of the highway between the regularly established curblines, or when no curbs exist, that portion improved, designed, or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     O.    “Safety zone” means that portion of a roadway reserved for the exclusive use of pedestrians, marked and designated as provided in this title.

     P.     “Sidewalk” means that portion of the highway between the curblines or traversable roadway and the adjacent property lines.

     Q.    “State Department of Transportation” means the Department of Transportation of the state of California.

     R.     Stop or Stand.

     1.     “Stop” means the complete cessation of movement.

     2.     “Stop or stand” means any stopping or standing of a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

     S.     “Street” means a highway, as defined in subsection E of this section.

     T.     Time. Whenever certain hours are named in this title they mean standard time or daylight-saving time as may be in current use in the city.

     U.    “Vehicle” means every device or animal by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn on a street or highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon rails.

     V.    “Vehicle code” means the Vehicle Code of the state.

     W.    Vehicle Code Definitions. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined in this title, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions as now exist are incorporated in this title and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases as are used in this title as though set forth in this title in full. (Ord. 447 § 2, 2017; prior code §§ 72.2—72.26)

 

10.04.030 Exemption of certain vehicles.
     A.    The provisions of this title regulating the operation, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle that has qualified under the Vehicle Code as an authorized emergency vehicle, when any such vehicle is operated in the manner specified in the Vehicle Code in response to an emergency call.

     B.     The foregoing exemption shall not, however, protect the driver of any such vehicle from the consequences of his or her wilful disregard of the safety of others.

     C.     The provisions of this title regulating parking or standing of vehicles shall not apply to any vehicle of the road department or department of public works or of the State Department of Transportation while necessarily in use for construction or repair work on any highway, or any vehicle owned by the United States while in use for the collection, transportation or delivery of United States mail. (Prior code § 72.52)

Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADVISORY COMMITTEE
10.08.010 Establishment.
     There is established in the city a traffic advisory committee, referred to in this chapter as the committee. (Prior code § 72.220)

 

10.08.020 Membership—Appointment—Compensation.
     A.    The committee shall consist of the following members:

     1.     One representative of the public works department;

     2.     One representative of the city engineer;

     3.     One representative of the development services department;

     4.     One representative of the San Diego County sheriff’s department; and

     5.     One representative designated by Heartland Fire & Rescue.

     B.     The traffic advisory committee secretary, appointed by the traffic advisory committee, shall inform the city council of the name of each member of the committee, and any alternates that such organizations or individuals may appoint.

     C.     Representatives to the committee shall serve without additional compensation over and above their rate of pay and/or contractual rate. (Ord. 447 § 3, 2017; Ord. 304, 2001; Ord. 281, 1998; Ord. 134, 1987; prior code § 72.221)

 

10.08.030 Function.
     Upon the receipt of a request or recommendation for a traffic regulation in the city, the committee may proceed to make such investigation as it deems necessary, which may include engineering studies and studies of traffic conditions. Upon completing such investigation, the committee shall make its report and recommendation to the city engineer and to the council. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

10.08.040 Council not bound by committee recommendation.
     The council may proceed to adopt any amendment to this code, or any resolution pursuant thereto, without first receiving the recommendation or report of the committee, and the council shall not be bound by any recommendation or report of the committee. (Prior code § 72.224)

Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS
10.12.010 Variation of state speed limit.
     When it has been determined upon the basis of an engineering and traffic survey that a speed greater than the prima facie speed limit of twenty-five miles per hour would facilitate the orderly movement of vehicular traffic and would be reasonable and safe under the conditions found to exist upon any street or highway in the city, the city council may by resolution determine and declare a prima facie speed limit of thirty, thirty-five, forty, forty-five, fifty, fifty-five or sixty miles per hour or a maximum speed limit of sixty-five miles per hour, and such declared prima facie speed limit shall become effective when signs are erected giving notice thereof. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2008; Ord. 190, 1991)

Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES
10.16.010 Signs—Failure to post.
     No provision of this title for which signs are required shall be enforced against an alleged violator thereof, unless appropriate signs are in place and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, giving notice of such provision. (Prior code § 72.61)

 

10.16.020 Signals—Designation of intersections.
     The council shall by resolution designate what intersection shall be controlled by official traffic-control signals. (Prior code § 72.62)

 

10.16.030 Signals—Road commissioner to place, maintain and operate.
     The road commissioner shall place, maintain and operate, or cause to be placed, maintained and operated, all official traffic-control signals authorized by the council as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 72.63)

 

10.16.040 Hours of operation.
     The road commissioner shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic-control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title or established by resolution of the council. (Prior code § 72.64)

 

10.16.050 Additional installations by commissioner.
     The road commissioner may place and maintain such traffic-control devices in addition to those authorized by other provisions of this title as he or she may deem necessary to regulate traffic or to guide or warn traffic, but he or she shall make such determination only upon the basis of traffic engineering principles and traffic investigations and in accordance with such standards, limitations and rules as may be established by this title or resolution of the council. (Prior code § 72.65)

 

10.16.060 Crosswalks.
     The road commissioner shall provide and maintain painted markings, or other appropriately devised symbols or warning signs, at all crosswalks which have been designated as such by the council. He or she may do so at such other crosswalks where, in his or her opinion, such symbols or warning signs are necessary. (Prior code § 72.67)

 

10.16.070 Traffic markings.
     The road commissioner may place appropriate traffic guide lines dividing highways into the number of traffic lanes that is proper and necessary, and may place such other pavement markings as are necessary to direct vehicular movements in accordance with requirements of this title and the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 72.68)

 

10.16.080 Distinctive roadway markings.
     Whenever the State Department of Transportation determines and designates a distinctive roadway marking which shall indicate no driving over such marking, the road commissioner is authorized to designate by such marking those streets or parts of streets where the volume of traffic or the vertical or other curvature of the roadway renders it hazardous to drive on the left side of such marking or signs and markings. Such marking or signs and marking shall have the same effect as similar markings placed by the State Department of Transportation pursuant to provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 72.69)

 

10.16.090 Temporary removal of signals and other facilities—Suspension of regulations.
     A.    Whenever, because of the construction, alteration, repair, or improvement of any highway, or because of other emergency, compliance with any prohibition of this title, including a prohibition pursuant to any action of the council taken in accordance with this title, will create a traffic hazard and the road commissioner so finds, he or she shall either remove or cover up any sign or other traffic marking which informs persons of such prohibition.

     B.     While such sign or other marking is removed or covered the effect of such prohibition is suspended. At the end of such emergency, unless otherwise determined by the council, the road commissioner shall replace or uncover such sign or other marking. (Prior code § 72.71)

 

10.16.100 Damaging or defacement prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to maliciously tear down, damage, mutilate, deface or destroy any sign, notice or traffic-control device placed upon or along or affixed to or along any city highway or any property, which sign, notice or traffic-control device is intended to indicate or designate any highway or is intended to direct, control or warn operators or travelers. (Prior code § 72.72)

 

10.16.110 Permit for school district to maintain portable sign within rightofway.
     Upon approval of the council, the road commissioner may issue a permit to a school district authorizing such district to maintain within a city right-of-way a portable school crossing sign and/or flasher. Such permit may be issued on the terms and conditions deemed necessary or appropriate by the road commissioner for the protection of the public. Any such permit issued by the road commissioner shall contain a provision that it may be revoked by the road commissioner for violation of any of the terms or conditions of such permit. (Prior code § 72.73)

 

10.16.120 Restricting use of or closing city street.
     A.    The road commissioner is authorized to restrict the use of, or close, any city street whenever he or she considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

     1.     For the protection of the public;

     2.     For the protection of such city street from damage during storms;

     3.     During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon.

     B.     No liability shall attach to the city, the road commissioner or to the city council for the restriction of use, or closing, of any city street for the above public purposes. (Prior code § 72.75)

 

10.16.130 Stop signs—Erection on through streets.
     The road commissioner shall erect and maintain stop signs complying with the provisions of the Vehicle Code at all entrances to highways or portions of highways designated by the council by resolution as through highways. (Prior code § 72.100)

 

10.16.140 Stop signs—Establishment at intersections.
     The road commissioner shall erect and maintain stop signs in compliance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code at the entrance of every intersection which the council has determined is an intersection at which there is special hazard to life or property by reason of the volume of traffic at such intersection, or because of the lack of visibility to the drivers of vehicles approaching such intersection, or because of the number of reported accidents or the apparent probability thereof, or by reasons of physical conditions which render any such intersection exceptionally dangerous or hazardous to life or property, and where the factors creating this special hazard are such that according to the principles and experience of traffic engineering, the installation of stop signs is reasonably calculated to reduce the expectancy of accidents and that the use of warning signs would be inadequate. (Prior code § 72.101)

 

10.16.150 Stop signs—Emergencies.
     Where because of any emergency the conditions described in Section 10.16.140 exist, the road commissioner may erect, or cause to be erected, stop signs complying with the Vehicle Code, as provided in Section 10.16.140, and maintain such signs while such conditions continue to exist. (Prior code § 72.102)

 

10.16.160 Stop signs—Obedience required.
     Where stop signs are erected, as provided in this chapter, at or near the entrance to any intersection, every operator of a vehicle shall stop such vehicle at such sign or at a clearly marked stop line before entering the intersection; provided, however, that no stop need be made at any such entrance or intersection where:

     A.    An officer is on duty and directs traffic to proceed;

     B.     A traffic signal is in operation and indicates that traffic may proceed;

     C.     A stop sign has been removed or covered pursuant to this title. (Prior code § 72.103)

 

10.16.170 Stop signs—Emergency removal.
     A.    Where, because of temporary detours, or other emergency, it would be impracticable and a hazard to require a vehicle to stop at an intersection where a stop sign has been erected pursuant to this title and the road commissioner so finds, he or she shall either remove such sign or so cover it that no portion of the word “STOP” remains visible.

     B.     At the termination of such emergency, unless the council otherwise determines, the road commissioner shall restore such signs or uncover such signs. (Prior code § 72.104)

 

10.16.180 Emerging from alley or private driveway.
     The driver of a vehicle, emerging from an alley, driveway or building, shall stop such vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or into the sidewalk area extending across any alleyway. (Prior code § 72.105)

 

10.16.190 Erection of signs at yield rightofway intersections.
     The road commissioner shall erect and maintain “Yield Right-of-Way” signs complying with the provisions of the Vehicle Code at all approaches to highways and intersections of highways designated by the council by resolution. (Prior code § 72.107)

Chapter 10.20 TURNING MOVEMENTS
10.20.010 Authority to place pavement markings, markers, etc.—Multiple lanes.
     The road commissioner is authorized to place pavement markings, markers, buttons, or signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersections, and the road commissioner is authorized to allocate and indicate more than one lane of traffic from which drivers of vehicles may make right or left turns, and the course to be traveled, as so indicated, may conform to or be other than as prescribed by law or ordinance. (Prior code § 72.80)

 

10.20.020 Restricted turn signs—Authority to place.
     The road commissioner is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right, left, or U turn, and shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. (Prior code § 72.81)

 

10.20.030 Restricted turn signs—Obedience required.
     Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating that no right, left, or U turn is permitted, no driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Prior code § 72.82)

 

10.20.040 Authority to prohibit right turns against traffic stop signal.
     The road commissioner is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right turn against a red or stop signal and shall erect proper signs giving notice of such prohibition. No driver of a vehicle shall disobey the directions of any such sign. (Prior code § 72.83)

Chapter 10.24 ONEWAY STREETS
10.24.010 Designation by resolution.
     The council may by resolution describe and designate highways or portions of highways as one-way streets. (Prior code § 72.90)

 

10.24.020 Posting of signs.
     The road commissioner shall place, or cause to be placed, in a conspicuous place on such one-way streets at the intersection of each highway intersecting such one-way street, adequate signs bearing the words “One-Way Street” and indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement. (Prior code § 72.91)

 

10.24.030 Violation unlawful.
     It is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle, traversing any portion of any one-way street as designated or established by resolution of the council, to operate such vehicle thereon in violation of the one-way street signs placed by the road commissioner pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 72.92)

Chapter 10.28 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING
10.28.010 Applicability.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping, standing or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified in this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on standing or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other and more restrictive provisions of the Vehicle Code, this code or city ordinances, prohibiting or limiting the standing or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. (Prior code § 72.110)

 

10.28.020 Prohibited within median strip or traffic island.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within any median strip between roadways or within any traffic island or other area designed to separate or guide the movement of traffic. (Prior code § 72.111)

 

10.28.030 Parallel with curb—Restrictions.
     A.    Subject to other and more restrictive limitations, a vehicle may be stopped or parked within eighteen inches of the left-hand curb facing in the direction of traffic movement upon any one-way street, unless signs are in place prohibiting such stopping or standing.

     B.     In the event a highway includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are in place permitting such standing or parking.

     C.     The road commissioner is authorized to determine when standing or parking shall be prohibited upon the left-hand side of any one-way street, or when standing or parking may be permitted upon or adjacent to the left-hand side of any one-way roadway of a highway having two or more separate roadways, and shall erect signs giving notice thereof.

     D.    No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon either side of a one-way street so that such vehicle is facing opposite to the direction of traffic movement upon such one-way street. (Prior code § 72.112)

 

010.28.040 On narrow streets.
     A.    The road commissioner is authorized to place signs or markings indicating no parking upon any highway when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway does not exceed twenty feet, or upon one side of a highway as indicated by such signs or markings when the width of the roadway and shoulders of such highway does not exceed thirty feet.

     B.     When signs or marking prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized in this section, no persons shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign or marking. (Prior code § 72.113)

 

10.28.050 Adjacent to schools.
     A.    The road commissioner is authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in his or her opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.

     B.     When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Prior code § 72.114)

 

10.28.060 Prohibited in specified places—Generally.
     When the road commissioner determines that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking at any of the following places in order to eliminate a dangerous traffic hazard, the road commissioner shall appropriately sign or mark such places and, when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of said places, except that this section does not prohibit buses from stopping to receive or discharge passengers at such places when appropriately signed or marked as bus loading zones:

     A.    At any place within twenty feet of a point on the curb edge of the roadway immediately opposite the mid-block end of a safety zone;

     B.     At any place within twenty-five feet of an intersection;

     C.     Within twenty-five feet of the approach to any traffic signal, stop sign, or official electric flashing device;

     D.    Adjacent to either side of a crosswalk or driveway entrance for a distance not to exceed twenty feet from either side of such crosswalk or driveway;

     E.     At any other place where the road commissioner determines that it is necessary in order to eliminate a dangerous traffic hazard;

     F.     Within one hundred feet of any intersection of any vehicle which is six feet or more in height. (Ord. 110, 1985; prior code § 72.115)

 

10.28.070 Prohibited in specified places—Near certain premises.
     The road commissioner may appropriately sign or mark the following places and, when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any of said places:

     A.    For a distance of fifty feet along the curb or edge of the roadway at the entrance to any hospital;

     B.     For a distance of fifty feet along the curb or edge of the roadway immediately in front of the main entrance to any substation office of the sheriff;

     C.     For a distance of fifty feet along the curb or edge of the roadway immediately in front of the main entrance to any fire station housing motor vehicle firefighting equipment;

     D.    Adjacent to any fire hydrant when it has been determined by the road commissioner that stopping, standing or parking of any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, would present some special hazard or would prevent ready access to the fire hydrant. (Prior code § 72.116)

 

10.28.080 Restrictions to facilitate traffic movement.
     When the council determines by resolution that it is necessary to prohibit stopping, standing or parking on certain highways, or portions thereof, at all or certain hours of the day, in order to facilitate the movement of traffic or to eliminate a hazardous condition, the road commissioner shall appropriately sign or mark such highways, or portions thereof, and when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof, in violation of the restrictions stated on or indicated by such signs or markings; except, that this section does not prohibit buses from stopping to receive and discharge passengers at places appropriately signed or marked as bus loading zones. (Prior code § 72.117)

 

10.28.090 Blocking highway unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to stop, park, or leave standing any vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon any highway within any business or residence district, unless not less than eight feet of the width of the paved or improved or main traveled portion of the highway opposite such stopped, parked or standing vehicle is left clear and unobstructed for free passage of other vehicles. (Prior code § 72.118)

 

10.28.100 Temporary restrictions.
     A.    Whenever the road commissioner determines that traffic congestion or traffic hazard of an emergency nature is likely to result from the operation, stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles during the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings, or functions, or during the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of any highway, or for any other reason, he or she may place or cause to be placed temporary signs prohibiting the operation, stopping, standing, or stopping of vehicles during the existence of such emergency.

     B.     When signs authorized by the provisions of this section are in place giving notice thereof, no person shall operate, stop, stand or park any vehicle contrary to the directions of such signs. (Prior code § 72.119)

 

10.28.110 Moving of vehicles by sheriff.
     If a person parks any vehicle contrary to the provisions of Section 10.28.100 and the presence of such vehicle prevents or interferes with the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of the highway, the sheriff shall move such vehicle to the nearest place on the highway where:

     A.    The presence of such vehicle will not prevent or interfere with the construction, alteration, repair or improvement of the highway; and

     B.     The presence of such vehicle is not in violation of any provisions of any statute or ordinance, or is not in violation of any statute or ordinance, except Section 10.28.100. The sheriff shall not move, in any event, any vehicle more than five hundred feet. (Prior code § 72.120)

 

10.28.120 Removal of ignition key.
     Every person who parks a motor vehicle upon any highway shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom, and take such key with him or her, unless a licensed operator remains in such motor vehicle, in which case such licensed operator, before leaving the vehicle, shall first lock the ignition, remove the key therefrom, and take such key with him or her. (Prior code § 72.121)

 

10.28.130 Use of streets for storage of vehicles prohibited.
     A.    No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or alley for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours.

     B.     In the event a vehicle is parked or left standing upon a street in excess of a consecutive period of seventy-two hours, the sheriff or any member of the Highway Patrol of the state may remove said vehicle from the street in the manner and subject to the requirements of Sections 22651 and 22652 of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 72.122)

 

10.28.140 Certain purposes prohibited.
     No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for the principal purpose of:

     A.    Displaying such vehicle for sale;

     B.     Washing, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, except repairs necessitated by an emergency. (Prior code § 72.123)

 

10.28.150 Emergency vehicles.
     When the council determines by resolution that it is necessary to restrict parking on certain highways, or portions thereof, to emergency vehicles as defined in Vehicle Code Section 165, or to one or more of the types of emergency vehicles as defined therein, the city engineer shall appropriately sign or mark such highways or portions thereof, and when so signed or marked no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway or portion thereof, in violation of the restrictions stated on or indicated by such signs or markings. (Prior code § 72.124)

 

10.28.160 No-parking/tow-away zones.
     A.    When the council determines by resolution that it is necessary to establish no-parking/tow-away zones on certain highways or portions thereof, the city engineer shall appropriately sign or mark such highways or portions thereof, and, when so signed or marked, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle on any such highway, or portion thereof, in violation of the restriction stated on or indicated by such signs or markings.

     B.     Any vehicles left parked or standing on any such highway, or portion thereof, in violation of subsection A of this section may be removed by the sheriff or any member of the State Highway Patrol. (Prior code § 72.125)

 

10.28.170 Commercial vehicles.
     A.    The parking or standing on streets in residential areas of commercial vehicles having a manufacturer’s gross weight rating of ten thousand pounds or more is prohibited.

     B.     This section shall not apply under the following conditions:

     1.     When such vehicle is loading or unloading property;

     2.     When such vehicle is parked in connection with and in aid of the performance of a service to or on a property within the residential area;

     3.     When such vehicle is engaged in the construction, installation, repair or maintenance of a publicly or privately owned utility facility located within the residential area;

     4.     When the area contains property used for commercial or industrial purposes and such vehicle is parked on the property or on the highway contiguous to the property;

     5.     When the city council has determined by resolution that the parking of such vehicles on certain residential streets, or portions thereof, shall be permitted and the road commissioner has appropriately signed or marked such streets, or portions thereof.

     C.     For the purposes of this section, “residential area” means that portion of a highway and the property contiguous thereto upon both sides of which highway, collectively within a distance of a quarter mile, the contiguous property fronting thereon is occupied by eight or more separate dwelling units. A residential area may be longer than one-quarter of a mile if the above ratio of dwelling units to the length of highway exists. (Prior code § 72.126)

 

10.28.180 Parking time limited—Violation of signs prohibited.
     It is unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to stop, stand or park such vehicle in violation of the restrictions stated on signs posted and maintained by the road commissioner as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 72.140)

 

10.28.190 Parking time limited—Erection of signs.
     The road commissioner shall erect and maintain adequate signs along the portions of highways designated in this chapter specifying that parking is limited as specified in this chapter. (Prior code § 72.141)

 

10.28.200 Angle parking—Established.
     A.    Within those portions of those highways designated in this chapter, the road commissioner shall indicate at what angle vehicles should be parked by placing parallel white lines on the surface of the roadway.

     B.     On such portions of such highways a person shall not stop, stand, or park any vehicle except between, at the angle indicated by, and parallel to both such adjacent white lines, with the nearest wheel not more than one foot from the curb or edge of the roadway. (Prior code § 72.150)

 

10.28.210 Angle parking—Main Street.
     Angle parking (thirty degrees) is established in the city on the west side of Main Street, from a point fifty feet south of the south line of Broadway southerly for a distance of eighty-eight feet and from a point one hundred eighty feet south of the south line of Broadway southerly for a distance of fifty-four feet and from a point ten feet north of the north line of Broadway northerly for a distance of six hundred seventy feet. (Prior code § 72.157)

 

10.28.220 Angle parking—Cinderella Way.
     Angle parking (ninety degrees) is established in the city on the southerly portion of Cinderella Way, from a point fifty feet south of Cinderella Place, for a distance of two hundred forty feet following the curb line of the cul-de-sac. Said angle parking shall be designated by and between signs posted by the city. (Ord. 66 § 1, 1980)

 

10.28.230 Perpendicular parking—Skyline Drive.
     Perpendicular parking (ninety degrees) is established in the city on the west side of Skyline Drive, from a point three hundred fifty-five feet south of Lincoln Street southerly for a distance of one hundred sixty feet (approx.). (Ord. 90, 1982)

Chapter 10.32 LOADING AND UNLOADING
10.32.010 Zones established by resolution.
     The city council may by resolution determine the location of and establish loading zones, passenger loading zones and bus loading zones. (Prior code § 72.130)

 

10.32.020 Loading zones.
     Loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs indicating such zone or by a yellow line stenciled with black letters “LOADING ONLY” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Prior code § 72.131)

 

10.32.030 Passenger loading zones.
     Passenger loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a white line stenciled with black letters “PASSENGER LOADING ONLY” upon the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Prior code § 72.132)

 

10.32.040 Bus loading zones.
     Bus loading zones shall be indicated by appropriate signs or by a red line stenciled with white letters “NO STANDING” together with the words “BUS ZONE” on the top or side of all curbs within such zones. (Prior code § 72.133)

 

10.32.050 Bus loading zones to be used by buses only.
     No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle except a bus in a bus loading zone. (Prior code § 72.134)

 

10.32.060 Curb markings—Regulations indicated by colors or signs.
     A.    The road commissioner is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to place, and, when required in this section, shall place the following curb markings to indicate parking or standing regulations, and said curb markings shall have the meaning set forth in this subsection:

     1.     Red shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the Vehicle Code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signposted as a bus zone.

     2.     Yellow shall mean no stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven am. and six pm. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty minutes.

     3.     White shall mean no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six pm. of any day, except Sundays and holidays, and except as follows:

     a.     When such zone is in front of a hotel, the restrictions shall apply at all times.

     b.     When such zone is in front of a theater, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such theater is closed; or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox.

     4.     Green shall mean no standing or parking for longer than twenty minutes at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Sundays and holidays.

     5.     Blue shall mean parking limited exclusively to the vehicles of physically handicapped persons.

     B.     When there are no curbs, the road commissioner shall indicate the parking or standing regulations by installing in lieu of curb markings appropriate signs giving notice of such regulations.

     C.     When the road commissioner, pursuant to this title, has caused curb markings or appropriate signs to be placed, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or adjacent to the side of any roadway so appropriately signed, in violation of any of the provisions of this section or of such curb markings or signs. (Prior code § 72.135)

 

10.32.070 Effect of permission to load or unload.
     A.    Permission granted in this section to stop or stand a vehicle for purposes of loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial vehicles and shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than twenty minutes.

     B.     The loading or unloading of materials shall apply only to commercial deliveries, the delivery or pickup of express and parcel post packages and United States mail.

     C.     Permission granted in this section to stop or park for purposes of loading or unloading passengers shall include the loading or unloading of personal baggage, but shall not extend beyond the time necessary therefor, and in no event for more than three minutes.

     D.    Within the total time above specified, the provisions of this section shall be enforced so as to accommodate necessary and reasonable loading or unloading but without permitting abuse of the privileges granted. (Prior code § 72.136)

 

10.32.080 Standing for loading or unloading only.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any yellow loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or material for such time as is permitted in Section 10.32.070. (Prior code § 72.137)

 

10.32.090 Standing in alley.
     No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of persons or materials in any alley. (Prior code § 72.138)

Chapter 10.36 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.36.010 Driving through funeral processions.
     No driver of a vehicle shall drive between vehicles comprising a funeral procession while they are in motion and when the vehicles in such procession are conspicuously so designated. (Prior code § 72.234)

 

10.36.020 New pavement.
     No person shall ride or drive any animal or any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted marking in any street when a sign is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or marking, or when a sign is in place stating that the street, or any portion thereof, is closed. (Prior code § 72.235)

 

 

10.36.030 Restricted access.
     No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any limited access roadway, except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority. (Prior code § 72.236)

 

10.36.040 Molesting of traffic-counting devices prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, except persons authorized by the road commissioner, to move, molest, tamper with or damage any traffic-counting device located within a city highway. (Prior code § 72.241)

 

10.36.050 Vehicles injurious to streets prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive, draw, or propel, or permit to be ridden, driven, drawn or propelled, along, upon or over any improved highway in the city any vehicle, traction engine, harrow or disc harrow, disc plow or other implement that will tear up or in any manner disturb or damage the surface on the street. (Prior code § 72.243)

 

10.36.060 Flashing lights—Prohibited.
     No person not authorized by the city council shall erect or maintain any device which directs a beam of light in a flashing sequence toward any highway, nor shall any person erect or maintain any electric advertising sign or similar device that interferes with the visibility of any official traffic-control device or warning signal. (Prior code § 72.247)

 

10.36.070 Transportation of animals.
     No person shall transport or carry, on any public highway or public roadway, any animal in a motor vehicle unless the animal is safely enclosed within the vehicle or protected by a cab or container, secured cage, cross-tether, harness or other device that will prevent the animal from falling from, being thrown from, or jumping from, the motor vehicle. (Ord. 130 § 1, 1986)

 

10.36.080 Animals in unattended vehicles.
     No person shall leave an animal in any unattended vehicle without adequate ventilation or in such a manner as to subject the animal to extreme temperatures which adversely affect the animal’s health or welfare. (Ord. 130 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 10.40 PERMITS FOR SPECIAL EVENTS AND PARADES
10.40.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish a process for permitting community events to use city streets, parks, open space, facilities or services in accordance with this chapter, Chapter 12.20 and any implementing regulations adopted by the city council, city manager, or recreation services direc-

tor as appropriate. The city recognizes the substantial community benefits that may result from community events. They can provide cultural enrichment, promote economic vitality and enhance community identity. They may also provide funding opportunities for service organizations. The purpose of this chapter is to provide a coordinated process for managing community events to ensure the health and safety of event patrons, residents, workers, and other visitors, to prohibit illegal activities from occurring at the community events, and to protect the rights of community event permit holders. It is also the intent of the council to protect the rights of people to engage in expressive activities in the city’s public places and to establish the least restrictive and reasonable time, place and manner of regulation of these activities. It is further intended to create mechanisms for cost recovery and use charges, to the extent authorized by law, while not unduly impacting the viability of events. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.020 Permit required.
     Except as otherwise provided by this chapter or other applicable law, rule or regulation or any permit or license issued hereunder or pursuant to the terms of a permit, lease, or contract which has been specifically authorized by the city council, a community event permit shall be required to be obtained from the recreation services director, or designee, for the following activities:

     A.    A parade, procession, march or assembly consisting of persons, animals, vehicles, or any combination thereof, which is to assemble or travel in unison on any public street, highway, alley, sidewalk or other city-designated public way and which either (1) may impede, obstruct, impair, or interfere with free use of such public street, highway, alley, sidewalk, or other public way owned, controlled, or maintained by the city or (2) does not comply with normal or usual traffic regulations or controls;

     B.     Any activity or event involving seventy-five or more persons on city owned, controlled, or maintained property not subject to the requirements of subsection A of this section;

     C.     Any activity or event on public property which requires the placement of a tent, canopy, or other temporary structure if that placement requires a permit from the city’s fire department or community development department;

     D.    Notwithstanding the above, events at facilities located on city property that are predominantly used and approved by the fire department or the community development department as assembly spaces do not require a community event permit so long as such events do not require a street closure or traffic diversion or require the use of public property that does not constitute an assembly space. For the purposes of this subsection, assembly spaces include, but are not limited to, the Lemon Grove Community Center, Lemon Grove Senior Center and the Lemon Grove Recreation Center.

     E.     School grounds and other property owned by the Lemon Grove Unified School District are exempt from the requirements of this chapter for school sponsored events. Private events held on school property are subject to the requirements of this chapter.

     F.     Long-term lessees of city owned, controlled, or maintained property may receive an annual community event permit which authorizes a specified number of community events at that property for the term of the permit so long as the community event otherwise complies with the requirements of this chapter.

     G.    Events using a ball field, gazebo or picnic shelter at a park or recreation area with more than twenty-five persons, but less than seventy-five, shall be subject to this chapter with permit conditions based upon the provisions of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, Sections 12.20.340 and 12.20.350, along with any implementing regulations adopted thereunder.

     H.    Spontaneous events, which are occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge less than forty-eight hours prior to such event, may be conducted at Civic Center Park without the or-

ganizers first having to obtain a community event permit. If practicable, the organizers should give notice to the city’s recreation services director at least four hours prior to the event informing the city of the date and time of the event and providing an estimate of the approximate number of persons who will be participating.

     Events that require advance planning such as recreation events, competition/contests/spectator sports fairs, festivals, carnivals, ticketed events, sales/trade shows or events which require a permit from the recreation services director or the fire department for the placement of structures shall not be considered spontaneous events. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.030 Application.
     A.    To receive a community event permit, a person must complete and file a community event application with the recreation services director, on a form approved by the city. The applicant must provide the following information:

     1.     A description of the proposed use, event, or activity;

     2.     The street or public property and specific area or areas thereof which will be utilized in connection with the proposed use, event, or activity;

     3.     The manner in which the public property will be utilized;

     4.     The date or dates and the specific times thereof, including set-up and tear-down, that the public property is to be utilized for the described use, activity, or event;

     5.     The name, address and telephone number of the person, entity or organization sponsoring or conducting the proposed event;

     6.     The name, address and telephone number of the person or persons to be contacted regarding the application or permit.

     B.     The recreation services director may refer the application to such city departments or personnel, as the director deems necessary from the nature of the application for review, evaluation, investigation and recommendations regarding approval or disapproval of the application.

     C.     An application must be submitted and reviewed in accordance with the time limits established in administrative regulations and guidelines established pursuant to Section 10.40.180. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.040 Review process.
     Subject also to Section 10.40.050, the recreation services director shall issue a community events permit, if it is determined that all of the following criteria have been met:

     A.    The proposed use of the property is not governed by or subject to any other permit procedures provided elsewhere in this code or other applicable laws, rules, or regulations.

     B.     The preparation for or the conduct of the proposed use, event or activity will not unreasonably or unfeasibly burden city resources necessary to preserve the public’s use of the street in the area contiguous to the street or other public property.

     C.     The preparation for or the conduct of the proposed use, event or activity will not unduly impede, obstruct, or interfere with the operation of emergency vehicles or equipment in or through the particular permit area or adversely affect the city’s ability to perform municipal functions or furnish city services in the vicinity of the permit area.

     D.    The proposed use, event, or activity does not otherwise present a substantial or unwarranted safety, noise, or traffic hazard.

     E.     The proposed event will be of a nature and size appropriate to the proposed venue, location, or site, will occur during a time period approved for that venue, location, or site, and will fall within the frequency limitations established by administrative guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     F.     The proposed event will not include live animals in parks, except participants with dogs on leashes per city regulations.

     G.    A transportation management/parking plan has been approved for the event by the city engineer or designee to the extent such a plan is required by implementing regulations.

 

     H.    The proposed event will not cause other adverse impacts on health or safety to surrounding residential or commercial uses, which cannot be effectively mitigated.

     In deciding whether to approve an application, no consideration may be given to the message of the event, the content of speech, the identity or associational relationships of the applicant, or to any assumptions or predictions as to the amount of hostility which may be aroused in the public by the content or speech or message conveyed by the event. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.050 Denial/revocation of permit.
     The recreation services director shall deny an application for a community events permit or revoke a permit if he or she finds any of the following:

     A.    One or more of the approval criteria specified in Section 10.40.040 is not met;

     B.     The applicant has knowingly made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the application process;

     C.     The application does not contain the information required by this chapter;

     D.    The application does not satisfy the applicable requirements of this chapter, Chapter 12.20 or the administrative regulations adopted thereunder;

     E.     The applicant fails to comply with any conditions of approval including, but not limited to:

     1.     Remittance of fees, charges or deposits,

     2.     Submittal of an indemnification agreement and/or proof of insurance to the extent required,

     3.     Timely receipt of all required approvals.

     F.     The applicant fails to agree as a condition of permit issuance that if city property is destroyed or damaged by reason of permittee’s use, event or activity and the damage or destruction is directly attributable to the permittee, the permittee shall reimburse the city for the actual replacement or repair cost of the destroyed or damaged property. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.060 Permit fees.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided by this code or any other applicable law, rule or regulation, or by the terms of a permit, license, lease or contract which has been specifically authorized by the city council, the permit application fees and other additional fees and charges, including neighborhood notification fees, for the use of city streets or other city-owned or controlled property pursuant to this chapter shall be established by the city council by resolution.

     B.     An indigent natural person who cannot apply for a permit because of an inability to pay the application fee due to such indigence may not be required to pay the fee in accordance with administrative regulations or guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time of permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, be reasonably necessary to verify such status. For purposes of this section, “indigent natural person” means:

     1.     A person who is receiving benefits pursuant to the Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and State Supplemental Payments (SSP) programs (Sections 12200 to 12205, inclusive, of the California Welfare and Institutions Code), the California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids Act (Cal WORKs) program (Chapter 2, commencing with Section 1 1200 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code), the Food Stamp program (7 U.S.C. Section 2011 et seq.) or Section 17000 of the Welfare and Institutions Code;

     2.     A person whose monthly income is one hundred twenty-five percent or less of the current monthly poverty line annually established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services pursuant to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, as amended.

     C.     An organization in which a majority of its members meet the criteria for indigent status, as established in subsection B of this section, may also be eligible for application fee waiver. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.070 Appeals.
     Any applicant aggrieved by an adverse decision under Section 10.40.040 or 10.40.050 may appeal such decision to the city manager by filing a written notice of such appeal with the city manager’s office within five business days of the decision. The city manager shall decide the appeal within one working day. The decision shall be final except for judicial review. Judicial review for matters involving expressive conduct under this chapter shall be subject to the expedited review process established under California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. Any agreement to follow the process established under Section 1094.8 shall not be deemed an admission regarding the type of conduct at issue. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.080 Interference with a community event prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to interfere with a community event permitted under this chapter by engaging in the following acts when done with the intent to cause interference:

     A.    Blocking, obstructing, or impeding the passage of participants, vehicles, or animals in the community event along the community event route;

     B.     Walking or running, driving a vehicle, riding a bicycle or skateboard, or using any similar device through, between, with, or among participants, vehicles, or animals in the community event;

     C.     Dropping, throwing, rolling, or flying any object toward, among, or between participants, vehicles, or animals in the community event;

     D.    Grabbing at, taking hold of, hitting, pulling, or pushing any participant, vehicle, or animal in the community event or anything in the possession of any participant in the community event;

     E.     Throwing, squirting, dumping, or dropping any liquid or gaseous substance on, toward, among, or between participants, vehicles, or animals in the community event;

     F.     Vending or offering for sale any food or merchandise from the roadway, curb to curb, on a community event route during the hours the community event route is closed to normal motor vehicle traffic, without first having obtained the written permission of the person holding the permit for the community event, in addition to any permits and/or licenses required for such activity by the city or any other governmental entity. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.090 Hold harmless.
     Each permittee shall execute a hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the city agreeing to defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city against losses and liabilities incurred from the conduct of the permittee or its officers, employees, and agents. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.100 Insurance requirements.
     A.    Except as otherwise prohibited by law or an exemption is obtained as provided by this chapter and the implementing regulations, the permittee shall procure and maintain in full force and effect during the term of the permit a policy of insurance from a reliable insurance company authorized to do business in the state, which policy includes the city, its boards, officers, agents, employees, and volunteers as named insureds or additional named insureds and which provides the coverage that the risk manager determines to be necessary and adequate under the circumstances. Proof of insurance shall be submitted to the city prior to issuance of the permit and maintenance of this insurance shall be a condition of the permit.

     B.     If the risk manager determines that a particular use, event, or activity which is for a permit period of no more than one day does not present a substantial or significant public liability or property damage exposure for the city or its officers, agents, employees, or volunteers, the risk manager may give a written waiver of the insurance requirements of this section. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.110 Community event temporary signage.
     The permit holder may install temporary or nonpermanent sign(s) identifying or pertaining to the community event, or designee, within the event site as defined in the community event permit. The logo of a commercial sponsor may be included on a small area of the temporary sign, not to exceed one square foot or five percent of the banner area, whichever is smaller, provided said sign(s) are internally oriented. However, the logo of tobacco sponsors shall be prohibited.

     Directional signs for walks and races may be installed by the permit holder, or designee, provided that each sign is less than two square feet in size, attached to a street light or other utility pole at a height of between five and six feet without damaging the finish of the pole, and installed less than two hours prior to the start of the event and removed within one hour of the completion of the event. A plan showing the type and location of the proposed directional signs must be submitted as part of the community event permit application and be approved by the city. The city may remove signs that do not meet the installation and removal requirements of this section and shall charge the permittee for the cost of this removal. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.120 Departmental service charge.
     A.    In addition to the payment of the nonrefundable permit application fee and as detailed in the administrative guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter, a permittee shall pay the city for city departmental service charges incurred in connection with or due to the permittee’s activities under the permit unless the event was city-produced or city co-produced.

     B.     City departments shall submit the final invoices and billings for departmental service charges to the permittee no later than ten working days after the expiration date of the permit.

     C.     A permittee who claims an inability to pay departmental service charges due to indigency may have these charges waived in accordance with administrative regulations or guidelines adopted pursuant to this chapter. Application for indigent status shall be made at the time of permit application and shall be accompanied by such relevant information and documentation as may, in the opinion of the city manager or designee, be reasonably necessary to verify such status. For purposes of this section, “indigent natural person” means:

     1.     A person who is receiving benefits pursuant to the Supplemental Security Income (SSI), State Supplemental Payments (SSP) programs (Sections 12200 to 12205, inclusive, of the California Welfare and Institutions Code), the California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids Act (CalWORKS) program (Chapter 2 commencing with Section 11200 of Part 3 of Division 9 of the California Welfare and Institutions Code), the Food Stamp program (7 U.S.C. Section 2011 et seq.), or Section 17000 of the Welfare and Institutions Code;

     2.     A person whose monthly income is one hundred twenty-five percent or less of the current monthly poverty line annually established by the Secretary of Health and Human Services pursuant to the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981, as amended.

     D.    An organization in which a majority of the members meet the criteria for indigent status, as established in subsection C of this section, may also be eligible for waiver of departmental service charges.

     E.     No permittee shall be required to provide for or pay for the cost of public safety personnel to provide for the protection of a community event and its attendees from hostile members of the public or counter-demonstrations or for general law enforcement in the vicinity of the event. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.130 Parade routes.
     A.    Subject to the requirements of this chapter, a community event permit may be issued for a march, procession, or parade in only one direction on the following streets: starts at Washington Street and Broadway, proceeding West on Broadway to Lemon Grove Avenue, South on Lemon Grove Avenue to the termination of the route at Montana Street.

     B.     Minor adjustments to the routes established in subsection A of this section may be authorized by the recreation services director to the extent necessary to avoid construction or other obstructions, which would prevent the parade from proceeding on the established route.

     C.     Subject to all other applicable requirements of this chapter, this section does not prohibit the issuance of a community event permit for marches or processions on other streets so long as through and cross-traffic can be preserved and the safety of the marchers can be maintained.

     D.    Marches and processions may not be conducted on streets classified by the city as arterial streets between the hours of seven a.m. to nine a.m. and four p.m. to six p.m. on business days unless the march or procession is being conducted to coincide with another event, not organized or planned by the permittee, which is occurring on or adjacent to the arterial street upon which the march will be conducted. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.140 Races—Runs—Walks.
     The procedures and criteria for conducting races/runs/walks shall be as follows:

     A.    There shall be ten-kilometer routes and a five-kilometer route established by the community services director in consultation with the city engineer. Said routes shall be established based on criteria which consider the safety of the participants, spectators and members of the community. The potential disruption of traffic flows shall also be taken into consideration when routes are established.

     B.     Four races/walks/runs per route shall be allowed each year with no more than one per quarter on any one route.

     C.     No vehicular races shall be permitted.

     D.    Events which include multiple modes of travel (e.g., walking, running, and bicycling) shall be permitted so long as the start times for different modes of travel are staggered.

     E.     In addition to the routes established by subsection A of this section, races/walks/runs may be permitted on other streets in the city so long as the majority of the race/walk/run occurs outside of the city and that portion of the race/walk/run within the city does not exceed one-half mile in length. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.150 Display of community event permit.
     A copy of the community event permit shall be displayed at the community event site and shall be exhibited upon demand of any city official. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.160 Use of city name or logo without authorization.
     It is unlawful for the permittee conducting a community event to use the words “the City of Lemon Grove,” to suggest or indicate that the event is sponsored by the city or to use a facsimile of the seal or logo of the city of Lemon Grove in the promotional materials or advertising for the event without the city’s authorization. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.170 Administrative regulations.
     The city manager, or designee, which may include the recreation services director, shall adopt administrative regulations that are consistent with and that further the terms and requirements set forth within this chapter. All such administrative regulations must be in writing. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.180 Other permits and licenses.
     The issuance of a community events permit does not relieve any person from the obligation to obtain any other permit or license required pursuant to this code. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.190 Penalties.
     Any person who intentionally violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction at the discretion of the city attorney. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

 

10.40.200 Permits for special events.
     Nothing in this chapter limits the authority of the city to permit special events and attendant activities on public property. (Ord. 385 § 2, 2009)

Chapter 10.44 BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
10.44.010 Riding bicycles on sidewalks prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to ride a bicycle upon any sidewalk in a business district. (Prior code § 72.230)

 

10.44.020 Use of skateboards, roller skates and similar devices prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person upon roller skates or riding on or by means of a coaster, skateboard or similar device to go upon any roadway or sidewalk in the central commercial area of the city.

     B.     The central commercial area of the city is defined as that area of the city zoned central commercial plus area zoned general commercial that is bounded on the west by Lemon Grove Avenue, on the south by Lincoln Avenue, on the east by School Lane and on the north by the central commercial zone. The central commercial area is considered to include the roadway and sidewalks on both sides of all boundary streets as well as for all streets located internally to the boundary streets.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person to ride roller skates, skateboards, coasters, or similar devices upon the sidewalk or public plaza in any business district or any private parking lot or property open to the public, including city owned property, where signs prohibiting such activity are displayed.

     D.    A violation of this section is an infraction punishable by:

     1.     A fine not exceeding fifty dollars for a first violation;

     2.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a second violation of the same section within one year;

     3.     A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same section within one year. (Ord. 155 §§ 1, 2, 3, 1989; Ord. 31 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 10.48 VEHICLE USE ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
10.48.010 Prohibited—Written permission required.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate or drive or leave any vehicle in, over or upon any private property without having in possession, or posted on the vehicle, the written permission of the owner thereof, or the person entitled to the immediate possession thereof, or the authorized agent of either.

     B.     Whenever any person is stopped by a peace officer pursuant to this section, he or she shall, upon request of such peace officer, display said written permission.

     C.     The provision shall not apply to:

     1.     Persons having lawful business with said owner, agent, or person having lawful possession of said property;

     2.     The owner, agent, or person having lawful possession of said property. (Ord. 129 § 2, 1986)

Chapter 10.52 INTERSTATE TRUCK TERMINALS
10.52.010 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth, and if any word or phrase used in this chapter is not defined in this section, it shall

have the meanings set forth in the California Vehicle Code; provided that if any such word or phrase is not defined in the Vehicle Code it shall have the meaning attributed to it in ordinary usage.

     A.    “Terminal” means any facility at which freight is consolidated to be shipped or where full load consignments may be loaded and off loaded or at which the vehicles are regularly maintained, stored or manufactured.

     B.     “Interstate truck” means a truck tractor and semi-trailer or truck tractor, semi-tractor with unlimited with unlimited length as regulated by the Vehicle Code.

     C.     “City engineer” means the city engineer or an authorized representative.

     D.    “CalTrans” means the state of California Department of Transportation or its successor agency. (Ord. 143 § 1, 1987)

 

10.52.020 Purpose of provisions.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for terminal designation and truck route designation to terminals for interstate trucks operating on a federally designated highway system and to promote the general health, safety and welfare of the public. (Ord. 143 § 2, 1987)

 

10.52.030 Application required.
     A.    Any interested person requiring terminal access for interstate trucks from the federally designated highway system shall submit an application on a form as provided by the city, together with such information as may be required by the city engineer and appropriate fees to the city.

     B.     Upon receipt of the application, the city engineer will cause an investigation to be made to ascertain whether or not the proposed terminal facility meets the requirements for an interstate truck terminal. Upon the city engineer’s approval of that designation, the city engineer will then determine the capability of the route requested and alternate routes, whether requested or not. Determination of route capability will include, without limitation, a review of adequate turning radius and lane widths of ramps, intersections and highways and general traffic conditions such as might distance, speed and traffic volumes. No access off a federally designated highway system will be approved without the approval of CalTrans.

     C.     Should the requested route pass through the city to a terminal located in another jurisdiction, the applicant shall comply with that jurisdiction’s application process. Coordination of the approval of the route through the city will be the responsibility of the entity which controls the terminal’s land use. Costs for trailblazer signs shall be as provided in Section 10.52.040. (Ord. 143 § 3, 1987)

Title 11 (RESERVED)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 PROTECTION OF HIGHWAYS
Chapter 12.08 CENTERLINES
Chapter 12.10 PUBLIC STREET DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS
Chapter 12.12 BRIDGE CROSSINGS AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
Chapter 12.16 NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR BUILDINGS
Chapter 12.20 PARKS AND FACILITIES
Chapter 12.30 TRUCK ROUTES AND MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS

Chapter 12.04 PROTECTION OF HIGHWAYS
Article I. Applications, Permits, Fees and General Provisions
12.04.005 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases set forth in this section shall have the following meanings:

     A.    Building or Structure. In addition to the meaning ordinarily ascribed thereto, “building or structure” includes any machine, implement, device, tree, derrick, stage or other setting, lumber, sash or door, structural steel, pipe bend, dynamo, transformer, generator, punch, agitator, object or thing having a width of more than eight feet, other than any implement of husbandry or any special mobile equipment, as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California, having a width of ten feet or less. “Building or structure” also includes a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum permitted by the Vehicle Code.

     B.     “Commerical driveway” means any driveway that is not a residential driveway as defined in subsection H of this section.

     C.     “Driveway” means a commercial driveway.

     D.    “Encroachment” means any tower, pole, poleline, pipe, pipeline, driveway, private road, fence, billboard, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned herein, which is placed in, under or over any portion of the highway.

     E.     “Highway” means any public highway, public street, public way, or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for purpose of travel.

     F.     “Moving contractor” means any person who for him or herself or for another moves, or causes to be moved, any building or structure over, upon, along or across any highway.

     G.    “Person” means any person defined by Section 1.08.180 and also includes the United States, this state, this city and this county, including all departments and bureaus thereof, except the road department of this city.

     H.    “Residential driveway” means any driveway serving any property which is used solely as a private residence consisting of one, two, or three dwelling units, including farms or ranches which are not used as retail outlets.

     I.      “Surveyor” means the city engineer and the building inspector as ex-officio city engineer as to residential driveway permits only.

     J.      “Total number of tire inches” means that number calculated by adding the respective tire sizes as specified by the manufacturer of all tires resting upon the surface of the highway.

     K.    “Vehicle Code” means the Vehicle Code of the state.

     L.     “Width” means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the building or structure, or portion thereof, is or is to be loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over which the same is being or is to be moved. (Prior code § 71.101)

 

12.04.010 Application required.
     Every applicant for a permit or license required by this chapter shall make a written application to the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.102)

 

12.04.015 Application of contractor.
     In addition to the application required by Section 12.04.010, the contractor of any such person also shall be required to obtain a permit; provided, however, any contractor of this city for highway construction, improvement or repair shall not be required to obtain a permit pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 71.102.1)

 

12.04.020 City free from liability.
     The applicant shall agree to indemnify and/or hold harmless the city, each of its officers and its employees from any liability or responsibility for accident, loss, or damage to persons or property arising by reason of the work done by the applicant, or his or her agents, employees, or representatives. (Prior code § 71.103)

 

12.04.025 Fee or deposit—Required.
     Every applicant for a permit or license required by this chapter shall at the time of making application for the permit or license pay the fees and make the deposits required for such permit or license. (Prior code § 71.104)

 

12.04.030 Fee or deposit—Exemption.
     If the United States, this state, this or any other county, any municipal corporation, school district, other public district or public body files with the surveyor a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the city, then neither an issuance fee nor deposit is required from such persons. (Prior code § 71.105)

 

12.04.035 Fees—Waiver of prepayment—Granted when.
     At the request of a permittee who maintains with the surveyor a general deposit, as provided in this chapter, the surveyor may waive the requirement covering prepayment of the issuance fees and bill the permittee for issuance fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request; provided, that the amount of the deposit is sufficient to cover the fees and to provide for other contingencies for which it is given. The surveyor may revoke such waiver at any time and must revoke the waiver if the permittee fails to pay his or her bill for fees within the required time. (Prior code § 71.106)

 

12.04.040 Fees—Waiver of prepayment—Billing of permittee.
     Where the surveyor grants the waiver provided in Section 12.04.035, he or she shall bill the permittee at the end of each month for all permits issued during that month, and the permittee shall pay said bill not later than the last day of the following month. The surveyor may, in his or her discretion, accept a personal check drawn on a bank located within the county or Los Angeles County in payment of such bill, provided the check is received by the surveyor not later than the fifteenth day of the month following the month covered by the billing. The acceptance of the check constitutes a payment of such bill when, but not before, the check is duly paid. All such checks shall be deposited daily by the surveyor with the city treasurer. (Prior code § 71.107)

 

12.04.045 Fees—Purpose.
     The issuance fees required by the provisions of this chapter are for the purpose of defraying the cost of issuing the requested permit. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded to any applicant. (Prior code § 71.108)

 

12.04.050 Fees—Deposited.
     Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection, or engineering collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements were made. (Prior code § 71.109)

 

12.04.055 Explanation of costs.
     Whenever in the provisions of this chapter any costs are to be charged to any permittee, and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs including the proportionate part of the salaries, wages, or other compensation of any deputy or employee, plus cost of overhead not to exceed fifteen per cent of the total. (Prior code § 71.110)

 

12.04.060 Approval of application—Conditions.
     The surveyor shall not approve the application unless it appears to him or her that the work proposed to be done will not significantly damage the highways or create an unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property, and that the approval of the application is in the public interest; provided, however, the surveyor may approve the application subject to conditions, if the surveyor determines that by doing so it would be in the public interest, no significant damage to the highways would be created, and no unreasonable risk of harm to persons or property would be created. (Prior code § 71.111)

 

12.04.065 Approval of application—Issuance of permit.
     When the surveyor approves an application for a permit, he or she shall issue the permit. (Prior code § 71.112)

 

12.04.070 Application of public agencies or public utilities.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 12.04.060, surveyor shall approve the application for permit, subject to conditions, of any public agency or public utility having a lawful authority to occupy the highways and authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, over, or under any public highway. Any such permit shall contain a provision that, in the event the future improvement of the highway necessitates the relocation of its facilities, the permittee will relocate the same at its sole expense. (Prior code § 71.113)

 

12.04.075 Conditions may be changed after issuance—Notification of permittee.
     A.    Any permit issued by the surveyor under any of the provisions of this chapter, or the conditions to which it has been made subject, may be amended or changed if the surveyor deems such amendment or change to be necessary for the protection of the highways, or to prevent undue interference with traffic, or to protect both persons and property within or adjacent to such highways from damage or danger.

     B.     Notification of the amendment or change shall be made by the surveyor either by mailing written notice to the permittee at the address contained on his or her application for the permit, or by making personal service of the written notice to the permittee. The amendment or change shall be effective either twenty-four hours after the written notice is deposited in the United States mail, or immediately upon completion of personal service. (Prior code § 71.114)

 

12.04.080 Revocation.
     All permits other than those issued to public agencies or a public utility having lawful authority to occupy the highways, are revocable on five days’ notice and the encroachment must be removed or relocated as may be specified by the surveyor in the notice revoking the permit and within a reasonable time specified by the surveyor, unless the permit provides a specified time. (Prior code § 71.115)

 

12.04.085 Purchase of specifications.
     Copies of the specifications entitled “The Standard Specifications, Road Department of the County of San Diego,” referred to in this chapter, may be sold by the surveyor for the sum of five dollars. Any portion of the specifications may be sold by the surveyor at the cost of producing the same. All moneys received pursuant to sales made under this section shall be paid into the city treasury as provided by law. (Prior code § 71.116)

 

12.04.090 Enforcement officers.
     The surveyor is authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 7l.119)

 

12.04.095 Violations.
     Except where otherwise specifically provided by this chapter, every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who, before obtaining a construction, excavation or encroachment permit from the surveyor to do so:

     A.    Moves, or causes to be moved, along any highway any building or structure;

     B.     Makes, or causes to be made, any excavation, fill or obstruction of, or lays, constructs or repairs any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or culvert or other work of any nature in, over, along, across or through any highway;

     C.     Places, changes or renews any encroachment in, under or over any portion of a highway. (Prior code § 71.117)

 

12.04.100 Penalties.
     Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable as follows:

     A.    Violation of any provision of this chapter, or of Article II or Article VI of this chapter, by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment;

     B.     Violation of any provision of Article III or Article IV of this chapter, by a fine of not less than ten dollars nor more than one hundred dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than sixty days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Prior code § 71.118)

 

Article II. Moving Buildings and Structures
12.04.105 Scope of regulations.
     The provisions of this article apply only to the moving of buildings and structures. (Prior code § 71.201)

 

12.04.106 Persons authorized to perform work.
     All work pursuant to this article shall be performed by a contractor licensed in accordance with the provisions of the contractor’s license law unless exempted by that law. Additionally, all persons performing work pursuant to this article shall possess a valid Lemon Grove business license. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999)

 

12.04.110 Permit—Required.
     No person shall move, or cause to be moved, along any highway any building or structure without first obtaining from the surveyor a permit to do so. (Prior code § 71.202)

 

12.04.115 Permit—Application—Contents.
     Application for a permit required by this chapter shall be made in duplicate and in accordance with Article I of this chapter and shall be submitted to the city engineer a minimum of two weeks prior to the date of the planned move. The application shall specify the following: (1) the kind of building or structure to be moved; (2) the approximate weight thereof, as nearly as may be ascertained; (3) the location of the same; (4) the location to which and the route over or along which such building or structure and each section, or portion of such building or structure, is to be moved; (5) the number of sections in which the building or structure will be moved; (6) the type and number of conveyances upon which the same is to be moved; (7) the total number of tire inches thereof for each separate section to be moved; (8) the time when such building, structure, or portion thereof, is proposed to be moved and within which such removal will be completed. The applicant shall attach to the application a copy of a valid building permit for the building or structure at its destination point, or in the case of intended storage, a copy of an appropriate special use permit or other evidence that storage at the destination point is not in violation of the zoning ordinance. If a building is being removed from within Lemon Grove city limits, the applicant shall also provide a notice of service disconnect from San Diego Gas & Electric Company. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999; prior code § 71.203)

 

12.04.120 Permit—Application—Changes by city engineer.
     The city engineer may make such changes to a permit or impose special permit conditions as in his or her opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways along or over which it is proposed to move the building or structure, or to prevent undue interference with traffic, or to avoid jeopardizing the safety of any persons using such highways. Such changes or special conditions will be listed in the permit or attached thereto and referenced in the permit. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999; prior code § 71.204)

 

12.04.125 Permit—Fee.
     Every person applying for a permit required by this chapter shall, at the time of making application for the permit, pay an issuance fee of ten dollars. (Prior code § 71.204.1)

 

12.04.130 Permit affixed to structure.
     The moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times while it is on the highway, in a conspicuous place on the building or structure to be moved, the permit for such moving. (Prior code § 71.205)

 

12.04.135 Copies of permit on sections of structure.
     If a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times, while they are on the highway, in a conspicuous place on each section on which the original permit is not affixed, true copies of such permit. Such true copies shall be issued by the surveyor upon payment to him or her by the applicant of an issuance fee of twenty-five cents for each additional copy. (Prior code § 71.206)

 

12.04.140 Extension of permit.
     Each permit issued shall become null and void upon the expiration of the time specified in the application, unless the surveyor extends the time, which he or she may do, if in his or her opinion the moving of the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is impracticable because of inclement weather, act of God, strikes, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. (Prior code § 71.207)

 

12.04.145 Classification of buildings.
     All buildings and structures are classified as follows:

     A.    Class A is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, which is moved on a motor truck or other vehicle propelled by its own power;

     B.     Class B is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, not of class A which is not more than sixteen feet in width;

     C.     Class C is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, not of class A which is more than sixteen feet and not more than twenty-two feet in width;

     D.    Class D is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, not of class A which is more than twenty-two feet and not more than twenty-eight feet in width;

     E.     Class E is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, not of class A which is more than twenty-eight feet and not more than forty feet in width;

     F.     Class F is any building or structure, or any portion thereof, not of class A which is more than forty feet in width. (Prior code § 71.208)

 

12.04.150 Deposits according to classification.
     Every applicant for a permit from whom an issuance fee is required, who does not maintain a sufficient general deposit with the surveyor, shall deposit with the surveyor:

     A.    Ten dollars for a class A permit;

     B.     Twenty-five dollars for a class B permit;

     C.     Fifty dollars for a class C permit;

     D.    One hundred dollars for a class D permit;

     E.     Two hundred fifty dollars for a class E permit;

     F.     Three hundred dollars for a class F permit. (Prior code § 71.209)

 

12.04.155 Tree trimming deposit.
     Before any permit is issued, in addition to any deposit made as required by Section 12.04.150, the moving contractor shall also deposit with the surveyor an amount equal to that estimated by him or her pursuant to Section 12.04.160 to cover the cost of necessary tree trimming. (Prior code § 71.210)

 

12.04.160 Estimate of tree trimming costs.
     If examination of the application and/or route to be traversed discloses that the moving will require the trimming of trees, the city shall estimate the cost of such trimming of trees growing upon any grounds or property belonging to the city or upon any highway, as is necessary:

     A.    At the time the structure is moved to facilitate the moving thereof;

     B.     Subsequent to the moving of the structure to correct previous trimming done when the structure was moved. (Prior code § 71.211)

 

12.04.165 General deposit in lieu of special deposits.
     In lieu of making the special deposits required by Sections 12.04.150 and 12.04.155, the moving contractor may make and maintain with the surveyor a general deposit in a sum equal to the amount of the special deposit for the highest class of building or structure which he or she desires, expects or intends to move. This general deposit shall be held and used for the same purpose as said special deposits. While such general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the amount of the deposit required for the removal of any building or structure sought to be moved, the moving contractor need not make any special deposit. (Prior code § 71.212)

 

12.04.170 Additional deposit.
     If, in the opinion of the city engineer, any special or general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways, including any trees or public improvements thereon, over which it is sought to move a building or structure, the city engineer may require an additional deposit or surety bond in such amount as he or she determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999; prior code § 71.213)

 

12.04.175 Increase in deposit to cover higher class.
     Before any permittee moves any building, structure, or portion thereof, of a class higher than the class for which he or she has made any general or special deposit, he or she shall increase such deposit in an amount sufficient to cover the class sought to be moved. (Prior code § 71.214)

 

12.04.180 Deductions from deposit.
     The city shall deduct from the deposit made or maintained by each permittee:

     A.    The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

     B.     The cost of the services and transportation of any inspector appointed pursuant to Section 12.04.190;

     C.     The cost of any repairs made necessary because of the moving of the building or structure;

     D.    The total cost of all tree trimming done by the city engineer made necessary in order to move the building or structure as specified in the permit, including all such trimming after the moving of the building or structure to correct trimming done when the structure was moved. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999; prior code § 71.215)

 

12.04.185 Refund or deficiency payment.
     The remainder of any such special deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, or to his or her assigns. In case the deposit made pursuant to this chapter is not sufficient to pay all fees and deductions provided for in this chapter, the person to whom such permit is issued, shall, upon demand, pay to the surveyor a sufficient sum to fully cover the same. Upon failure to pay such sum, the same may be recovered by the city in any court of competent jurisdiction, and until paid, no further such permit shall be issued to such moving contractor. (Prior code § 71.216)

 

12.04.190 Billing in lieu of deductions.
     If a moving contractor makes and maintains a general deposit with the surveyor, the deductions provided for in Section 12.04.180 need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the surveyor may bill the moving contractor for the amount due from him or her to the city under the provisions of this chapter. If, fifteen days after such bill has been sent, the moving contractor does not pay the same in full, then such amount may be deducted from his or her general deposit and Sections 12.04.180 and 12.04.185 shall apply. (Prior code § 71.217)

 

12.04.195 Supervision by inspector.
     The surveyor may require that the moving of any building or structure be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the surveyor. The permittee shall pay to the surveyor an amount equal to the compensation and cost of transportation of such inspector during the time he or she is assigned to such inspection. (Prior code § 71.218)

 

12.04.200 Planks required under dollies or wheels.
     When so required by the surveyor, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving the building or structure, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface, except upon such board, plank or runway. (Prior code § 71.219)

 

12.04.215 Charge for damage to highway or public improvements.
     The city engineer may restore, or cause to be restored, every highway or other public improvement damaged by the moving of any building or structure thereon to a condition equivalent to that prior to such damage. The moving contractor who caused such damage shall pay the cost of the repair thereof to the city. (Ord. 288 § 1, 1999; prior code § 71.220)

 

12.04.220 Warning lights.
 

     When a building or structure, while being moved, is located on any highway, at all times between sunset and sunrise the moving contractor shall keep burning a red warning light not over six feet above the surface of such highway at each corner of such building or structure and, unless the surveyor otherwise directs, on all sides and projections thereof at intervals of not more than five feet. (Prior code § 71.221)

 

12.04.225 Defacing trees not permitted.
     A permit granted under this chapter does not permit, license, or allow any person, except the surveyor, to trim, prune, cut or deface in any manner any tree upon any grounds or property belonging to the city or upon any road, street or highway. (Prior code § 71.222)

 

12.04.230 Trimming of trees.
     Under the supervision of the city engineer, the moving contractor shall trim such trees to the extent required to move the structure to the location specified in the permit. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

12.04.235 Permit for structures exceeding permissible weights.
     The surveyor shall not issue a permit to move any building or structure when the weight of such building or structure, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code; except, that, if it appears to the surveyor that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the building or structure, or portion thereof, to be moved, or of the highway over which such building or structure is to be moved, makes it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the surveyor may issue a permit:

     A.    To move a building or structure on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with rubber tires, where the total weight of both building or structure and vehicle does not exceed sixty thousand pounds;

     B.     To move a building or structure on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires. (Prior code § 71.224)

 

12.04.240 Permit for specific equipment—Application—Fee—Bond.
     A.    The surveyor may in his or her discretion, if good cause appears, issue a permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move over and along highways specific pieces of mobile mechanical equipment or specific vehicles or specific pieces of mechanical equipment on specific vehicles, or emergency public utility equipment on specific vehicles. Any such permit shall be subject to the following conditions:

     1.     The permit shall be limited to specified highways or a specified area of the city and shall specifically describe the highways or the area of the city to which it is limited. This limitation shall be fixed by the surveyor so as to afford protection to highways and the traveling public.

     2.     The granting of the permit shall in no way relieve the permittee from liability for damage to the highways or to person or property.

     3.     The permit shall be issued for a specific period of time designated by the surveyor and set forth in the permit, which period shall not exceed one year.

     4.     The permit may be issued subject to such other conditions as the surveyor deems necessary for the protection of the highways and the traveling public.

     B.     The application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be made on a form furnished by the surveyor and shall contain the information required by Section 710 of the Vehicle Code and such other information as may be required by the surveyor.

     C.     The application shall be accompanied by payment of a fee of thirty dollars which shall be in lieu of any other fee prescribed by this chapter.

     D.    Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall file with the surveyor a surety bond satisfactory to the surveyor in the amount of five thousand dollars for the protection of highways from injury and to provide indemnity for any damage resulting from the operation or movement under the permit. The filing of such bond shall satisfy the provisions of this article requiring the deposit of money with the surveyor; insofar as any permit issued pursuant to this section is concerned, and a single five thousand dollar bond may in the discretion of the surveyor be deemed sufficient security for the issuance of one or more permits to the same applicant pursuant to this section. (Prior code § 71.225)

 

12.04.245 Permit for specific equipment—Insurance in lieu of bond.
     In lieu of the surety bond specified in Section 12.04.240, the surveyor may accept a certificate of insurance certifying that the applicant for the permit has an insurance policy in the amount specified by the surveyor, but not less than five thousand dollars property damage, to which there has been attached and executed an oversize-overweight vehicle permit endorsement on a form approved by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.226)

 

Article III. Excavations, Fills and Obstructions
12.04.250 Scope of regulations.
     The provisions of this article apply only to permits for the making of encroachments, including excavations, fills, or obstructions, for the purpose of installing utilities including, but not limited to: sanitary sewer, storm drainage, domestic and irrigation water, oil and natural gas, electrical power, telephone, and television signals; both main and lateral lines. (Prior code § 71.301)

 

12.04.255 Permit—Required.
     No person, or the contractor of any person excepting the contractor of this city for highway construction, improvement or repair, shall make, or cause to be made, any encroachment including an excavation, fill or obstruction in, over, along, or across or through any highway without first obtaining from the city surveyor a permit to do so. (Prior code § 71.302)

 

12.04.260 Permit—Application.
     Application for a permit required by this article shall be made in accordance with Article I of this chapter. The application shall specify in detail:

     A.    The location, dimensions, purpose, extent and nature of the excavation, fill or obstruction;

     B.     The time during which it is estimated that such excavation or obstruction will exist. (Prior code § 71.303)

 

12.04.265 Permit—Fee.
     Every person, unless otherwise exempted by law applying for a permit required by this article, shall at the time of making application for the permit pay an issuance fee of three dollars. (Prior code § 71.307)

 

12.04.270 Permits nontransferable.
     Permits issued under this article are nontransferable. (Prior code § 71.309)

 

12.04.275 Permits subject to use of highways by others.
     Every permit for an excavation in or under the surface of any highway shall be granted subject to the right of the city, or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. (Prior code § 71.308)

 

12.04.280 Applicant responsible for removing obstructions.
     Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that as to any encroachment not placed in a right-of-way belonging to applicant which is prior in time and/or right to the city’s right-of-way, if any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, pole, anchor, or overhead line placed in the excavation or obstruction for which a permit is issued interferes with the subsequent improvement, grading or realignment of the highway by the city, then the applicant and his or her successors or assigns will at his or her own expense remove such tank, pipe, conduit, duct, tunnel, pole, anchor, or overhead line, or relocate at a location designated by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.304)

 

12.04.285 Proof of right to use highways.
     The surveyor may require each applicant for a permit to file with him or her proof of the applicant’s right to use the highways for the purposes set forth in the application. (Prior code § 71.305)

 

12.04.290 Location changes required by surveyor.
     The surveyor may require such changes in the location of the proposed excavations, fills or obstructions as may necessary to prevent undue interference with the use of the highway for other lawful purposes provided the changes required will not unreasonably interfere with the applicant’s rights of such use. (Prior code § 71.306)

 

12.04.295 Commencement of work—Cancellation of permits.
     The surveyor may cancel a permit unless the work therein permitted is commenced within sixty days of the issuance thereof and thereafter, in the opinion of the surveyor, is diligently prosecuted to completion. (Prior code § 71.310)

 

12.04.300 Permit not required of certain parties—Report—Fees—Filing of maps, plats, etc.
     A.    No permit shall be required in advance of performing work of the persons, firms or agencies listed in Section 12.04.030, or of any public utility company subject to regulation by the Public Utilities Commission of the state, or of any distributor of public water supply for excavations required for service connections to existing pipelines or conduits maintained in highways, or for excavations reasonably necessary for the location of trouble in such pipelines or conduits or the making of necessary repairs, but not replacements thereto.

     B.     In such event, however, a report of the excavation, in such form as may be required by the surveyor, shall be filed with the surveyor within five days after the excavation is made and all provisions of this chapter for the protection of the public and governing repairs to the highway shall apply to the same extent as where applications and permits are required.

     C.     There shall be paid with each such report the same fees and deposits as would otherwise be required for a permit.

     D.    In all other cases, each applicant for an excavation permit shall file with the surveyor as a condition to the granting of the permit, such plats, maps and descriptions of the work to be done as may be reasonably required by the surveyor for the purpose of maintaining full and complete records of the structures within the highways, and for establishing responsibility for the protection of the public and repairing the property damaged. The advance exemption from obtaining a permit granted by this section shall not apply to the contractor of the persons, firms or agencies so exempted. (Prior code § 71.311)

 

12.04.305 Poles and overhead lines—Exemption from permit requirements.
     Any person who is subject to the rules and regulations of the Public Utilities Commission of the state shall not be required to obtain a permit to install, maintain, replace, repair or relocate any telephone or electric pole, anchor, or overhead lines; provided, however, that any person exempted by this section from obtaining a permit shall be deemed to be a permittee under a blanket permit while performing any work referred to in this section and shall comply with all regulations and requirements of this chapter imposed on a permittee or otherwise imposed on such person; and further provided, that no such person shall be deemed exempted by this section unless such person has on file with the surveyor a signed and unrevoked statement of the sort required by Section 12.04.020 and of the sort required by Section 12.04.280. (Prior code § 71.312)

 

12.04.310 Emergency excavations.
     Nothing in this article prohibits any person from maintaining, by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any pipe or conduit in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when such necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the city are closed, if the person making such excavation obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the surveyor are first opened subsequent to the making of such excavation. (Prior code § 71.213)

 

12.04.315 Special deposit—Exemptions.
     A.    Except as provided in subsections B and C of this section, each applicant for a permit, in addition to payment of the issuance fee, shall deposit with the surveyor a sum of money, in no event less than ten dollars, which is twice the estimated cost to the nearest five dollars of repairing the surface of the highway which may be damaged or destroyed by the proposed excavation or obstruction. The cost shall be estimated by multiplying the number of square feet of surface which may be damaged as shown by the application and plat, and the number of inches of thickness, plus one inch, by such sum as the city council by order determines to most adequately represent the actual cost. Such order shall in no event specify a sum greater than twenty-five cents. The city council may change and revise such order from time to time. In the absence of any such order the amount shall be ten cents. In all cases the cost shall be presumed to be not less than one dollar.

     B.     An exemption from the provisions of this section shall be granted to an applicant for a permit in the case of a contract secured by a faithful performance bond, which contract is awarded by this city; provided, however, the applicant shall furnish a written certification by the surveyor of the satisfactory restoration of the highway as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the work under such contract by this city.

     C.     Where the deposit as calculated above will exceed three thousand dollars, an exemption from the provisions of this section shall be granted for the excess above three thousand dollars to an applicant for a permit in the case of a contract secured by a faithful performance bond, which contract is awarded by a public agency which is exempt from payment of fees or deposits as provided by Section 12.04.030, or by a public utility company authorized to occupy a county roadway under terms of a franchise granted by the city, or under the terms of a franchise issued by the state; provided, however, that the public agency or public utility company for whom the work is to be performed shall submit to the surveyor a written guarantee of restoration of the highway to the satisfaction of the surveyor and a guarantee of payment of all costs for which the agency or the company or their contractor may become liable to the city; and, further provided, that the public agency or public utility company for whom the work is to be performed shall submit to the surveyor evidence satisfactory to the surveyor that the applicant shall be required to furnish a written certification by the surveyor of the satisfactory restoration of the highway as a condition precedent to the acceptance of the work by the public agency or public utility company. (Prior code § 71.314)

 

12.04.320 General deposit in lieu of special deposit.
     In lieu of making the special deposit required by Section 12.04.315, the applicant may make and maintain with the surveyor a general deposit in an amount estimated by the surveyor to be sufficient to pay for the cost of permit issuance fees and expected repairs occasioned by future excavations or obstructions, but not to exceed one thousand dollars. The general deposit shall be held and used for the same purposes as said special deposit. While a general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the amount of deposit required for the making of any excavation, or obstruction sought to be made, the applicant need not make any special deposit. (Prior code § 71.315)

 

12.04.325 Additional deposit.
     If, in the opinion of the survivor, any special or

general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways in which it is proposed to excavate, or on which it is proposed to place obstructions, the surveyor may require an additional deposit in such amount as he or she determines will be sufficient to protect such public interest. (Prior code § 71.316)

 

12.04.330 Deductions from deposit.
     The city shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee:

     A.    The permit issuance fee, if that has not otherwise been paid;

     B.     The cost to the city of refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction;

     C.     The cost to the city calculated pursuant to subsection A of Section 12.04.315, of resurfacing the highway;

     D.    The cost of any inspection by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.317)

 

12.04.335 Refund or deficiency payment.
     After making the required deductions, the city shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining in the special deposit in the manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. If any deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs to be deducted, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the surveyor an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the city may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full a permit shall not be issued to such permittee. (Prior code § 71.318)

 

12.04.340 Billing in lieu of deductions.
     If a person makes and maintains with the surveyor a general deposit, the deductions provided for in Section 12.04.330 need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the surveyor may bill such person for the amount owed by him or her to the city under the provisions of this article. If such amount is not paid within fifteen days of the transmission of such bill, the surveyor may deduct such amount from the general deposit, and Sections 12.04.330 and 12.04.335 shall apply. (Prior code § 71.319)

 

12.04.345 Work must conform to permit.
     Every permittee who makes, or causes to be made, any excavation, or constructs, puts upon, maintains, or leaves any obstruction or impediment to travel, or piles or places any material in or upon any highway, or installs or maintains, or causes to be installed or maintained, any tank, pipe, conduit, duct, or tunnel in or upon, or under the surface of any highway, at any location other than that described in the application, as amended, if amended, by the surveyor, and shown in the plat filed with such application, or in any way contrary to the terms of the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 71.320)

 

12.04.350 Protective measures required.
     In any permit issued by him or her the surveyor may specify what lights, barriers, warning signs or other measures designed to protect the traveling public must be erected by the permittee. (Prior code § 71.321)

 

12.04.355 Warning lights—Requirements.
     A.    If the permit does not specify what lights, barriers, warning signs or other measures must be erected by the permittee, the permittee shall place and maintain warning lights at each end of such excavation or obstruction and at distances of not more than fifty feet along such excavation or obstruction from sunset of each day to sunrise of the next day, until such excavation is entirely refilled and resurfaced or such obstruction is removed, and shall place and maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of any such excavation or obstruction at all times, until such excavation is entirely refilled or such obstruction is removed.

     B.     The upper portion of each of these barriers shall consist of a substantial sign approximately one foot high and four feet wide and on each side thereof bearing a sign complying with one of the following requirements:

     1.     In letters, not less than three inches high and neither yellow nor black, bearing the name of the permittee, on a background of alternate three-inch black and yellow stripes. The stripes shall be at an angle between forty-five and sixty degrees from the horizontal.

     2.     In letters, not less than six inches high, bearing the word “excavation.”

     3.     In conformity with the regulations adopted by the State Division of Highways, pursuant to Section 465.7 of the Vehicle Code. (Prior code § 71.322)

 

12.04.360 Refilling excavations required.
     Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction permitted by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction. (Prior code § 71.323)

 

12.04.365 Restoration of highway.
     A permittee shall refill an excavation in the manner which the surveyor determines is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the highway to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (Prior code § 71.324)

 

12.04.370 Restoration by surveyor.
     If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he or she has made, or remove any obstruction which he or she has placed in any highway, the surveyor may do so and charge the cost thereof to the permittee. (Prior code § 71.325)

 

12.04.375 Notification of completed refilling.
     Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, the permittee shall so notify the surveyor, in writing, on a form prescribed by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.326)

 

12.04.380 Resurfacing highway.
     A.    Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, the surveyor, may require the permittee to resurface that portion of the highway surface damaged by the permittee’s excavation or obstruction, or the surveyor may direct city staff to perform the resurfacing. Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it with a new pavement section one inch greater in thickness than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and, in no event, to a thickness less than two inches, while matching the finished surface elevation of the previous pavement or surface. Where a treated or modified subgrade or surface has been removed or destroyed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness of not less than that of the surrounding or adjacent subgrade or surface, unless the surveyor orders that the repair of such treated or modified subgrade or surface shall be made by an oil and rock mixture, in which case the thickness shall not be less than one-half the thickness of the treated or modified surface or subgrade.

     B.     Pavement cuts for underground utilities in all new, reconstructed or resurfaced city roads shall be prohibited for three years following project pavement treatment by the city. Pavement treatment shall be defined as asphalt concrete resurfacing, chips seals, or slurry seals. This prohibition shall include, but not be limited to excavation for utility system installations, replacements, maintenance, and upgrading.

     If the surveyor grants an exception to this prohibition, for trenching longitudinal to the centerline of the street the permittee shall be required to resurface the full width of the street for the entire longitudinal length of trench. For trenching perpendicular to the centerline, the permittee shall be required to resurface the full width of the street for a longitudinal dimension measured along centerline equal to no less than five feet beyond the outside of the trench excavation. For trenching on an angle from centerline, the permittee shall be required to resurface the full width of the street for the entire longitudinal length of trench.

     C.     All paving shall comply with the most current Regional Standard Drawings and Notes and be approved by the surveyor as part of an encroachment permit prior to utility work being performed. (Ord. 381 § 1, 2009; prior code § 71.327)

 

12.04.385 Charge for resurfacing.
     If, after the refilling of an excavation, the permittee fails or refuses to resurface that portion of the surface of the highway damaged by him or her, or if the surveyor elects to do such resurfacing, the surveyor may do such resurfacing. The cost of such resurfacing shall be charged against the permittee, except in those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of pavement to be immediately reconstructed by the city, and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement. The cost shall be computed as provided in subsection A of Section 12.04.315. (Prior code § 71.328)

 

12.04.390 Charge for subsequent repairs.
     If, at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation or obstruction, the permittee shall pay to the surveyor the cost of such additional repairs. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such additional costs upon demand, the city may recover such additional costs by an action against such permittee in any court of competent jurisdiction.

 

Until such costs are paid the surveyor shall not issue any permits to such permittee. (Prior code § 71.329)

 

Article IV. Construction
12.04.395 Scope of regulations.
     The provisions of this article apply only to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing, or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, or other appurtenant highway structures. (Prior code § 71.401)

 

12.04.400 Permit—Required.
     No person shall construct or repair any curb, sidewalk, gutter, driveway, roadway surface, retaining wall, storm drain or culvert or other work of any nature in, over, along, across or through any highway, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining from the surveyor a permit to do so. (Prior code § 71.402)

 

12.04.405 Permit—Residential driveways.
     No person shall construct, improve or repair any residential driveway in, over, along, across or through any highway, or cause the same to be done, without first obtaining a permit to do so pursuant to Chapter 15.08 of this code. (Prior code § 71.402.5)

 

12.04.410 Permit—Application.
     Application for a permit required by this article shall be made in accordance with Article I of this chapter. The application shall specify:

     A.    The location, nature, and extent of the work to be performed;

     B.     The materials to be used;

     C.     Such other information as the surveyor may require. (Prior code § 71.403)

 

12.04.415 Plans required with application.
     If, in the opinion of the surveyor, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the surveyor may require the application to be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. (Prior code § 71.404)

 

12.04.420 Applicant for concrete work.
     Where the structure, driveway, curb, sidewalk or gutter is to be constructed of concrete, the applicant shall be a person licensed by the state to perform the work described in the application, and he or she must perform the work, or the work must be performed under his or her immediate supervision. (Prior code § 71.405)

 

12.04.425 Work to be full length of street.
     If, in the opinion of the surveyor, the construction of any length of curb or sidewalk less than the full length of a street between street intersections would create a condition hazardous to the traveling public using the street upon which it is proposed to install the curb or sidewalk, he or she may refuse to issue a permit for the construction of curb or sidewalk for any length less than the full length of said street between intersecting streets. (Prior code § 71.406)

 

12.04.430 Permit fee.
     Every person applying for a permit required by this article shall, at the time of making application for the permit, pay an issuance fee of two dollars. (Prior code § 71.407)

 

12.04.435 Engineering and/or inspection fee.
     A.    An applicant for a permit to construct any work, except curbs, walks, gutters or highway surfaces, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay or make a deposit for an engineering or inspection fee as follows:

     1.     An amount estimated by the surveyor to be equal to twice the actual cost of all necessary engineering and inspection;

     2.     An applicant for a permit to construct a driveway with surfacing other than dirt, gravel or decomposed rock, shall, in addition to the issuance fee, pay an engineering and/or inspection fee of twenty dollars.

     B.     The surveyor shall not charge any engineering or inspection fee for a permit to construct curbs, walks, gutters or highway surfaces. (Prior code § 71.408)

 

 

12.04.440 Refund or deficiency payment.
     A.    The engineering and inspection costs provided for in subsection A(2) of Section 12.04.435 shall be presumed to be the actual cost. A refund shall not be made to any applicant unless the inspection and/or engineering fee was erroneously collected, in which case the entire amount may be returned, or if the driveway or driveways were not constructed by the permittee, the applicant may apply for a refund of the unused fees, less a charge of one dollar and fifty cents on the permit for final inspection charges. Where the deposit has been made under subsection A(l) of Section 12.04.435, the surveyor shall deduct from the deposit the amount of the issuance fee and the actual cost to the city of the required engineering and inspection. If such cost and fee is less than the deposit, the difference shall be refunded to the person making the deposit in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys.

     B.     If the cost, plus the issuance fee, exceeds the deposit, the permittee shall pay the excess to the city. If he or she does not so pay within fifteen days, the city may recover such sum in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid, further permits shall not be issued to such permittee. (Prior code § 71.409)

 

12.04.445 Relocation costs.
     If so required by the surveyor, the permittee shall make proper arrangements for, and bear the cost of relocating any structure, public utility, tree or shrub, where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The surveyor may elect to do the necessary relocation. In such case the permittee shall deposit with the surveyor a sum of money estimated by him or her to be sufficient to pay the cost thereof. After such relocation, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall by paid by, the permittee as provided in Section 12.04.440. (Prior code § 71.410)

 

12.04.450 Deposit for resetting stakes.
     If any stakes set for any work covered by this chapter are disturbed or destroyed and it becomes necessary to set additional stakes, the permittee shall deposit a sum estimated by the surveyor to be sufficient to pay the cost of setting such additional stakes. The surveyor shall set the additional stakes. After such setting, a refund shall be paid to, or a deficiency shall be paid by, the permittee as provided in Section 12.04.440. (Prior code § 71.411)

 

12.04.455 Refund upon revocation.
     When a permit has been revoked by the surveyor, the permittee may obtain a refund of any unused fee paid or unused deposit made. No part of any issuance fee may be refunded. (Prior code § 71.412)

 

12.04.460 Work to commence in sixty days.
     Every permittee shall commence the proposed work within sixty days after the granting of the permit and thereafter prosecute the work in a continuous, diligent, and workmanlike manner to completion. (Prior code § 71.414)

 

12.04.465 Revocation for delay.
     Unless, in his or her opinion, a good and sufficient reason exists for the failure of the permittee to comply with the provisions of Section l2.04.460, the surveyor may revoke the permit. (Prior code § 71.415)

 

12.04.470 Work must conform to permit.
     Every person who performs any work covered by this article in an amount greater than, or in any way different from, or contrary to the terms of any permit issued therefor, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code § 71.416)

 

12.04.475 Lines and grades obtained from surveyor.
     Before a permittee performs any work regulated by this article, he or she shall obtain from the surveyor the lines and grades therefor. (Prior code § 71.417)

 

 

12.04.480 Performance according to plans and specifications—Inspection.
     A.    The permittee shall perform all work in accordance with the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications entitled “The Standard Specifications, Road Department of the County of San Diego,” on file with the surveyor, and, further, to the satisfaction of the surveyor.

     B.     The surveyor may waive inspection, if he or she believes such inspection is not necessary for the best interests of the county; provided, however, any such waiver shall be in writing. (Prior code § 71.418)

 

12.04.485 Subsequent change in plans and specifications.
     No change in any plans, if plans are made, or specifications shall be made unless approved in writing by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.419)

 

12.04.490 Request for inspector before work begins.
     Not less than eighteen hours before the commencement of any work regulated by this article, the permittee shall apply in writing to the surveyor for an inspector therefor. In such application he or she shall specify the day and hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced. (Prior code § 71.420)

 

12.04.495 Approval of concrete forms.
     No concrete shall be poured or placed until the surveyor has approved in writing the forms into which the concrete is to be poured or placed. (Prior code § 71.421)

 

12.04.500 Warning lights.
     A permittee shall place and maintain at each end of the work and not more than fifty feet apart along the side thereof, unless otherwise directed by the surveyor, from sunset of each day until sunrise of the following day, until the work is entirely completed, flares or red warning lights. He or she shall also place and maintain barriers not less than three feet high at each end of the work until the work is completed to the entire satisfaction of the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.422)

 

12.04.505 Removal of debris.
     A permittee shall remove all material and debris:

     A.    Where new work is covered with earth, in accordance with the terms of the specifications attached to the permit;

     B.     In all other cases within three days. (Prior code § 71.423)

 

12.04.510 Completion of work—Notification.
     Whenever any permittee has completed any work for which a permit has been granted, he or she shall so notify the surveyor in writing. (Prior code § 71.424)

 

12.04.515 Completion of work—Certificate of acceptance.
     If the surveyor, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit, issued therefor and all of the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue, if requested to do so by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Prior code § 71.425)

 

12.04.520 Permittee’s responsibility.
     The inspection, or approval, or acceptance of work or materials shall not relieve the permittee of any of his or her obligations to perform and complete the work according to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in Sections 12.04.480 and 12.04.485. (Prior code § 71.426)

 

12.04.525 Defective work and materials.
     Upon order of the surveyor, any work or material which does not conform to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in Sections 12.04.480 and 12.04.485 shall be removed and replaced so as to conform to said plans and specifications, notwithstanding that such work or material has been previously inspected, or approved, or accepted by the surveyor. (Prior code § 71.427)

 

12.04.530 Default of permittee.
     By applying for and obtaining a permit pursuant to this chapter, the permittee agrees with the city that, in the event the permittee fails to comply promptly with the terms of the permit and perform and complete the work according to the plans, if any, and the specifications referred to in Sections 12.04.480 and 12.04.485 or fails to comply with any other provisions of this chapter, the city may elect to perform and complete the work, in which event the permittee shall pay to the city, upon demand of the surveyor and prior to actual performance and completion of the work by the city or its contractor, the cost of performing and completing the work according to such permit, the plans, if any, and the specifications either by the use of the city’s forces or by an independent contractor, whichever method the surveyor deems appropriate, and, in the event the permittee fails to pay such cost to the city upon demand, the city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to recover such cost together with reasonable attorneys fees. (Prior code § 71.428)

 

12.04.535 Public nuisance.
     Any work performed contrary to the permit, the plans, if plans are made, and the specifications referred to in Sections 12.04.480 and 12.04.485, is declared to be a public nuisance, and, upon order of the city council, the city attorney shall immediately initiate proceedings necessary for the abatement, enjoinment, and removal thereof in the manner provided by law. (Prior code § 71.429)

 

 

Article V. Planting, Trimming and Removal of Trees, Hedges and Shrubs
12.04.540 Trimming or removal—Permit—Required.
     A.    No person shall trim, prune, cut, break, deface, destroy, burn or remove any tree, hedge, plant, shrub, or flower growing or to grow upon any city-owned public property within the city, unless authorized in writing to do so by the director of public works, or designee, or the city council.

     B.     No person shall trim, prune, cut, break, deface, destroy, burn or remove any tree, hedge or shrub from a public or city highway within the city, unless authorized in writing to do so by the director of public works, or designee. (Ord. 447 § 4, 2017; prior code § 71.501)

 

12.04.545 Trimming or removal—Permit—Application.
     Any person desiring to trim, prune, or remove any tree, hedge or shrub from any public or city highway shall file an application with the city surveyor and road commissioner. (Prior code § 71.503)

 

12.04.550 Trimming or removal—Permit—Issuance or denial.
     A.    The city surveyor and road commissioner may issue a written permit authorizing the trimming, pruning or removal of any tree, hedge or shrub within a public or city highway on such terms and conditions as he or she deems to provide protection to persons and property appropriate to provide protection to persons and property or may deny such permit.

     B.     Any person removing a live tree pursuant to a permit issued by the city surveyor and road commissioner shall, within thirty days following removal of such live tree, plant another tree of a type and in a location specified in the permit. The requirement of replanting another tree may be waived by the city surveyor and road commissioner where the requirement would impose an unreasonable hardship. (Prior code § 71.504)

12.04.555 Trimming or removal—By city.
     A.    If the city surveyor and road commissioner deems that the trimming, pruning or removal of any tree, hedge or shrub within a city highway is necessary for the protection of the traveling public or public property, he or she shall, subject to the availability of funds, personnel and equipment, cause such tree to be trimmed, pruned or removed to provide such protection.

     B.     On application of any person to whom there has been issued a permit to trim, prune or remove a tree, hedge or shrub from a city highway, the city surveyor and road commissioner may trim, prune or remove such tree, hedge or shrub described in such permit, provided the cost thereof is paid by the permittee, and provided there shall first be deposited with the city surveyor and road commissioner a sum determined by him or her to be the estimated cost of such work. All such deposits shall be placed in a trust fund. Following completion of the work, the city surveyor and road commissioner shall determine actual cost of the work and transfer that portion of the deposit to the appropriate county fund and return the balance to the depositor. Should the original deposit be insufficient to cover the actual cost of the work, the permittee shall be liable to the city for the unpaid balance and shall promptly pay such amount to the city upon demand of the city surveyor and road commissioner. (Prior code § 71.505)

 

12.04.560 Planting—Permit—Required.
     No person shall plant any tree, hedge or shrub upon or within any city highway, public highway or public property within the city, unless authorized in writing to do so by the director of public works. (Ord. 447 § 5, 2017; prior code § 71.510)

 

12.04.565 Planting—Permit—Application.
     Any person desiring to plant any tree, hedge or shrub within any public or city highway shall file an application with the city surveyor and road commissioner. (Prior code § 71.511)

 

12.04.570 Planting—Permit—Issuance or denial.
     No permit for the planting of a tree, shrub or hedge within any public road, dedicated right-of-way or city highway shall be issued unless the species of the tree, shrub or hedge to be planted is one approved by the director of public works. The permit for the planting of a tree, shrub or hedge may be issued upon such terms and conditions as the road commissioner determines appropriate to protect persons and property or may be denied. (Ord. 447 § 6, 2017; prior code § 71.512)

 

12.04.575 Removal of protective structures prohibited.
     No person shall injure, deface, or remove any protective structure placed around any tree or plant growing upon any public or city highway or public property in the city. (Prior code § 71.502)

 

Article VI. Encroachments
12.04.580 Scope of regulations.
     The provisions of this article apply only to the placing, changing or renewing of an encroachment not subject to the provisions of Articles II, III, IV or V of this chapter. (Prior code § 71.601)

 

12.04.585 Permit—Required.
     No person shall place, change or renew an encroachment in, under or over any portion of a highway without first obtaining from the surveyor a written permit in accordance with this chapter and with Article I of this chapter. (Prior code § 71.602)

 

12.04.590 Permit—Application.
     Application for a permit shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the surveyor. The application shall specify in detail:

     A.    The location, description and justification for the encroachment and the extent to which it will interfere with the public use and maintenance of the highway.

     B.     The duration for which a permit is sought and the date it is requested to be effective.

     C.     Such other information that the surveyor may require. (Prior code § 71.603)

 

12.04.595 Permit—Fee.
     Every person applying for a permit required by this chapter shall, at the time of making application for the permit, pay an issuance fee of ten dollars. (Prior code § 71.608)

 

12.04.600 Permittee liable for damages.
     Every permit shall contain an agreement, signed by the applicant that the city and any officer or employee thereof shall be saved harmless by the applicant from any liability or responsibility for an accident, loss or damage to persons or property, happening or occurring as the proximate result of any placement, change or renewal of an encroachment under the terms of this application and the permit or permits which may be granted in response thereto, and that all of said liabilities are assumed by the applicant. (Prior code § 71.604)

 

12.04.605 Protective measures required.
     In any permit issued by him or her, the surveyor may specify what lights, barriers, warning signs, or other measures designed to protect the traveling public, must be erected by the permittee. If the permit does not specify what protective measures are required, every encroachment which in any way interferes with the public use of any traveled way, shoulder, parking lane, side path, or sidewalk shall be lighted, barricaded and signed as provided in Section 12.04.355. (Prior code § 71.605)

 

12.04.610 Removal of encroachments.
     Permits issued under the authority of this chapter may specify a duration of ten days or less from their effective date, in which case they shall be revocable with notice as provided in Section 12.04.075. Other permits issued under the authority of this article shall be classified as of indefinite duration and shall be revocable as provided in Section 12.04.080. (Prior code § 71.606)

 

12.04.615 Restoration of highway.
     Every permit shall contain an agreement, signed by the applicant, that if the permit expires, is revoked by the surveyor, or is vacated or abandoned, the permittee will, within a reasonable time and to the satisfaction of the surveyor, restore the highway to the equivalent or better condition than it was prior to the date that permit became effective or prior to the date the encroachment was first placed, whichever is earlier. (Prior code § 71.607)

 

12.04.620 Special deposit.
     Each applicant for a permit, in addition to payment of the issuance fee, shall deposit a sum with the surveyor to guarantee the placement of protective measures, if required, and the removal of the encroachment and restoration of the highway. The amount of the deposit shall be twice the estimated cost of removing the encroachment, but in no case less than fifty dollars. Such a deposit may be waived by the surveyor if the encroachment existed prior to the adoption of this article. (Prior code § 71.609)

 

12.04.625 General deposit.
     In lieu of making the special deposits required by Section 12.04.620, an applicant for temporary permits having a duration of ten days or less may make and maintain with the surveyor a general deposit in an amount estimated by the surveyor to be sufficient to pay the cost of permit fees and to guarantee performance as required in Section 12.04.620 for future encroachments. Such a deposit shall not exceed one thousand dollars. While a general deposit is maintained in an amount sufficient to cover the fees and deposits required for the placing, changing or renewing of all encroachments sought to be made, the applicant need not make any special deposit. If, in the opinion of the surveyor, a general deposit is not sufficient for the proper protection of the public interest in the highways on which encroachment permits are sought,

he or she may require a special deposit under the provisions of Section 12.04.620. (Prior code § 71.610)

 

12.04.630 Deductions from deposit.
     The city shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee:

     A.    The permit issuance fee, if that has not otherwise been paid;

     B.     The cost of any inspection by the surveyor;

     C.     The cost to the city of the placement of protective measures, if required, and the removal of the encroachment and restoration of the highway, if the permittee fails or refuses to do so. (Prior code § 71.611)

 

 

 

12.04.635 Refund or deficiency payment.
     After making the required deductions, the city shall refund to the applicant any amount still remaining in the special deposit in the manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust moneys. If any deposit made is less than sufficient to pay all fees and costs to be deducted, the permittee shall, upon demand, pay to the surveyor an amount equal to the deficiency. If the permittee fails or refuses to pay such deficiency upon demand, the city may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency is paid in full, a permit shall not be issued to such permittee. (Prior code § 71.612)

 

12.04.640 Billing in lieu of deductions.
     If a person makes and maintains with the surveyor a general deposit, the deductions provided for in this article need not be made. In lieu of such deductions, the surveyor may bill such person for the amount owed by him or her to the city under the provisions of this chapter. If such amount is not paid within fifteen days of the transmission of such bill, the surveyor may deduct much amount from the general deposit, and Sections 12.04.630 and 12.04.635 shall apply. (Prior code § 71.613)

Chapter 12.08 CENTERLINES
12.08.010 Definition.
     Throughout this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed as follows.

     “General plan roadway” means any street identified in any adopted specific plan or in the roadway circulation plan of the mobility/circulation element of the Lemon Grove general plan, as amended.

     “Street” means a city road, state highway, public road, street, or alley. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006; prior code § 75.101)

 

12.08.020 Establishment of an official centerline.
     The official centerline of a street shall be as follows:

     A.    The official centerline of the street as shown on a final subdivision map, a record of survey map, or a recorded road survey map established by a licensed registered civil engineer or land surveyor shall be the centerline. The official centerline shall be that centerline shown on the most recent qualifying map or plan for purposes of this chapter.

     B.     If no such map is filed pursuant to subsection A of this section or if there is an ambiguity within or between such maps, the official centerline of the street shall be established by the city engineer with the concurrence of the community development director.

     C.     In the event that the official centerline of a street has not been established according to subsections A or B of this section, or that the map filed as in subsection A of this section does not show an official centerline, then, until such time as the official centerline is established pursuant to subsections A or B of this section, it is presumed that the official centerline is a line equidistant between the existing exterior right-of-way lines of the street. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006; Ord. 190, 1991)

 

12.08.030 Change of existing centerlines.
     An established official centerline shall not be deemed changed by the vacation or widening of a part of the ultimate right-of-way on either or both sides thereof. No established official centerline shall be changed except by any of the following methods:

     A.    A new subdivision map or a resubdivision map filed in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act;

     B.     A new record of survey map filed pursuant to Section 11535 and Chapter 15 of Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code;

     C.     A new road survey map prepared by and filed with the engineering division; or

     The city engineer with the concurrence of the community development director may determine a new location for an official centerline of any general plan roadway. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006; prior code § 75.103)

 

12.08.040 Appeal—Persons authorized to do so.
     The following persons, and no others, are authorized to appeal from the decision of the city engineer or community development director:

     A.    Persons owning real property adjoining the portion of the street for which the centerline is proposed to be established or changed; and

     B.     Persons owning real property that adjoins said street and are within three hundred feet of the portion thereof for which the centerline is to be established or changed and is not separated from such portion by an intersecting street. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006; prior code § 75.105)

Chapter 12.10 PUBLIC STREET DEDICATION AND IMPROVEMENTS
12.10.010 Findings, purpose and intent.
     A.    The city council finds as follows:

     1.     There is a lack of adequate curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street lights in various areas of the city, which are necessary to provide a safe environment for pedestrians; and

     2.     The lack of improved sidewalks in the city in many instances forces pedestrians, including school children to walk in the streets; and

     3.     Streets of inadequate width and improvements hinder safety and efficient vehicular movement; and

     4.     The lack of curbs, storm drains and other public street improvements results in poor drainage and degrades water quality; and

     5.     The lack of improved streets impedes the operation of emergency vehicles as well as street sweepers and refuse collection vehicles.

     B.     It is the purpose of the city council in adopting the provisions of this chapter to:

     1.     Impose reasonable requirements for the dedication of real property for public street purposes and for the installation of public street improvements upon persons engaged in the development, construction, reconstruction or remodeling of buildings which tend to result in increased demands upon the existing public streets in the city, thereby adversely impacting the public health, safety and welfare; and

     2.     Extend the public street dedication and improvement requirements of the Subdivision Map Act by establishing standards and requirements for public street dedication and improvements in connection with the development of land in which no subdivision is involved; and

     3.     Spread the cost of public street improvements upon all properties abutting public streets in an equitable manner, and by causing the installa-

tion of those improvements required by the city to serve property being developed.

     C.     The provisions of this chapter are intended to be in addition to any other requirement of law pertaining to the provisions of public street dedication and improvements, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to avoid compliance with any other requirement for the provisions of public street improvements.

     D.    The requirements of Sections 12.10.060 (Public street improvements), 12.10.080 (Undergrounding and relocating existing utility facilities), 12.10.090 (Street lights required) and 12.10.100 (Street trees required) shall not be applicable to projects located within any commercial or industrial zone, pursuant to the city zoning map, for a period of one year of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. Notwithstanding, any other provision herein, the city manager may impose the requirements listed above based upon a finding that to waive the requirements would constitute a threat to public safety or would constitute a significant environmental impact as defined under the California Environmental Quality Act. Any finding of the city manager to grant or deny a waiver under this subsection shall be appealable to the city council for the permit requested. Nothing herein shall be construed to waive a federal or state legal requirement. This exception to the requirements of portions of this chapter shall not be applicable to residential projects regardless of where they are located. This subsection shall sunset and be no longer in effect after January 3, 2014. (Ord. 433 § 2, 2015; Ord. 414 § 2, 2013; Ord. 408 § 2, 2011; Ord. 397 § 2, 2011; Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.020 Definitions.
     Throughout this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed as follows:

     “Block face” means the one-half right-of-way width of the public street abutting the subject property between the nearest intersecting public streets. For block faces longer than one thousand feet, the block face shall be defined as three hundred feet along the public street frontage in either direction from the subject property.

     “General Plan roadway” means any street identified in any adopted specific plan or in the Roadway Circulation Plan of the Mobility/Circulation Element of the Lemon Grove General Plan, as amended.

     “Public street improvements” mean and includes curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, paving, base material, alleys, street lights, traffic signals, signing, striping, storm drainage facilities, sewer and water facilities, the relocation and/or undergrounding of overhead utilities, fire hydrants, street trees, street landscaping and all necessary appurtenances thereto in accordance with this chapter.

     “Street” means a city road, state highway, public road, street, or alley. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.030 General compliance requirement.
     A.    No building permit shall be issued for the construction of any new building or structure or for the enlargement or alteration of any existing building or structure on a lot or parcel of land adjoining a street that is either a public street or General Plan roadway and provides direct access to property in the city of Lemon Grove unless the owner of such lot of land complies with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     All of the public street frontages of lots located on the corner of two public streets, or irregularly shaped lots or other lot configurations with two or more public street frontages shall be subject to the public street dedication and improvement requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.040 Waivers and modifications.
     The city engineer with the concurrence of the development services director or upon appeal to the city council, the city engineer, or city council may grant a waiver or modification of the provisions of this chapter if all of the following findings are made:

     A.    Existing streets and systems for drainage which are intended to serve the site are adequate to

accommodate the additional burdens imposed by the proposed project;

     B.     The proposed improvements will fit harmoniously into and will have no adverse effects upon the adjacent or surrounding area;

     C.     The waiver or modification will produce an environment of sustained desirability and stability, harmonious with the character of the surrounding area;

     D.    The waiver or modification will not become detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience or general welfare; and

     E.     The strict interpretation and enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will create one of the following:

     1.     A public nuisance,

     2.     A public safety hazard, or

     3.     A conflict or inconsistency with the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, the Lemon Grove General Plan or an adopted specific plan, roadway plan, improvement plan or city council ordinance or policy. (Ord. 433 § 2, 2015; Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.050 Public street dedication.
     A.    No building permit shall be issued for the erection, enlargement, or alteration of any building or structure, unless the abutting public street(s) right-of-way is dedicated to a one-half right-of-way width specified and approved by the engineering division and consistent with the Mobility Element of the General Plan.

     B.     Exemptions. The foregoing requirements of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any of the following:

     1.     Building permits with a valuation of less than fifteen thousand dollars. The building permit valuation shall be calculated by adding all of the valuations assigned to building permits for the subject property that comply with all of the following:

     a.     The building permits were applied for after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and within five years of the application date of the building permit being applied for;

     b.     The building permits are either in processing or have final building department approval; and

     c.     The building permits are not exempt pursuant to subsections (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section.

     2.     Maintenance, repairs and demolitions to existing structures if no physical elements of the building or structure are relocated or added.

     3.     The establishment of accessory rental dwelling units and improvements required pursuant to Section 17.24.060(C)(13) of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     C.     If a public street dedication is required, the applicant shall furnish to the city all of the following:

     1.     A copy of the proposed legal description with the proposed dedication;

     2.     A site plan indicating the existing and the proposed boundary;

     3.     A copy of the grant deed;

     4.     Other documents acceptable to, and required by, the engineering division for use in preparing necessary ultimate right-of-way public street dedication documents; and

     5.     Engineering review fees for the public street dedication as described in Section 12.10.070. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.060 Public street improvements.
     A.    No building permit shall be issued for the erection, enlargement, or alteration of any building or structure unless one half of the public street ultimate right-of-way abutting the subject property is improved with public street improvements for the entire length of the subject property abutting the public street so as to meet the city adopted standards.

     B.     Exemptions. The foregoing requirements of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any of the following:

     1.     Building permits with a valuation of less than twenty-five thousand dollars. The building permit valuation shall be calculated by adding all of the valuations assigned to building permits for the subject property that comply with all of the following:

     a.     The building permits were applied for after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and within five years of the application date of the building permit being applied for;

     b.     The building permits are either in processing or have final building department approval; and

     c.     The building permits are not exempt pursuant to subsections (B)(2) through (B)(4) of this section.

     2.     Maintenance, repairs and demolitions to existing structures if no physical elements of the building or structure are relocated or added.

     3.     The establishment of accessory rental dwelling units and improvements required and associated with the establishment of accessory rental dwelling units as indicated in Section 17.24.060(C)(13) of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     4.     Properties located within the residential low and residential low/medium zoning districts as indicated on the official zoning map of the city of Lemon Grove, except that building permits proposing the construction of new single-family residence(s) shall not be exempt from the requirements of subsection A of this section.

     C.     When public street improvements are required, either of the following shall be complied with:

     1.     If the block face(s) is subject to improvement agreements or is constructed with existing public street improvements satisfactory to the city engineer for greater than fifty percent of such block face(s) (linear feet), then public street improvements along the frontage of the subject property are required to be installed prior to final building inspection approval for building permits involving the subject property; or

     2.     If the block face(s) is subject to improvement agreements or is constructed with existing public street improvements satisfactory to the city engineer for less than or equal to fifty percent of the block face(s) (linear feet), then an improvement agreement signed by the property owner(s) of the subject property and the city of Lemon Grove and recorded in the county of San Diego is required to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The terms and conditions of the improvement agreement shall be binding upon the property owner(s) and subsequent property owners as specified within the improvement agreement.

     D.    If the installation of public street improvements is required, the property owner(s) shall furnish all of the following to the engineering division upon applying for a permit to construct public street improvements:

     1.     A street improvement plan prepared by a civil engineer registered in the state of California;

     2.     An erosion control plan prepared by a civil engineer or landscape architect registered in the state of California;

     3.     A landscape and irrigation plan prepared by a landscape architect registered in the state of California, if planting is required; and

     4.     Engineering review fees for the construction permit as described in Section 12.10.070. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.070 Fees.
     The applicant shall pay the fees set forth in the city’s Master Fee Schedule. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.080 Undergrounding and relocating existing utility facilities.
     If public street improvements are required in accordance with Section 12.10.060, the property owner(s) shall be required to underground or relocate all existing utility distribution facilities, including telecommunication lines, along the frontage of the subject property as required by the city engineer. The property owner(s) shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities, including licensed telecommunication operators for the installation or relocation of such facilities. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.090 Street lights required.
     A.    If public street improvements are required in accordance with Section 12.10.060, then all of the following regulations shall be complied with:

     1.     The property owner(s) shall install a street lighting system that provides the level of illumination recommended by the engineering division. Installation shall be in accordance with plans and specifications that meet the approval of the city engineer; and

     2.     The property owner(s) shall deposit with the city a fee sufficient to operate the street light(s) for a period of one year. If the actual cost is less than the amount deposited, the engineering division will refund to the applicant any remaining funds in the deposit within forty-five days after said street light(s) was operated for a period of one year. If any deposit is insufficient to pay the actual costs incurred by the engineering division, the applicant shall, within fourteen days of the demand of the engineering division, pay an amount equal to the deficiency or equal to the amount estimated to be needed to operate the installed street light(s) for a period of one year. The building permit shall not receive final building department approval until all such deficiencies have been paid.

 

     B.     Sufficient lighting shall be provided at the following: intersections, short radius curves, knuckles, at the neck of cul-de-sacs, and at other potential traffic safety locations as may be determined by the city engineer. Other than at the locations listed, street lights shall be installed at typical spacing as specified in the table contained in subsection C of this section, on tangent portions of roadway.

     C.     The following standards shall apply to lighting on public streets in compliance with this policy.

 

 

 

Street

Classification

Street Width Curb to Curb

Size/Type Light Fixture

Spacing of Light Standards

Short Radius Curve Defined

Residential Street

36′ or less

100 watt HPSV

350′ to 450′

250′ or less

Class III Collector

> 36′ to 40′

150 watt HPSV

300′ to 400′

450′ or less

Class II and higher Classification

Greater than 40′

250 watt HPSV

See Notes Below

1,100′ or less

 

 

 

     1.     Installations are to be of a staggered pattern (alternating sides of the street). Street lights will be provided at a typical spacing of one hundred seventy-five feet to two hundred fifty feet on the stagger or every three hundred fifty feet to five hundred fifty along the same side of the street.

     2.     Upon divided roadways with center median islands of at least fourteen feet in width, the street light standards will be provided, centered on the median island, at a typical spacing between one hundred twenty-five feet and two hundred fifty feet between light standards. Each median mounted standard will have two mast arms and luminaries so that there is lighting over each half of the roadway.

     3.     On existing streets, the same standards shall apply, except that the spacing on residential streets shall not exceed six hundred feet. Street lights on all streets less than thirty-six feet in width will be one hundred Watt, High Pressure Sodium Vapor (HPSV) full cut-off fixtures.

     4.     All street lighting shall be installed in accordance with San Diego Regional Standard Drawings. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.100 Street trees required
     If public street improvements are required in accordance with Section 12.10.060, then the property owner(s) shall install trees in conformance to the adopted street tree program for that area. If a street tree program has not been adopted for the area in which the subject property is located, then one twenty-four inch box tree shall be required and installed at a rate of one tree per thirty linear feet of street frontage along the subject property. The tree species, maintenance program, planting details and permanent irrigation shall meet the requirements of the Public Works Department. (Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

 

12.10.110 Appeals.
     Except as otherwise stated in this chapter, the appeal procedure shall conform to the require-

ments of Section 17.28.020 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009; Ord. 358 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 12.12 BRIDGE CROSSINGS AND MAJOR THOROUGHFARES
12.12.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to make provision for assessing and collecting bridge and/or major thoroughfare construction fees as a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or as a condition of issuing a building permit where such fees are to be collected for the purposes of defraying the actual or estimated costs of constructing bridges and/or major thoroughfares as provided by Section 66484 of the Government Code. (Prior code § 77.101)

 

12.12.020 Applicability.
     This chapter provides an alternative system for doing the work authorized by this chapter and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect any other provisions of this code. (Prior code § 77.103)

 

12.12.030 Definitions.
     Whenever the following words are used in this chapter, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    “Bridge” means any portion of a city road which crosses a stream at an elevation higher than the bed of the stream on a structure with a single or multiple span with a total length of twenty feet or more.

     B.     “Bridge crossing” means any location on a stream at which a bridge is contemplated to be constructed pursuant to the flood control provisions of the county general plan.

     C.     “Bridge facility” means a bridge, or an addition or improvement to a bridge, which increases its traffic-carrying capacity.

     D.    “Construction” means design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts and actual construction.

     E.     “Land developer” means any person who has applied for a building permit which affects property, any portion of which is located within an area of benefit which has been established pursuant to this chapter.

     F.     “Major thoroughfare” means any roadway, other than a freeway or collector road shown on the circulation element of the county general plan.

     G.    “Reconstruction” means any construction, improvement or widening of an existing road which is necessary to carry projected traffic and includes design, right-of-way acquisition and contract administration.

     H.    “Stream” means any body of water or area subject to periodic inundation for which a bridge crossing is required pursuant to the flood control provisions of the circulation element of the county general plan.

     I.      “Subdivider” means any person who submits for approval a final subdivision map which affects property, any portion of which is located within an area of benefit which has been established pursuant to this chapter. (Prior code § 77.102)

 

12.12.040 Areas of benefit.
     After holding a hearing pursuant to this chapter, the city council may establish an area of benefit and may impose a reasonable charge on property within the area which, in the opinion of the city council, is benefitted by the construction of the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare. The area of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land or improvements which are considered at such proceeding. The charge collected shall be paid to the city at the time of approval of any final subdivision map or of the issuance of a building permit for such property. Where a bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare has been constructed by contract pursuant to Section 12.12.100, disbursement of funds received by the city pursuant to such reimbursement contract may be made. (Prior code § 77.104)

 

12.12.050 Public hearing—Proceedings.
     A.    At any public hearing held pursuant to this chapter, the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of fee apportionment based on estimated traffic generation in the next twenty years shall be established. A description of the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs whether actual or estimated and the method of fee apportionment established at the hearing shall be incorporated in a city council resolution, a certified copy of which shall be recorded by the city council with the county recorder. Such apportioned fees shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property, or portions thereof. The city council may, from time to time, call public hearings to ascertain whether a bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare is required and to determine the area of benefit of such bridge and/or major thoroughfare when a developer proposes to develop land in a location substantially isolated by a stream or served by major thoroughfare. Prior to establishing an area of benefit, the city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish such area and hold a public hearing thereon. The city clerk shall notify owners of property within the proposed area of the time and place of the hearing at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Such hearings shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearings all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. At such public hearing, the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and a fair method of fee apportionment based on estimated traffic generation in the next twenty years shall be established. The areas of benefit may include land or improvements in addition to the land improvements which are the subject of the subdivision map or building permit application considered at such proceedings. A description of the boundaries of the area of benefit, the costs, whether actual or estimated, and the method of fee apportionment established at the hearing shall be filed by the city council with the recorder. Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final subdivision map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for such property, or portions thereof. Such fees shall be apportioned to benefiting properties in proportion to the area of each ownership falling within the area of benefit multiplied by a factor approved by the city council which reflects the relative degree of benefit to the benefiting property.

     B.     In the case of major thoroughfares, the method of fee apportionment shall not provide for higher fees on land abutting the proposed development, except where the abutting property is provided direct usable access to the major thoroughfare. (Prior code § 77.105)

 

12.12.060 Public hearing—Filing of protests.
     A.    At any time not later than the hour set for hearing objections to the proposed bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare, any owner of property liable to be assessed for the work may make protests against the proposed bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare or against the extent of the area to be assessed or against both of them. Such protests must be in writing and must contain a description of the property, in which each signer thereof is interested, sufficient to identify the same and if the signers are not shown on the last equalized assessment roll as the owners of such property, must contain or be accompanied by written evidence that such signers are the owners of such property. All such protests shall be delivered to the city clerk and no other protests or objections shall be considered. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owners making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the conclusion of a public hearing.

     B.     If there is a written request filed with the city clerk by the owners of more than one half of the area of the property to be benefited by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented to less than one half of that to be benefited, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the city council shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the city council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings, not including any part of the improvement or acquisition so protested against. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the city council, within such one year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of a portion of the improvement so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four fifths of its members, that the owners of a majority of the property within the area of benefit are in favor of going forward with such portion of the improvement or acquisition. (Prior code § 77.106)

 

12.12.070 Public hearing—Resumption.
     Whenever in any proceeding under this chapter a time and place for any hearing by the legislative body is fixed and, from any cause, the hearing is not then and there held or regularly adjourned to a time and place fixed, the power of the legislative body in the premise shall not thereby be divested or lost, but the legislative body may proceed anew to fix a time and place for the hearing, and cause notice thereof to be given by publication by at least one insertion in a daily, semiweekly or weekly newspaper, such publication to be at least five days before the date of the hearing, and thereupon the legislative body shall have power to act as in the first instance. (Prior code § 77.107)

 

12.12.080 Public hearing—Notice.
     Notice of any hearing held pursuant to this chapter shall be given in accordance with Section 65905 of the Government Code. In addition to the requirements of Section 65905 of the Government Code, such notice shall contain preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated cost and method of fee apportionment. (Prior code § 77.108)

 

12.12.090 Payment of fee—Required under specified conditions.
     A.    No final subdivision map shall be approved and no building permit shall be issued if any portion of the property which is the subject of the subdivision map or building permit is located in an area of benefit established pursuant to this chapter, unless there has first been paid the fee established and apportioned to said property, pursuant to this chapter, for the purpose of defraying the actual or estimated cost of constructing the bridge and/or major thoroughfare facilities.

     B.     Nothing in this chapter is intended to relieve a subdivider or applicant for a building permit from the requirements, imposed under other provisions of this code, to dedicate and improve roads as a condition of approval of a tentative map or building permit.

     C.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required:

     1.     Unless, for major thoroughfares, such major thoroughfares are in addition to or a reconstruction of any existing major thoroughfares serving the area at the time of the adoption of the area of benefit, and

     2.     For bridge facilities, unless the planned bridge facility is an original bridge serving the area or an addition to any existing bridge facility serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit.

     D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required unless the planned bridge facility is intended to be constructed at a bridge crossing which is identified as such on the flood control provisions of the circulation element of the county general plan, or unless the planned major thoroughfare is intended to be constructed on a route shown on the circulation element of the county general plan; provided such provisions were adopted not less than thirty days prior to the filing of the subdivision map or application for building permit.

     E.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection A of this section, payment of such fees shall not be required for the following:

     1.     The use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land; provided, however, that the total value, as determined by the building official of all such alteration, enlargement so construction which is completed within any one-year period, shall not exceed one-half of the current market value as determined by the building official of all existing buildings or structures on such lot or parcel of land and if the alteration or enlargement of the building is not such as to change its classification of occupancy as defined by Section 501 of the Uniform Building Code;

     2.     The following accessory buildings and structures: Private garages, children’s playhouses, radio and television receiving antennas, windmills, silos, tank houses, shops, barns, coops and other buildings which are accessory to one-family or two-family dwellings;

     3.     Outdoor advertising;

     4.     Agriculture buildings;

     5.     Oil wells. (Prior code § 77.109)

 

12.12.100 Payment of fee—Contracts for construction.
     Whenever, pursuant to this chapter, a subdivider or land developer is required to pay a fee for the construction of a bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare as a condition precedent to the acceptance of a final map, or as a condition of issuing a building permit, and the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare is dedicated to the public, the city council may contract with the subdivider or land developer for the construction of the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare and reimburse the subdivider or land developer for the cost of constructing the bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare. (Prior code § 77.110)

 

12.12.110 Payment of fee—Methods.
     A.    Consideration in lieu of the payment of fees may be accepted.

     B.     Fees shall be deposited in a planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare fund. A separate fund shall be established for each area of benefit. Moneys in such fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected, or to reimburse the city for the cost of constructing the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares.

     C.     The city may advance money from its general fund or road fund to pay the cost of constructing the bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares and may reimburse the general fund or road fund for such advances from planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfares funds established to finance the construction of such bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares.

     D.    The city may incur an indebtedness for the construction of bridge facilities and/or major thoroughfares; provided, that the sole security for repayment of such indebtedness shall be moneys in planned bridge facility and/or major thoroughfare funds.

     E.     The city may contract with the subdivider or land developer for the construction of the bridge and/or major thoroughfare and reimburse the subdivider or land developer for the cost of constructing the facility.

     F.     The city may require or accept the dedication and/or improvement of right-of-way along a major thoroughfare and may reduce the fees assessed against that property by an amount equal to the cost of that right-of-way and improvements as determined by the director of transportation if the value of the right-of-way or improvements were included in the calculation of the fee.

     G.    No property will be assessed a fee under this chapter for both a final subdivision and a building permit. (Prior code § 77.111)

Chapter 12.16 NUMBERING SYSTEM FOR BUILDINGS
12.16.010 Conformance required.
     All dwelling and/or business buildings within the city shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 59 § 1, 1980)

 

12.16.020 System—Center designated.
     All streets running in a north/south direction shall begin at the nine-hundred block and increase in a northerly direction. All streets running in an east/west direction begin at the westerly city limits, beginning with the sixty-three-hundred block, and increase in an easterly direction. (Ord. 59 § 2, 1980)

 

12.16.030 System—Rules for assignment.
     Buildings in each of said areas shall be numbered in accordance with the following general rules:

     A.    Numbers shall be assigned on the general plan of one hundred to each block and, where adjacent blocks are irregular in length, the numbers in these blocks may be varied to meet the conditions as determined by the building official.

     B.     Even numbers shall be allotted to the north and west sides of the streets, the odd numbers to the south and east sides. (Ord. 59 § 3, 1980).

 

12.16.040 Allotment of numbers.
     All numbers shall be allotted by the building official, who shall determine the proper number in each case from the maps to be numbered and maintained on file in the building department in the city. (Ord. 59 § 4, 1980)

 

12.16.050 Building permits.
     Before any permit is issued for building operations, the applicant for such permit shall obtain from the building official the proper house number for the property for which such permit, within the limits of this chapter, is desired. (Ord. 59 § 5, 1980)

 

12.16.060 Placement of numbers and size.
     House numbers, as so allotted, shall be placed on buildings on the transom over the principal entrance, or on some other place on the front of the building where the numbers may be easily seen from the street, and all such numbers shall be at least two and one-half inches in height. (Ord. 59 § 6, 1980)

 

12.16.070 Duty of lessee, occupant, or owner.
     It shall be the duty of the lessee, occupant, or owner of any existing building to obtain the proper house number from the building official and to place this number on said building within thirty days from the effective date of this chapter. It shall

be the duty of the lessee, occupant or owner of any new building to place the number assigned to said building on or before the day final inspection is made by the building official. (Ord. 59 § 7, 1980)

 

12.16.080 Improper placement of numbers.
     If the building official finds any building upon which the proper number has not been properly placed, as required by this chapter, he or she may order the applicant, lessee, or owner to obtain and properly place such number within ten days. The posting of a notice upon the entrance door of such building shall meet the requirements of this chapter for legal service of such notice or order. It shall be the duty of the lessee, occupant, and/or owner of the building to comply with the order. (Ord. 59 § 8, 1980)

Chapter 12.20 PARKS AND FACILITIES
12.20.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited and referred to as the “Parks and Facilities Ordinance of the City of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.020 Purpose.
     It is the purpose of the city council, in establishing rules and regulations governing the use of park and recreational areas in the city, to insure the public in general, and the inhabitants of this community in particular, full and equal rights to the use and enjoyment of said public facilities without regard to the status or condition of the users of the facilities. It is recognized that society generally and the inhabitants of any community have a right to have publicly owned premises maintained in a sanitary and orderly condition. Further, the city council recognizes the rights of individuals to speak, write and freely disseminate their views and to make full use of public facilities so long as said rights are exercised in the manner which is not inconsistent with the rights of others and violative of said rights. It is the intent of the city council, being aware that no rights are absolute, to regulate and prohibit certain activities in public parks and other places of public recreation within the city, in the interest of protecting the enjoyment and safety of the public in the use of the facilities. To further this purpose and intent, the director of community services, as authorized herein, is authorized to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations and post signage as may be necessary and appropriate to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     “Alcoholic beverage” means any beverage as defined by Business and Professions Code Section 23004, and includes beer, wine, whiskey, gin or similar beverage containing more than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume.

     “Director” means the director of community services or designee.

     “Park” or “city park” means the land and easements owned or leased by the city of Lemon Grove which, by ordinance, resolution, encroachment permit, regulation or agreement, are dedicated to or operated by the city for purposes of sports, community gardens, and public recreation. The term shall include the buildings, parking lots, streets and sidewalks within the territorial boundaries establishing the park.

     “Pet” means any dog, cat, reptile, or other domestic or exotic animal legally permitted pursuant to applicable laws including the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     “Recreation area” means the land and easements owned or leased by the city of Lemon Grove which, by ordinance, resolution, regulation or agreement, is dedicated to or operated by the city for purposes of sports, special events, community gardens, and public recreation.

     “Recreation facility” means a building and the appurtenant land owned, leased or operated by the city of Lemon Grove for the purpose of sports and public recreation activities including, but not limited to, community gardens, and includes a parking lot serving the building and any contiguous sidewalks. Although a recreation facility may be located within a city park, it is a separate and distinct term for purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.040 Prohibited acts.
     On any property as defined in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 12.20.030, it is unlawful for any person to perform the acts prohibited by Lemon Grove Municipal Code Sections 12.20.050 through 12.20.360, inclusive. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.050 Hours of operation.
     A.    It is unlawful to remain upon the grounds of any city park, or any part thereof, except between the hours of dawn to dusk. The director is authorized to alter the park closing hours stated herein above when determined necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare. Any change in park hours shall be posted at each affected park site. Any alteration in park hours shall be made on a content-neutral basis and shall be solely based on threats to the health, safety and welfare of park users. If an alteration in park hours is claimed to potentially impact the expressive rights of any park user, said affected individual may seek immediate judicial review of the change in park hours pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8.

     B.     The director shall promulgate hours of operation for the city-owned facilities and fees and charges for the use of said facilities which shall be effective from the time they are approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2017; Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.060 Defacing of structures, monuments, or vegetation.
     A.    Except when authorized by the director, it is unlawful to dig up vegetation or excavate any soil within any city park or recreation facility.

     B.     Except when authorized by the director, it is unlawful to cut, break, injure, deface or disturb any tree, shrub, plant or other vegetation, rock, building, fence, bench, table, street, sidewalk, parking lot or other structure, apparatus or property within any city park or recreation facility.

     C.     Except when authorized by the director, it is unlawful to mark or write upon, paint or deface in any manner any tree, rock, building, monument, fence, bench, wall, street, sidewalk, parking lot, apparatus or other structure within a city park or recreation facility, or to attach a decoration of any sort to any structure in or at any city park or recreation facility. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.070 Consumption of alcohol.
     It is unlawful to possess and consume all alcoholic beverages within any city park, recreation facility or recreation area. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2017; Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.080 Alcoholic beverage consumption and possession.
     A.    It is unlawful to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage within any city park during the hours of closure established by Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 12.20.050.

     B.     It is unlawful to consume or possess an alcoholic beverage at any time within any city park rest room, playground, parking lot or public street contiguous to or immediately adjoining the territorial boundary of those parks. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.090 Littering.
     Littering in a city park or recreation area is prohibited pursuant to California Penal Code Section 374 4. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.100 Toilets and rest rooms.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person over eight years of age to enter or use any toilets or rest rooms designated by signage for persons of the opposite gender.

     B.     It is unlawful to use a sink in any public park or recreation building to launder clothing or to bathe or wash any part of the body other than the hands or face, or both. Notwithstanding the forgoing, any person may wash their person or clothing stained or soiled as a result of using park grounds or facilities. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.110 Posting of handbills and other papers.
     A.    It is unlawful to post within any city park or recreation facility, or to post or affix upon any tree, fence or structure or building located within any city park or recreation facility, any handbills, circulars, pamphlets, tracts, papers or advertisements.

     B.     With the permission of the director of community services, announcements may be posted upon community service bulletin boards located within recreation facilities advising persons of local, non-commercial or non-sectarian recreational, non-profit or civic events in the Lemon Grove community. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.120 Sale or solicitation for sale of merchandise.
     Except as authorized by a permit issued by the director, it is unlawful to sell or offer for sale any merchandise, article, food, or beverage or any object whatsoever, or to practice, carry on, conduct or solicit for any trade, occupation, business or profession, within any city park, recreation facility or recreation area. Permits shall only be issued for city-authorized, community events. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.130 Vending vehicles.
     Except pursuant to a permit issued by the director or except for emergency repairs, it is unlawful to stop or park a food vending vehicle or other vehicles within a one-fourth mile radius of any city park or recreation facility for the purpose of, or to sell, give away, display or offer for sale, any food or beverage product from that vehicle. Any vehicle stopped for emergency repairs shall not sell, give away, display or offer for sale any food or beverage product. Permits shall only be issued in conjunction with city-authorized events and the permittees shall comply with Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 8.04 (Food Regulations). (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.140 Motor vehicles.
     It is unlawful for any automobile, motorcycle or other motor vehicle to be in any park, excepting at such place or places as are provided for and designated as places for the parking of automobiles, motorcycles or other motor vehicles. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.150 Cleaning or repairing of vehicles.
     It is unlawful to clean, wash or polish, or to make other than emergency repairs upon, any automobile, motorcycle or self-driven vehicle within any city park or at any recreation facility. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.160 Obstructing vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
     It is unlawful for any person to willfully obstruct vehicular or pedestrian traffic or circulation within or upon any of the sidewalks or streets of a city park or recreation facility. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.170 Fires.
     It is unlawful to ignite and/or maintain a fire in any city park except in picnic stoves provided by the city for that purpose or as part of a city-authorized event. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.180 Tampering with equipment, tools or materials.
     It is unlawful to open or close any valves or switches pertaining to the water, gas or electric service or to move or remove from one location to another or destroy any equipment, tools, implements or materials used by the community services department; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any employee or contractor of the community services department while in the performance of their approved duties. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.190 Pets.
     A.    Subject to the conditions set out in this section, pets are permitted in city parks during the hours that such parks are open to the public.

     B.     No person shall bring a dog into, permit a dog to enter into or remain in, or possess a dog in any city park without first having obtained a valid license for such dog.

     C.     It is unlawful to bring or allow a dog to be within any city park, unless the dog is restrained by a chain, line or leash not to exceed six feet and is in the custody and control of some competent person.

     D.    Except as provided in subsection C of this section, no person shall bring a pet into or permit a pet to enter and/or remain within, or posses a pet within any structure in a city park. Subsection C of this section shall not apply to a seeing-eye dog or other service animal assisting a person with a disability.

     E.     No person shall keep, or permit to remain within a city park, a noisy, vicious, or dangerous pet, or pet which disturbs others. This prohibition shall include all wild animals, potentially dangerous animals and vicious animals as defined in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 6.04 (Rabies, Animal Control and Regulation).

     F.     Any person bringing a pet into a city park is solely responsible for the action of such pet.

     G.    The director may further regulate pets in, or may exclude pets from, any city park, recreation facility, or recreation area or section of city park, recreation facility, or recreation area that they find that the presence of pets conflicts with the general use and enjoyment of such park, recreation facility, or recreation area. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.200 Animals.
     No person shall trap, kill, wound, or maltreat any wild or domesticated bird or animal, and no

person shall permit any pet to pursue, trap, kill, or wound, kill or catch any wild or domesticated bird or animal in any city park, recreation facility or recreation area. Nothing herein shall prevent the acts of public officers, employees or agents from performing acts in furtherance of their public duties. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.210 Horses.
     It is unlawful for any person to ride, bring, allow, or permit a horse, mule, donkey, or pony owned or controlled by such person upon a city park, parking lot, street or sidewalk without the written permission of the director as part of an authorized city event. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.220 Children.
     It is unlawful to permit any child under the age of seven years to play in any city park or recreation area unless such child is attended by an adult. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.230 Games and sports.
     It is unlawful to practice or play any team or organized sports within a city park. The use of regulation-type baseballs or bats is prohibited. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

l2.20.240 Archery and golf.
     It is unlawful in any city park, recreation facility or recreation area to practice or participate in archery or golf, or to possess an implement used for archery or golf. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.250 Model airplanes, other vehicles and dangerous activities.
     It is unlawful to operate any model airplane, model car, go-cart or similar self-propelled device, toy or model within any city park or recreation area. Further, it is unlawful to engage in any inherently dangerous activity within any city park or recreation area. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.260 Entertainment.
     It is unlawful to set up, maintain or give any exhibition, performance, lecture, or concert without a permit. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.270 Amplified noise.
     Except when authorized pursuant to a permit issued by the director, it is unlawful in any city park or recreation area to operate a radio, television, stereo or any similar electronic or mechanical device capable of producing or emitting sound at a volume where the sound is audible at a distance greater than fifty feet from the point of emission. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.280 Disturbing of meetings and gatherings.
     It is unlawful to disturb in any manner any picnic, meeting, services, concert, exercises, exhibition, athletic events, special events or organized class, or to indulge in riotous, boisterous, threatening or indecent conduct or abusive, threatening, profane or indecent language in any city park, building or recreation area. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.290 Water fountains.
     It is unlawful to enter into, wade, bathe, or launder clothing in the waters of any fountain. Further, it is unlawful to throw into or deposit any dirt, filth, coins or foreign matter in the waters of any fountain, or in like manner pollute the same. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.300 Camping and other overnight activities.
     Except when authorized pursuant to a permit issued by the director, it is unlawful to camp, lodge, or sleep for any period of time within a city park during the hours that the park is closed pursuant to Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 12.20.050. Usage of the parks and recreation areas shall also be subject to the restrictions found in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 9.36 (Loitering, Soliciting, Camping and Storage of Personal Property). (Ord. 329, 2004)

12.20.310 Parks—Discharge of fireworks and firearms.
     Unless permitted by Chapter 8.56, Fireworks, pursuant to a lawful permit, it is unlawful to discharge any firearm, firecracker, bomb, torpedo, rocket or other fireworks within any city park. (Ord 421 § 2, 2014; Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.320 Carrying of arms and weapons.
     Except for peace officers defined in California Penal Code Section 817, it is unlawful to carry, convey, maintain, or provide any arm or weapon including, but not limited to, any fixed-blade knife, hunting knife, pocket knife, switchblade knife, bayonet, machete, firearm, chain, club, bat, stack, cane, blackjack, sling shots, bullies, sandclubs, sandbags, and metal knuckles or any other object or device, whether normally designed for such use or not, which is intended to be used or which can be used in a dangerous or offensive manner to inflict bodily harm upon the person of another, or property damage upon the property real and personal, or the trees, shrubs, vegetation or lawn owned by or in the custody of the city, or any other person upon his or her person, or in a vehicle, whether concealed or not, within any public park, or other recreational area in the city, or in or upon any of the walks, lots or avenues of any park or recreational area in the city. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.330 Gambling and gaming.
     Gambling and gaming is prohibited pursuant to the provisions of California Penal Code Sections 330 and 330A. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.340 Group use—Rules and regulations.
     A.    It is unlawful in a city park to use a group picnic shelter designated for group use of twenty-five or more persons or to use a ballfield without a permit authorized by the director. Group picnic shelters for groups of twenty-five or more persons shall be designated by signs posted by the director of community services for that purpose.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person or group of persons within a city park, without a permit issued by the director, to fail or refuse to promptly leave a picnic shelter designated for group use by twenty-five or more persons or a ballfield following notification by a person designated for that purpose by the director, or a law enforcement officer.

     C.     All groups desiring to make reservations for picnic shelters or ballfields must complete a park reservation request form, submit a refundable cleaning and security deposit, and pay the required fee(s) at the time of request. The reservations must be made at least two days before the desired date. Groups wishing to reserve a ballfield must reserve one for a minimum of two hours. If groups wish, for an additional required fee(s), to have a ballfield prepped (dragged and chalked), seven days’ notice must be given.

     D.    At the conclusion of the group’s use, a staff member from the community services department will inspect the area to determine if it has been cleaned and to ensure that no damage has occurred. If the area is left in satisfactory condition, the deposit will be refunded. If the area has not been properly cleaned, the department will cause it to be cleaned, with the actual costs being deducted from the deposit. If the costs of cleaning exceed the amount of the deposit, the group or organization will be billed for the balance due with interest added if not paid within thirty days after the billing date.

     E.     Groups must not exceed the maximum size for their shelter. Any group that exceeds the maximum will forfeit its cleaning deposit. This occurrence may be grounds for refusal to approve future requests.

     F.     Groups who cancel a reservation will be charged a required fee(s) for handling. If the reservation is cancelled seven or more days in advance, the use fee and cleaning/damage deposit will be refunded. If the reservation is cancelled less than seven days in advance, only the cleaning/damage deposit will be refunded. Cancellations must be made during business hours (eight a.m. to five-thirty p.m.), Monday through Thursday, by calling

825-3815 or by coming to the community services department. Should inclement weather occur on the day of the reservation, the groups may receive a refund of the use fee and cleaning/damage deposit or reschedule their reservation.

     G.    All groups will confine themselves to their assigned areas, unless they are involved with recreational activities. No picnic tables, benches, grills, stoves or other park equipment will be moved from any other area without express permission from the community services department. Groups may not change assigned picnic areas. Failure to comply will result in forfeiture of all fees.

     H.    All group members and caterers must use the parking area assigned on the reservation form. Any vehicle not parked in designated parking spaces will be ticketed.

     I.      Organizations and groups staging functions in the parks should acquaint themselves with the general park rules and regulations. Actions which are in violation of said rules and regulations may result in cancellation of the outing, forfeiture of deposits, arrest or fine.

     J.      These group use rules and regulations apply to all city parks and recreation areas. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.350 Issuance of park permits.
     Upon application presented at least three days in advance, the director will issue a permit for activities regulated within this chapter. The permit process described in this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 10.40 (Permits for Special Events and Parades). A permit shall not be issued if the director finds that the event or activity will violate or cause any of the following conditions to occur:

     A.    Violate law;

     B.     Exceed the capacity of the city park or recreation facility for the safe conduct of the event;

     C.     Present a clear and present danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public or other park users;

     D.    Conflict with the terms or conditions of a valid prior issued permit;

     E.     Involve the use of machinery or equipment which can damage park or recreation property; or

     F.     Involve activity, equipment or a number of persons, or a combination thereof, which in the opinion of the director of community services, is or constitutes a threat to public health and safety. (Ord. 329, 2004)

 

12.20.355 Smoking in public parks.
     It is unlawful to possess a lighted or burning tobacco product or tobacco-related product, marijuana or a marijuana-related product, or use an electronic smoking device, as defined in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 8.24, at any time within the boundaries of any park, including designated parking areas of any city park. (Ord. 445 § 1, 2017; Ord. 430 § 3, 2015; Ord. 383 § 1, 2009)

 

12.20.360 Skateboard park safety regulations.
     A.    Any person skateboarding in a designated skateboard park must wear a helmet, elbow pads, and knee pads at all times.

     B.     Skateboarding in a designated skateboard park is prohibited during wet or unsafe conditions (including, but not limited to, maintenance, repairs, or construction). (Ord. 377 § 1, Exh. A, 2008; Ord. 374 §1, 2008)

 

12.20.370 Enforcement.
     Any person who knowingly or willingly violates any of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction as determined by the city attorney. (Ord. 377 § 1, Exh. A, 2008; Ord. 374 §1, 2008)

Chapter 12.30 TRUCK ROUTES AND MAXIMUM GROSS WEIGHT LIMITS
12.30.010 Prohibited acts—Excepted routes.
     Pursuant to the provisions of Section 35701 of the Vehicle Code, no person, corporation, or any other organization shall use or operate any commercial vehicle or any vehicle exceeding six thousand pounds rated gross weight on or over any street, road or public right-of-way within the city except the following streets which are designated truck routes:

     Route 1—College Avenue from Federal Blvd., north to the city boundary;

     Route 2—Massachusetts from Broadway north to the city boundary;

     Route 3—Broadway from the eastern city boundary continuing west to College Avenue;

     Route 4—Federal Blvd. from the western city boundary continuing east to Broadway;

     Route 5—Lemon Grove Avenue from the northern city boundary continuing south to the southern city boundary. (Ord. 303, 2000)

 

12.30.020 Vehicles subject to public utilities code.
     The provisions of this chapter are not applicable with respect to any vehicle which is subject to the provisions of Sections 1031 through 1036, inclusive of the Public Utilities Code. (Ord. 303, 2000)

12.30.030 Pickups and deliveries.
     This chapter shall not prohibit any commercial vehicles coming from an unrestricted street having ingress or egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups and deliveries of goods, wares, merchandise and refuse from or to any building or structure located on the restricted street or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted street for which a building permit has been previously obtained. (Ord. 303, 2000)

 

12.30.040 Vehicles owned by a public utility or licensed contractor.
     This chapter shall not apply to any vehicle owned by a public utility or a licensed contractor while necessarily in use in connection, installation or repair of any public utility. (Ord. 303, 2000)

 

12.30.050 Violations are infractions.
     Violation of this chapter is an infraction and is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year. (Ord. 303, 2000)

 

12.30.060 Effective subject to proper sign erection on streets affected.
     This chapter shall not be effective until the appropriate signs are erected indicating those streets which are affected by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 303, 2000)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 13.06 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
Chapter 13.08 WELLS
Chapter 13.12 SEWERS
Chapter 13.16 SEWER CONNECTIONS
Chapter 13.20 SEPTIC SYSTEMS
Chapter 13.24 SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING AND GREEN WASTE COLLECTION
Chapter 13.28 MANDATORY RECYCLING
Chapter 13.32 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS DIVERSION DEPOSIT PROGRAM
Chapter 13.36 USE OF PUBLIC SOLID WASTE RECEPTACLES

Chapter 13.04 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
13.04.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following words or phrases defined in this section are used, they shall have the respective meaning assigned to them in the following definitions:

     A.    “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

     B.     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     C.     “Underground utility district” or “district” means an area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited, which area is established pursuant to and hereafter described in this chapter.

     D.    “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 13 § 1, 1977)

 

13.04.020 Public hearing by council—Resolution of intention—Agreement on costs of conversion.
     A.    The city council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service.

     B.     Prior to establishing an area as an underground utility district, the city council shall adopt a resolution of intention to establish such district and hold a public hearing thereon. The city clerk shall notify all owners of property within the proposed district, as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and all utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of the hearing on such resolution at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

     C.     Prior to adopting a resolution of intention pursuant to subsection B of this section, the city council shall determine that the city or public utility has voluntarily agreed to pay over fifty percent of all costs of conversion, excluding costs of users connections to underground electric or communication facilities. (Ord. 13 § 2, 1977)

 

13.04.030 Establishment of districts by ordinance—Time set by resolution.
     A.    If, after such public hearing on the resolution of intention, the city council finds that the public health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by ordinance amending this chapter declares such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation.

     B.     Such ordinance shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall provide that the city council shall subsequently fix by resolution the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. Notification of the passage of such resolution fixing the time shall be given pursuant to Sections 13.04.080 and 13.04.090. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 13 § 3, 1977)

 

13.04.040 Unlawful acts.
     Whenever the city council establishes an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 13.04.030, it shall be unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when said overhead facilities are required to be removed by such ordinance and the resolution of the city council fixing said removal date, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 13.04.110 and for such reasonable time as may be required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 13 § 4, 1977)

 

13.04.050 Exceptions—Emergency or unusual circumstances.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city engineer in order to provide emergency service. The city engineer may grant special permission on such terms as he or she may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances and without discrimination as to any person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 13 § 5, 1977)

 

13.04.060 Exceptions—General.
     This chapter and any ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such ordinance, not apply to the following types of facilities:

     A.    Any county facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures crossing any portion of an underground utility district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of such district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited);

     D.    Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building, or to an adjacent building, without crossing any public street;

     E.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility or person for furnishing or receiving communications services;

     F.     Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     G.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used, or to be used, in conjunction with construction projects;

     H.    New or existing pole-to-anchor guy wires within the district necessary to support overhead facilities outside the boundary of the district, or poles within the district which have been specifically excepted in the ordinance creating the district. (Ord. 13 § 6, 1977)

 

13.04.070 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
     A.    Within ten days after the effective date of an ordinance establishing an underground utility district adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the city clerk shall give notice of the adoption of such ordinance to all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the underground utility district established by the ordinance.

     B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing to all owners of property within the district, as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll, and to the affected utilities a copy of the ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030. (Ord. 13 § 7, 1977)

 

13.04.080 Resolution setting date—Notice to property owners.
     Within ten days of adoption, the city clerk shall notify all affected property owners of the adoption of a resolution by the city council setting the date for undergrounding of the utilities and of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric connections or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. (Ord. 13 § 8, 1977)

 

13.04.090 Resolution setting date—Notice to utility companies.
     Within ten days of adoption, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities of the adoption of a resolution of the city council setting the date by which the utilities must furnish the necessary underground service facilities and remove their overhead service facilities. (Ord. 13 § 9, 1977)

 

13.04.100 Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors, and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 13 § 10, 1977)

 

13.04.110 Responsibility of property owners.
     Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 13.04.100 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served, all in accordance with the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission. (Ord. 13 § 11, 1977)

 

13.04.120 Authority of city engineer.
     If the requirements of Section 13.04.110 are not met by any person within the time prescribed in the resolution establishing the date by which such on-premises undergrounding must be accomplished, the city engineer may proceed in accordance with one or more of the procedures set forth in Sections 13.04.130 and 13.04.140. (Ord. 13 § 12, 1977)

 

13.04.130 Disconnection of premises.
     The city engineer shall conspicuously post on the property being served a written notice to comply with the requirements of Section 13.04.110. Such notice shall state that, if the service connection required by Section 13.04.110 is not completed within thirty days after the posting of such notice, the city engineer may order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated service facilities supplying utility service to the property. If such service connection is not completed within the thirty-day period, the city engineer shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated service facilities supplying utility service to said property. (Ord. 13 § 13, 1977)

 

13.04.140 Construction of service connection and assessment of cost.
     A.    Notice to Construct. The city engineer shall give written notice to the person in possession of the premises and to the owner thereof, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to comply with the requirements of Section 13.04.110 within thirty days after service of such notice. The notice shall particularly specify what work is required to be done and shall state that, if such work is not completed within thirty days after service of such notice, the city engineer will cause such work to be done, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property and become a lien upon such property. Such written notice may be given either by personal service or by mail.

     B.     Service by Mail. In case of service by mail on the person in possession, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of such premises at such premises. In case of service by mail on the owner, the notice shall be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the owner of the premises, as such owner and address are shown on the last equalized assessment roll. When no address appears on said roll it shall be addressed to the owner, general delivery, at the United States Post Office nearest the property. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it was addressed within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof.

     C.     Posting. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or person in possession of the premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof to be conspicuously posted on the premises.

     D.    Engineer Performs Work. If, upon the expiration of the thirty-day period, the work has not been done, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work; provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall, in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property.

     E.     Report and Assessment. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property for which such required underground facilities were provided and against which such cost is to be assessed. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which time shall not be less than fifteen days thereafter.

     F.     Notice of Hearing on Assessment. The city engineer shall give a notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner provided in this section for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the city council will pass upon such report and will hear protests against such assessment. Such notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment. Such notices shall be

 

personally served or mailed and posted not less than fifteen days prior to the date of hearing.

     G.    Confirmation of Assessment. Upon the date and hour set for the hearing of protests, the city council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any. After completing the hearing the city council shall confirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     H.    Assessment Becomes Lien; Collection. If any assessment is not paid within ten days after its confirmation by the city council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property, and the city engineer shall deliver to the county tax collector a notice that the assessment has not been paid. The county tax collector shall enforce such liens and collect such assessments. Each assessment shall be due and payable at the time said assessment is confirmed by the city council and, if not paid within ten days after its confirmation, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per year from the date of its confirmation. (Ord. 13 § 14, 1977)

 

13.04.150 Responsibility of city.
     The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the ordinance establishing the district. (Ord. 13 § 15, 1977)

 

13.04.160 Extension of time.
     In the event that any act required by the ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 13.04.030, and the resolution setting the time for performance, cannot be performed within the time provided by said resolution on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall, upon written request by the person required to perform the act, be extended by the city council or city engineer for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 13 § 16, 1977)

Chapter 13.06 VIDEO FRANCHISE FEES, CUSTOMER SERVICE AND OTHER VIDEO-RELATED MATTERS
13.06.010 Regulation of state video franchises and city video franchises.
     Under state law effective January 1, 2007, the California Public Utilities Commission (“PUC”) has the authority to grant state video franchises. The city of Lemon Grove will acquire certain rights and responsibilities with respect to state video franchise holders. These include the receipt of a franchise fee and a fee for public, educational and government (“PEG”) purposes, both based on a percentage of the gross revenues of state franchise holders, as well as the establishment and enforcement of penalties for violations of customer service rules. The city of Lemon Grove will retain authority, without change, over all city of Lemon Grove video franchisees until such time as they no longer hold a valid city of Lemon Grove video franchise, or are no longer operating under a current or expired city of Lemon Grove video franchise. The city may continue to grant, modify, renew, extend or terminate city of Lemon Grove video franchises for video service until January 1, 2008. After January 1, 2008, the city of Lemon Grove may modify, renew, extend or terminate existing city of Lemon Grove video franchises, whether current or expired. For purposes of this chapter, the terms “city of Lemon Grove video franchise” and “city of Lemon Grove video franchisee” shall have the same meaning as the terms “city of Lemon Grove cable franchise” and “city of Lemon Grove cable franchisee” as they are used in Chapter 13.06. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.020 State video franchise and PEG fees.
     A.    For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Lemon Grove, there shall be a fee paid to the city of Lemon Grove equal to five percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder.

     B.     For any state video franchise holder operating within the boundaries of the city of Lemon Grove, there shall be an additional fee paid to the city equal to one percent of the gross revenue of that state video franchise holder, under the terms and conditions set forth in the Act. This fee shall be used by the city for PEG purposes consistent with state and federal law.

     C.     Gross revenue, for the purposes of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, shall have the definition set forth in California Public Utilities Code Section 5860, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.030 Audit authority.
     Not more than once annually, the city manager or his or her designee may examine and perform an audit of the business records of a holder of a state video franchise to ensure compliance with Section 13.06.020. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.040 Customer service penalties under state video franchises.
     A.    The holder of a state video franchise shall comply with all applicable state and federal customer service and protection standards pertaining to the provision of video service.

     B.     The city manager or his or her designee shall monitor the compliance of state video franchise holders with respect to state and federal customer service and protection standards. The city manager or his or her designee will provide the state video franchise holder written notice of any material breaches of applicable customer and service standards, and will allow the state video franchise holder thirty days from the receipt of the notice to remedy the specified material breach. Material breaches not remedied within the thirty-day time period will be subject to the following penalties to be imposed by the city:

     1.     For the first occurrence of a violation, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

     2.     For a second occurrence of a violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

     3.     For a third or further occurrence of a violation of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each occurrence of the violation.

     C.     A state video franchise holder may appeal a penalty assessed by the city manager or his or her designee to the city council within sixty days of the initial assessment. After relevant speakers are heard and any necessary staff reports are submitted, the city council will vote to either uphold, modify or vacate the penalty. The city council’s decision on the imposition of a penalty shall be final. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

13.06.050 City response to state video franchise applications.
     A.    Applicants for state video franchises within the boundaries of the city of Lemon Grove must concurrently provide two complete copies to the city of Lemon Grove of any application or amendments to applications filed with the PUC. One complete copy must be provided to the city clerk, and one complete copy to the city manager.

     B.     Within thirty days of receipt, the city manager will provide any appropriate comments to the PUC regarding an application or an amendment to an application for a state video franchise. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

13.60.060 Extension of existing city of Lemon Grove video franchises.
     Any entity providing video service under an expired city of Lemon Grove video franchise on January 1, 2007, shall hereby have the terms of its city of Lemon Grove video franchise extended with the same terms and conditions until January 2, 2008. The extension of a city of Lemon Grove video franchise does not preclude the city of Lemon Grove from further modifications, renewals, extensions, or termination of that city of Lemon Grove video franchise. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 13.08 WELLS
13.08.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter is to provide for the construction, repair and reconstruction of wells so that the groundwater of the city will not be polluted or contaminated, and that water obtained from such wells will be suitable for the purpose for which used and will not jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city, and for the destruction of abandoned wells or wells found to be public nuisances so that such wells will not cause pollution or contamination of groundwater or otherwise jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the people of this city. (Ord. 289, 1999)

 

13.08.020 San Diego County Ordinance No. 4286 (New Series) adopted by reference.
     There is adopted by reference San Diego County Ordinance No. 4286 (New Series) three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, relating to construction, repair, reconstruction or destruction of wells, and incorporating by reference Water Well Standards: State of California (Chapter II of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74), and Catholic Standards: State of California (Chapter II of Department of Water Resources Bulletin No. 74-1). The provisions of said ordinance shall be made a part hereof as though fully set out in this chapter. (Ord. 289, 1999)

 

13.08.030 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction shall be fined in an amount not to exceed five hundred dollars or by imprisonment for a period of not more then six months in the county jail or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 289, 1999)

 

13.08.040 Additional permits required.
     All persons performing work in accordance with this chapter shall, in addition to the permits required as set forth herein, obtain all associated or incidental permits as set forth elsewhere in this code and as otherwise required by the city engineer. (Ord. 289, 1999)

Chapter 13.12 SEWERS
Article I. General Provisions and Definitions
13.12.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “sanitary sewer ordinance” and +may be cited as such. (Prior code § 68.101)

 

13.12.020 Definitions.
     The definitions in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context.

     A.    “Director” means the director of the department of public works of the city or his or her authorized agent.

     B.     “Effluent” means partially or completely treated sewage flowing out of any sewage treatment device.

     C.     “Industrial liquid waste” means any waterborne waste from industrial or manufacturing processes, labs, institutions, commercial or business buildings, as distinct from sanitary sewage.

     D.    “Inspector” means the authorized inspector, deputy, agent, or representative of the director.

     E.     “Lot” means any piece or parcel of land bounded, defined, or shown upon a plat or described in a deed recorded in the office of the

county recorder which conforms to the boundaries of such lot as shown upon such recorded plat or described in such recorded deed; provided, however, that, in the event any building or structure covers more area than a lot as herein defined, the term “lot” includes all such places or parcels of land upon which said building or structure is wholly or partly located.

     F.     “Permittee” means any person who has obtained a permit from the director under the provisions of this chapter.

     G.    “Sewage” (also known as “wastewater”) means the waterborne wastes from dwellings, kitchens, restaurants, institutions, stables, dairies, business buildings, and other similar structures, but excludes any stormwater, rainwater, surface water, groundwater, roof or yard drainage.

     H.    Sewage, Industrial. “Industrial sewage” means sewage in which industrial wastes predominate.

     I.      Sewage, Sanitary. “Sanitary sewage” (also known as “domestic sewage”) means sewage which originates in the sanitary conveniences of a residential dwelling, business building, factory, or institution.

     J.      Sewer, Building. “Building sewer” means that part of the private sewer system which receives discharge from soil and waste pipes in a building and extends from the building to the sewer service lateral or public sewer.

     K.    Sewer, Industrial Connection. “Industrial connection sewer” means a building sewer through which is discharged industrial waste, or industrial sewage as defined in subsection H of this section.

     L.     Sewer, Main Line. “Main line sewer” means any sewer or pressure main which is used to convey the common sewage of any community.

     M.    Sewer, Public. “Public sewer” means the main line sewer constructed in a street, highway, alley, place, right-of-way, or sewer easement dedicated for public use. “Public sewer” does not include building sewer.

     N.    “Sewer service lateral” means that portion of a sewerage system in public property which connects any property, public or private, to a public sewer. For practical purposes, a sewer service lateral shall be considered to terminate at the property line of the property being served.

     O.    “Soil pipe” means any pipe receiving the sewage from one or more water closets or clinic sinks, with or without connection to any other plumbing fixture, but does not include building sewers as defined in subsection J of this section.

     P.     “Waste pipe” means any pipe receiving the discharge of any plumbing fixture, except a water closet and clinic sink, but does not include building sewers as defined in subsection J of this section.

     Q.    “Wye” or “Y” means a fitting for a branch, on which the spur joins the barrel of the pipe at an angle of approximately forty-five degrees. (Ord. 190, 1991; prior code §§ 68.102—68.122)

 

13.12.030 Exception may be granted.
     Whenever the director is permitted by this chapter to grant an exception to any requirement of this chapter, he or she shall do so only if he or she finds that literal compliance with such provision is impossible or impractical because of peculiar conditions in no way the fault of the person requesting such exception, and that the purposes of this chapter may be accomplished and public safety secured by an alternative construction or procedure, in which case he or she may

 

 

 

permit such alternative construction or procedure. (Prior code § 68.123)

 

Article II. Specific Applications
13.12.040 New main line sewers.
     New main line sewers shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise specifically excepted. (Prior code § 68.130)

 

13.12.050 Sewer service laterals.
     New sewer service laterals shall conform to the requirements of this chapter unless otherwise specifically excepted. (Prior code § 68.132)

 

13.12.060 Revocation of permits and disconnection of facilities.
     The director may revoke the permit issued to any person in the event of a violation by the permittee of any provision of this chapter. The director may disconnect from the public sewer any connection sewer, main line sewer, or other facility which is constructed, connected, or used without permit, or which is constructed, connected, or used contrary to the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.134)

 

13.12.070 Notice of disconnection.
     The director shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner or occupant of the premises affected by any proposed disconnection and may grant a reasonable time for elimination of the violation. Notification shall be made by delivery of a notice in writing, either to the occupant of the premises or to the record owner of the property as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes. Such notice shall be delivered either by first class mail, postage prepaid, or personal service. (Prior code § 68.135)

 

13.12.080 Exceptions.
     Trunk line sewers under jurisdiction of the city are excepted from the provisions of Articles I to VII of this chapter. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

Article III. Permits
13.12.090 When required.
     No person, other than persons specifically excepted by this chapter, shall commence, or do or cause to be done, or construct or cause to be constructed, or use or cause to be used, or alter or cause to be altered, any public sewer, main line sewer, sewer service lateral, sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping plant, or industrial liquid waste pretreatment plant in the city without first obtaining a permit from the director. (Prior code § 68.140)

 

13.12.100 When not required.
     The provisions of Articles I to VII, inclusive, of this chapter requiring permits shall not apply to the city or to contractors constructing public sewers and appurtenances under contracts awarded and entered into under proceedings had or taken pursuant to any of the special procedure statutes of this state providing for the construction of sewers and the assessing of the expenses thereof against the lands benefited thereby, or under contracts between the contractor and city council. (Prior code § 68.141)

 

13.12.110 Not transferable.
     Permits issued under this chapter are not transferable from one person to another, or from one place to another, and connections shall not be made at any place other than the location specifically designated therein. (Prior code § 68.142)

 

13.12.120 Application.
     Any person requiring a permit under the provisions of this chapter shall make written application therefor to the director, giving such information as the director may require. The director shall provide printed application forms for the various types of work permitted under this chapter, indicating thereon the information to be furnished by the applicant. The director may require, in addition to the information furnished by the printed form, any additional information from the applicant which will enable the director to determine that the proposed work complies with the provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.143)

 

13.12.130 Issuance.
     If it appears from the application for any permit required by this chapter that the work to be performed thereunder is to be done according to the provisions of this chapter, the director, upon receipt of the fees required, shall issue such permit. (Prior code § 68.144)

 

13.12.140 Main line sewers.
     Before granting a permit for the construction of any main line sewer, with or without sewer service laterals, the director shall check and approve the plans and specifications therefor as to their compliance with city, state and other governmental laws or ordinances, and as to conformity with the standards of design established by this chapter. (Prior code § 68.147)

 

13.12.150 Industrial liquid waste and industrial sewage disposal.
     Before granting an industrial waste discharge permit to any applicant to discharge any industrial liquid waste or industrial sewage into any public sewer, the director shall determine either that the waste is one which will not damage or destroy the public sewer or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of maintenance of the public sewer or retard or inhibit the treatment of the sewage, or is one that can be made acceptable by pretreatment. (Prior code § 68.148)

 

13.12.160 Pretreatment plans required.
     In the event pretreatment is required to make the waste acceptable, as provided under Section 13.12.150, the application for a permit to dispose of industrial liquid waste or industrial sewage shall be accompanied by suitable plans and specifications showing the method of collection and pretreatment proposed to be used, and a permit shall not be issued until said plans and specifications, or required modifications thereof, have been checked and approved by the director. (Prior code § 68.149)

 

Article IV. Inspections
13.12.170 Inspection by director.
     All work done under the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to inspection by and shall meet the approval of the director; provided, however, that approval by the director shall not relieve the permittee or any other person from fully complying with all of the applicable provisions of Chapter 15.20 of this code and no provision of this chapter supersedes, affects or modifies in any way the provisions of Chapter 15.20 or any revision thereof or any ordinance which may hereafter be enacted regulating plumbing within the city. No facility constructed, altered or otherwise accomplished under the provisions of this chapter shall be used or placed in service by the permittee until the final approval and acceptance thereof by the director has been obtained in writing. At any time during the progress of the work, however, the director may, upon written notice to the permittee, take over and open to the public use the whole or part of any sewer or appurtenance thereto which has been substantially completed. Such use shall constitute a limited acceptance of that part of the work so taken over and utilized which shall relieve the permittee from responsibility for any damage to that part of the work which may be caused by the use of such part by the public. Such utilization, however, shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for any defect, omission or faulty work, or for any damage caused by his or her subsequent operations at the site. (Prior code § 68.156)

 

13.12.180 Materials and construction.
     All materials used in any work done under provisions of this chapter shall be new first-class material and shall conform to and the manner of construction shall meet, all the requirements prescribed by the “San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings” and the “Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction” referred to in Section 13.12.200, and any amendments thereto approved and adopted by the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code § 68.157)

 

13.12.190 Maintenance and operation.
     The director may inspect as often as he or she deems necessary any sewage pumping plant, sewage treatment plant and industrial liquid waste pretreatment plant to ascertain whether such facilities are maintained and operated in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. All persons shall permit the director to have access to all such facilities at all reasonable times. (Prior code § 68.158)

 

Article V. Sewer Design Standards
13.12.200 Conformance of work and plans.
     Except as provided in Article VII of this chapter, all work performed and all plans and specifications required under the provisions of this chapter shall conform to the requirements prescribed by “The San Diego Area Regional Standard Drawings” and “The Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction,” copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, and any amendments thereto approved and adopted by the city council and filed in the office of the city clerk. (Prior code § 68.159)

 

Article VI. General Regulations
13.12.210 Connecting sewer in undedicated street.
     It is unlawful to connect, or cause to be connected, any sewer which has been or may hereafter be constructed in any street, highway, alley, right-of-way, or other public place prior to the dedication and acceptance of such street, alley, right-of-way, or other public place by the city council on behalf of the public with any public sewer of the city, unless such sewer first mentioned shall have been laid under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the director and in accordance with all provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.161)

 

13.12.220 Limitations on use of sewer.
     It is unlawful to place, throw or deposit, or cause or permit to be placed, thrown or deposited, in any public or building sewer any dead animal, offal, or garbage, fish, fruit, or vegetable waste, or other solid matters, or materials or obstructions of any kind whatever of such nature as shall clog, obstruct, or fill such sewer, or which shall interfere with or prevent the effective use or operation thereof. No person shall cause or permit to be deposited or discharged into any such sewer any water or sewage or liquid waste of any kind containing chemicals, greases, oils, tars, or other matters in solution or suspension which may, by reason of chemical faction or precipitation, clog, obstruct, or fill the same, or which may in any way damage or interfere with or prevent the effective use thereof, or which may necessitate or require frequent repair, cleaning out or flushing of such sewer to render the same operative, or which may obstruct or cause an unwarranted increase in the cost of treatment of the sewage. (Prior code § 68.162)

 

13.12.230 Opening manhole.
     It is unlawful to open or enter, or cause to be opened or entered, any manhole in any public sewer, to dispose of garbage or other deleterious substances or stormwater or surface water, or for any other like purpose. (Prior code § 68.163)

 

13.12.240 Temperature of effluent.
     It is unlawful to discharge into the public sewer effluent of a temperature exceeding one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit. (Prior code 68.164)

 

13.12.250 Control of pH and biochemical oxygen demand.
     Before any person shall discharge alkalis, acids, or other corrosive or harmful wastes into the public sewer, he or she shall reduce the biochemical oxygen demand and control the pH to the extent which the director finds adequate taking all circumstances into consideration. (Prior code § 68.165)

 

13.12.260 Toxic substances.
     All toxic chemical substances shall be retained or rendered acceptable before discharge into the public sewer. (Prior code § 68.166)

 

13.12.270 Petroleum products.
     It is unlawful to discharge any petroleum products into the public sewer. (Prior code § 68.167)

 

13.12.280 Dilution of wastes.
     Wastes shall be diluted when and in such amounts as required by the director. (Prior code § 68.168)

 

13.12.290 Flushing sewer connections.
     Every industrial waste pretreatment plant shall be equipped with an adequate fresh water supply easily available for diluting any flushing, and all sewer connections shall be thoroughly flushed after discharge of each batch of industrial liquid wastes. (Prior code § 68.169)

 

13.12.300 Maintenance of industrial waste pretreatment facilities.
     Every industrial waste pretreatment facility shall be adequately maintained to accomplish its intended purpose. Abandonment or failure to properly maintain such equipment shall be cause for immediate revocation of the industrial connection sewer permit and disconnection from the public sewer. (Prior code § 68.170)

 

13.12.310 Rainwater and surface water.
     It is unlawful to connect, or cause or permit to be connected, any roof conductor, yard drain, or other conduit used for carrying off rainwater or surface water with any public sewer or building sewer leading thereto. It is unlawful to cause or permit any indirect connection to the public sewer or building sewer leading thereto by means of which rainwaters or surface waters are permitted to enter said sewer. (Prior code § 68.171)

 

13.12.320 Director to enforce.
     The director shall enforce all the provisions of this chapter and for such purpose shall have the powers of a peace officer. (Prior code § 68.160)

 

13.12.330 Implementation.
     To assure that the provisions of this ordinance are carried out the director shall promulgate such detailed regulations and other requirements as are necessary to fully implement this chapter. The specific provisions of this chapter may be supplemented by additional requirements established by the director and separate ordinances establishing charges for use of the public sewerage facilities which will provide for the recovery of capital and operating costs of such facilities. (Prior code § 68.160.1)

 

13.12.340 Violator to reimburse city for disconnection.
     Whenever a disconnection from the public sewer has been made by the director for failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter, reconnection shall be made only upon issuance of a permit as provided in this chapter. Before such permit is issued, the applicant shall reimburse the city for the cost of the disconnection made, and the director may require the installation of a manhole for the purpose of measuring the flow or for making periodic tests of the waste for such connection. (Prior code § 68.172)

 

Article VII. Public Agencies
13.12.350 Provisions of Articles I to VII not to apply.
     The provisions of Articles I through VII, inclusive, of this chapter shall not apply to a sanitary district, county water district, community-service district, public utility district, or any other district, municipality, or state agency empowered by the state law to acquire, construct, or operate public sewage facilities (hereafter in this article referred to as public agencies), except to the extent that the governing body thereof specifically subjects itself or its works thereto. (Prior code § 68.180)

 

13.12.360 Minimum standards for design and construction established.
     For the protection of the public health and safety, minimum standards for the design and construction of facilities hereafter constructed by a public agency for the transporting or disposal of sewage or industrial waste (hereafter in this article referred to as sewer facilities) shall be established in the following manner: The director, with the advice and assistance of engineers for such public agencies and others designated by the director, shall propose such minimum standards to the city council for adoption by it after public hearing. Any revisions shall be proposed and adopted in the same manner. The said standards adopted pursuant to this section are set forth in the San Diego Area Regional County Standard Drawings and the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk. All plans and specifications for any sewer facilities constructed in the city and all work performed and materials used in the construction of any such facilities shall conform to the minimum standards adopted as provided in this section. No work shall be done on any such sewer facility until the plans and specifications therefor have been approved, as provided in this article. (Prior code § 68.181)

 

13.12.370 Filing of plans and specifications—Certification.
     A.    Any public agency intending to construct any sewer facilities shall, within a reasonable time (not less than thirty days) before awarding a contract, file plans and specifications therefor with the director.

     B.     The director shall, within a reasonable time (not more than thirty days) after such filing, examine the same and ascertain whether or not they conform to the minimum standards adopted. He or she shall issue his or her certificate thereon if he or she finds that said plans and specifications meet the minimum standards, or, if he or she finds that such plans and specifications fail to meet the minimum standards, he or she shall specify in what particulars they do not. The director may waive minimum standards when he or she finds reasonable compliance is provided in the plans and specifications. (Prior code § 68.182)

 

13.12.380 Responsibility of public agency—Inspection by director.
     A.    It shall be the responsibility of the public agency to inspect the facilities during construction and to cause the same to conform to the minimum standards.

     B.     The director may in his or her discretion cause periodic inspections to be made of the facilities and shall report in writing to the engineer of the public agency any particular in which the construction of the facilities does not conform to the minimum standards. In the event there arises a difference of opinion between the director and the engineer for the public agency as to whether or not the construction of the facilities does conform to the minimum standards, the difference of opinion shall be resolved and determined by an engineering review board appointed in the manner provided in Section 13.12.490 and with the powers provided in Section 13.12.500. The decision of the engineering review board may be appealed to the city council as provided in Section 13.12.500 and its decision shall be final. (Prior code § 68.186)

 

13.12.390 Responsibility of public agency—Establishment of standards.
     It shall be the responsibility of each public agency to establish standards for sewage facilities constructed by others for acceptance by the agency, which standards must not be lower than those established pursuant to Section 13.12.360. It shall be the responsibility of each agency to inspect all such construction and to cause the same to so conform. (Prior code § 68.187)

Chapter 13.16 SEWER CONNECTIONS
13.16.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     A.    “Building sewer” includes only sewer lines and facilities which are connected to a sewer service lateral or trunk line sewer.

     B.     “Building sewer connection fee” means the sum of fees and charges due the city prior to issuance of a wastewater discharge permit as authorized by Section 13.16.030.

     C.     “Permittee” means any person who has obtained a wastewater discharge permit from the department under the provisions of this chapter.

     D.    “Sewer service lateral” shall mean a pipe or other conduit that transports sewage from a source to a collector main, said main being located in a public right-of way. The installation, maintenance and operation of a lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner including the lateral connection to the public collector main.

     E.     “Sewer service lateral fee” means the sum of fees and charges due the city for construction and connection of sewer service laterals and related work as authorized by Section 13.16.020.

     F.     “Trunk line sewer” includes all sewer lines and facility used convey community sewage.

     G.    “Wastewater discharge permit” means the official document authorizing connection of a building sewer to the city sewerage system. (Ord. 332, 2004; Ord. 183, 1990; prior code § 68.201)

 

13.16.020 Persons authorized to make connections—Fees.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to make any connections to, or construct any sewer service lateral connections with or to, any trunk line sewer within the boundaries of the city, or with or to any trunk line sewer which is the property of the city, except an officer, employee or agent of the city authorized to perform such construction or make such connection, or a person authorized by a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 13.12 to perform such construction or make such connection.

     B.     The department is authorized and directed to make such connections and construct such sewer service laterals and perform related work at the rates, lateral fees, and charges which are now or may hereafter be established by the city, and the department is authorized and directed to collect such rates, lateral fees, and charges and to issue its receipts therefor. (Prior code § 68.204)

 

13.16.030 Wastewater discharge permit Required—Application—Fee.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person other than a plumber or homeowner licensed by the city to make a connection between any sewer service lateral and any building sewer upon or within private property in the city; and, before any such licensed plumber or homeowner may make any such connection between a sewer service lateral and a building sewer within the city, he or she shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit authorizing the connection to be made. Any such connection must be made to the sewer prior to the installation of any plumbing fixtures discharging into the building sewer.

     B.     A plumber or homeowner desiring a permit to make a connection to a sewer service lateral or trunk line sewer shall file with the department an application in writing on a form furnished and specified by the department. The application shall include the name of the plumber or homeowner, the name of the owner of the premises on which the work is to be performed, the legal description of the property on which the work is to be performed, or, in lieu of such legal description, the official street and number of the premises; or, if there is no official street number, a street number recognized by the department; or, if there is no street number recognized by the department, a sketch or diagram showing the location of the premises. The applicant shall attach to the application a plat showing the location of existing trunk lines and laterals adjacent to the property upon which the work is to be done, and showing the place where it is desired to connect to the sewer service lateral or trunk line sewer.

     C.     No wastewater discharge permit shall be issued unless the application fee is first approved by the department. (Prior code § 68.205)

 

13.16.040 Inspection.
     A.    When connections are made to the trunk line sewers or sewer service laterals within the city, all pipes shall be left exposed and all ditches left open until the connection with the trunk line sewer or sewer service lateral has been inspected and approved by an inspector of the department.

     B.     In case a connection is made to the sewer where it crosses private property, the plumber or homeowner shall install the pipe to the main sewer and shall uncover the main sewer line so that a saddle connection can be properly made by a person authorized pursuant to Section 13.16.020 and inspected by the inspector of the department. The homeowner shall obtain all easements required for such installation. (Prior code § 68.206)

 

13.16.050 Specification of materials—Responsibility for damages.
     A.    All connections to or with trunk line sewers or sewer service laterals within the boundaries of the city shall be made in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 13.12.

     B.     All licensed plumbers and licensed homeowners engaged in any work provided for in this chapter shall be held responsible for the injury to any property and for all other damages. (Prior code § 68.207)

 

13.16.060 Tampering with manhole covers prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person other than the duly authorized agents of the city to remove, tamper with, or molest any manhole cover to any manhole of the trunk line sewers in a sanitation district. (Prior code § 68.208)

 

13.16.070 Throwing refuse in manholes prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to drop, throw, put or place any refuse, trash, rubbish or obstruction into the manholes of the trunk line sewers in or owned by a sanitation district. (Prior code § 68.209)

 

13.16.080 Payment of costs for removing certain obstructions.
     When it is necessary to clean a sewer service lateral to relieve stop-ups, and the obstruction is found to be due to waste matters which should not have been placed in the sewer, the owner of the property served by the lateral shall pay to the department the cost of removal of such obstruction. When it is necessary to clean a building sewer in order to relieve a stop-up, whether the obstruction causing the stop-up is in the building sewer or the sewer service lateral, the owner of the building sewer shall pay to the department the cost of cleaning such building sewer. (Prior code § 68.210)

 

13.16.090 Revocation of permits and disconnection of facilities.
     The department may revoke the permit issued to any person in the event of a violation by the permittee of any provision of this chapter. The department may disconnect from the public sewer any connection sewer, main line sewer, or other facility which is constructed, connected, or used without permit, or which is constructed, connected, or used contrary to the provision of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.211)

 

13.16.100 Notice of disconnection.
     The department shall make every reasonable effort to notify the owner or occupant of the premises affected by any proposed disconnection and may grant a reasonable time for elimination of the violation. Notifications shall be made by delivery of a notice in writing, either to the occupant of the premises or to the record owner of the property as shown upon the last equalized assessment roll of the city. Such notice shall be delivered either by first class mail, postage prepaid, or personal service. (Prior code § 68.212)

 

13.16.110 Enforcing agent.
     The department is authorized and empowered to make the inspections authorized by this chapter and to enforce the regulations contained in this chapter. (Prior code § 68.203)

Chapter 13.20 SEPTIC SYSTEMS
Article I. General Provisions and Definitions
13.20.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “septic tank ordinance.” (Prior code § 68.301)

 

13.20.020 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the following terms are used, they shall have the meaning respectively ascribed to them in this section:

     A.    Approval. Whenever the term “approval” or “approved” appears in this chapter, the approval of the director is meant, and/or “approval” means meeting the approval of the director as the result of investigation and/or tests conducted by the director, or by reason of accepted principles or tests by national authorities, technical or scientific organizations, or a research laboratory of recognized authority.

     B.     “Department” means the department of public health.

     C.     “Director” means the director of public health.

     D.    “Drainage system” or “drainage piping” means and includes all the piping within public or private premises which conveys sewage or other liquid wastes to a legal point of disposal, but does not include the mains or laterals of a public sewer system.

     E.     “Plumbing” includes all drainage systems, both direct and indirect, and all vent piping, water piping and other piping in any building or within the boundaries of any property through which sewage, water, wastewater or any other substance or liquid is conveyed. (Prior code §§ 68.302—68.307)

 

Article II. General Requirements
13.20.030 Provisions governing sewage disposal.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to cause, suffer or permit the disposal of sewage, human excrement or other liquid wastes, in any place or manner except through and by means of an approved plumbing and drainage system and an approved sewage disposal system installed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the Chapter 15.20 of this code and this chapter.

     B.     “Approved sewage disposal system” means a system that is functioning satisfactorily by disposing of all sewage underground. (Prior code § 68.311)

 

13.20.040 Connection to public sewer when available.
     The plumbing and drainage system of every building hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall be connected to a public sewer if the property on which such building is located abuts a public sewer. When a public sewer is not available for use, the plumbing and drainage system of a building shall be connected to an approved private subsurface sewage disposal system. The type of system required shall be determined on the basis of location, area, soil porosity, the groundwater level and the density of population in the area and shall be designed to receive and dispose of all sewage and liquid waste from the property served. (Prior code § 68.312)

 

13.20.050 Connection of existing buildings to newly installed sewers.
     No person shall maintain a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system on any premises adjacent to a public sewer; provided, however, that where a public sewer is installed adjacent to premises upon which there is located an existing building served by a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system, the director may approve the continued use of such subsurface disposal system until such time as he or she deems that the public health and sanitation require the connection of such building to the public sewer and the discontinuance of the use or maintenance of such subsurface disposal system. (Prior code § 68.313)

 

13.20.060 Temporary facilities—Agreement.
     Where the director determines it is probable that a public sanitary sewer will become available to property within twenty-four months, he or she may issue a permit to the owner of such property authorizing the construction of a temporary sewage disposal facility provided the permittee executes and records in the office of the county recorder an agreement with the director providing:

     A.    That the permittee will connect the property to the sanitary sewer within thirty days after it becomes available to the property;

     B.     That, if the sanitary sewer does not become available to the property within a period of time specified by the director, the permittee will apply for a permit for and construct a septic tank and sewage disposal system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;

     C.     That the permittee will pump and remove all sewage from said temporary sewage disposal facility and fill said facility with soil or other material in a manner approved by the director at the time the property is connected to the sanitary sewer or a septic tank and sewage disposal system specified in subsection B of this section;

     D.    That, in the event the property is sold or transferred before the connection of the property to the sanitary sewer is made, the agreement with the director shall be made a part of the contract to sell or transfer said property;

     E.     That the property will not be occupied until a sewage disposal facility has been installed and approved by the director;

     F.     That the agreement with the director shall be binding upon the owner, his or her heirs, administrators, executors, successors and assigns.

     It is unlawful for any person by the terms of such agreement to violate any provision of such agreement. (Prior code § 68.316)

 

Article III. Permits and Inspections
13.20.070 Permit—Required.
     No septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or any other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or any part thereof, shall be installed, constructed, reconstructed, repaired in any manner, or added to, in the city unless there is in effect a valid permit therefor issued by the director. (Prior code § 68.325)

 

13.20.080 Permit—Application and inspection fee.
     Any person desiring to install, construct, reconstruct, repair or add to, a septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or any part thereof, shall file with the director a written application for a permit for such installation, construction, reconstruction, repair or addition. A separate application and permit for each installation shall be required. The application shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the director and shall be accompanied by an inspection fee as set forth below. The application shall contain the following information and such other information as the director may require: street name and number of the premises where the installation is to be made; the name and address of the owner; the name and address of the contractor who is to perform the work; the size and type of the septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system to be installed and the number of people it is to serve. When required by the health officer the application shall include or be accompanied by a plan or diagram showing the character and kind of installation to be made and the manner and location in which the work is to be done. The fee for filing all applications pursuant to this section shall be forty dollars except that applications for FHA/VA approvals shall be seventy dollars and land development applications without field investigation shall be ten dollars. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1981)

 

13.20.090 Permit—Investigation—Issuance requirements.
     Upon receipt of such application, the director shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as he or she deems necessary. The director may require the applicant for the permit to furnish him or her the report of an engineer registered in the state showing that soil percolation tests have been made by such engineer on the site of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system or unit and the results of such tests. If the director determines that the location, area, soil porosity, groundwater level, density of population in the area, the number of persons to be served or other conditions would cause the operation of the subsurface sewage disposal unit, or system described in the application to create an insanitary condition endangering public health, he or she shall not issue the permit for which application was made. In such case the inspection fee shall be refunded. (Prior code § 68.328)

 

13.20.100 Minimum lot area of six thousand square feet—Exceptions.
     No septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal system or unit shall be installed or constructed on a lot, parcel or building site containing an area of less than six thousand square feet, except that the director may issue a permit for the installation or construction of any such subsurface sewage disposal system or unit on a lot or combination of lots shown on a recorded subdivision map, which lot or combination of lots contains an area of less than six thousand square feet but not less than four thousand square feet; provided, that the director’s investigation indicates that an approved type or subsurface disposal system would function satisfactorily in a building site of such area at that location. (Prior code § 68.329)

 

13.20.110 Change of location—Supplemental permit and fee.
     A permittee to whom there has been issued pursuant to this chapter a permit for an installation to be made at a particular location may apply for a supplemental permit authorizing such work to be performed at a different location; provided; that no work has been commenced at the location specified in the original permit. The application for a supplemental permit shall be made on a form prescribed and furnished by the director. On receipt of such application and a fee of fifty dollars the director may issue a supplemental permit authorizing the performance of work at the substituted location. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1981)

 

13.20.120 Expiration of permit.
     Permits issued pursuant to this chapter shall be void at the expiration of one year from the date of issuance. (Prior code § 68.330)

 

13.20.130 Director to make inspections.
     The director shall inspect, or cause to be inspected, in a thorough manner all septic tanks, settling tanks, cesspools and other subsurface sewage disposal units or systems hereafter installed, constructed or reconstructed in the city. It shall be his or her duty to see that there is compliance with the terms and provisions of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.331)

 

13.20.140 Inspection required—Approval.
     A.    As soon as the septic tank, settling tank, cesspool or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system is installed and ready to receive its cover, the person to whom the permit for such unit or system was issued shall notify the department that such unit or system is ready for inspection. As soon thereafter as practical, the director shall make, or cause to be made, an inspection of the work.

     B.     If the unit or system is approved by the director, an inspection certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place upon the property where the unit or system is located, which inspection certificate shall note the date and approval and the signature of the director or the person making the inspection on his or her behalf. (Prior code § 68.332)

 

13.20.150 Reinspections—Fee.
     When an inspection has been ordered and the work is found to be not ready for inspection and approval, the director shall cause an official notice to be posted on the job stating the changes necessary in order that the work will comply with the requirements of this chapter. As soon thereafter as practicable the owner or contractor shall cause the changes to be made and upon completion thereof shall notify the department that the unit or system is ready for reinspection. At the time the reinspection is requested, the applicant shall pay to the department a reinspection fee. As soon thereafter as practicable, the director shall make or cause a reinspection to be made, if upon reinspection the work is approved, a certificate to that effect shall be posted as hereinabove specified. The fee for such reinspection shall be ten dollars, which fee shall be paid to the director. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1981; prior code § 68.333)

 

13.20.160 Inspection of existing systems—Fee.
     Any person desiring for any reason, the inspection of an existing septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, or other subsurface disposal system, or unit by the director shall file with the director a written request for such inspection accompanied by an inspection fee of seventy dollars. A separate request for each unit or system shall be required, and the request shall contain such information as the director may require and shall be made upon a form prescribed and furnished by the director. As soon after the request is made as is practical, the director shall make or cause to be made the requested inspection and shall determine whether the inspected unit or system functions satisfactorily in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. In the event that the unit or system is found not to function satisfactorily the director shall upon written request make or cause to be made a reinspection, and a fee for each such reinspection shall be thirty dollars made payable to the director in advance. (Ord. 67 § 1, 1981; prior code § 68.336)

 

Article IV. Construction Specifications
13.20.170 Location.
     A.    Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, or part thereof hereafter constructed or installed in the city, shall be so situated that it will be a safe distance from any source of water supply as determined by the director. In determining what is a safe distance the director shall consider the source of possible pollution, the type of soil, surface and subsurface, the type and source of water supply, the geological formation of the ground, the direction of surface drainage, and the depth and direction of ground water flow.

     B.     Under no circumstances shall any part of such subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, except the house sewer line, be located closer than fifty feet from any water supply.

     C.     No part of such subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, except the house sewer line, shall be located less than five feet from every building or structure, or less than five feet from every property line. (Prior code § 68.340)

 

13.20.180 Construction of house sewer.
     Any house sewer line, or part thereof hereafter constructed or installed in the city, shall be constructed of bell and spigot cast iron pipe with leaded joints when located less than fifty feet from any well used as a domestic water supply. (Prior code § 68.341)

 

13.20.190 Type of system required.
     Any subsurface sewage disposal unit or system, hereafter constructed or installed in the city, shall consist of a septic tank with effluent discharging into either (1) a serial distribution system, or (2) a distribution box connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines, each of which lines shall not exceed one hundred feet in length; provided, that, with the approval of the director, such distribution box may be connected to a seepage pit or pits each having at least four feet inside diameter. (Prior code § 68.342)

 

13.20.200 Tanks—Minimum requirements.
     Any septic tank hereafter constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

     A.    Such tank shall have an inside diameter of at least five feet with a liquid depth of at least four feet. The length of the tank shall not exceed three times the width of such tank. Such tank shall have a liquid capacity of not less than one thousand gallons. Such tank shall have at least two compartments, and a manhole with a minimum diameter or width of twenty-two inches shall be installed in each compartment, over the inlet and outlet pipe.

     B.     The inlet and the outlet of such tank shall each be a vertical four inch diameter “T” extending such a distance below the liquid level that forty percent of the liquid depth is below it, and extending a minimum of six inches above the liquid level of the tank. The outlet shall be two inches below the inlet.

     C.     Such tank shall be watertight and shall be constructed of concrete, concrete block, brick or tile. The top of such tank shall be constructed of reinforced concrete at least four inches thick. When such tank is constructed the walls and bottom of the tank shall be at least six inches thick and shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material. The concrete used for such tanks shall contain one part cement, two parts sharp sand and four parts crushed rock or gravel. Where brick, concrete block, or tile is used in the construction of such tank, the inside shall be plastered with portland cement mortar composed of one part cement and three parts sand. The side walls of such tank shall be adequately reinforced with steel or other approved material so as to withstand any inside or outside pressure.

     D.    The line from such septic tank to the distribution box shall be constructed of watertight bell and spigot pipe, or such other pipe with watertight joints that the director may approve. (Prior code § 68.343)

 

13.20.210 Distribution box—Minimum requirements.
     Any distribution box hereafter constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

     A.    Such distribution box shall be watertight and shall be constructed of the same materials authorized for construction of a septic tank. The inner surface of the distribution box shall have a protective coating of Hunt’s emulsion, or some other protective coating equal thereto in the opinion of the director.

     B.     The outlets from such distribution box shall have exactly the same elevation and shall be located at least two inches above the bottom of the box. The inlet to such distribution box shall be one inch above the elevation of the outlets.

     C.     Such distribution box shall be connected to a subsurface tile system consisting of at least two lateral absorption lines; provided, that one or more seepage pits may be substituted for or used in conjunction with lateral absorption lines when approved by the director.

     D.    All lines leading from the distribution box to the lateral absorption lines or to seepage pits shall be constructed with watertight joints. (Prior code § 68.344)

 

13.20.220 Disposal lines—Minimum requirements.
     Any subsurface tile system hereafter constructed or installed in the city for the purpose of disposing of the effluent from a septic tank shall meet the following minimum specifications:

     A.    Such tile system shall consist of at least two lateral absorption lines totaling at least two hundred feet in length; provided, however, that no line shall exceed one hundred feet in length. The lines shall be approximately equal in length, with a maximum variation of ten percent between the longest line and the shortest.

     B.     Lateral absorption lines shall be constructed of tile pipe spaced one-quarter inch apart so as to provide open joints. The upper one-half of each open joint shall be covered with tar paper or copper screen.

     C.     Each lateral absorption line shall be placed in a trench thirty-six inches deep and eighteen inches wide, which trench shall contain at least twenty-one inches of rock or gravel grading one to one and one-half inch. At least twelve inches of such rock or gravel shall be beneath the bottom of the line, and four inches of such rock and gravel shall be over the top of the line.

     D.    Lateral absorption lines shall have a grade of two inches per one hundred feet, with not more than fifty percent variation either way.

     E.     Lateral absorption lines shall not be more than thirty-six inches below the surface of the ground without the prior approval of the director.

     F.     Every lateral absorption line shall be at least ten feet from every other lateral absorption line. All bends used in the disposal field shall have one tight joint to each end of the bend. (Prior code § 68.345)

 

13.20.230 Seepage pits—Substitution for tile system—Approval required.
     A seepage pit or series of seepage pits may be substituted for, or used in conjunction with, a subsurface tile system, when such substitution or use is approved by the director; provided, however, no seepage pit shall be permitted where the director determines that its use might contaminate or pollute an underground water supply. (Prior code § 68.346)

 

13.20.240 Seepage pits—Minimum requirements.
     Any seepage pit hereafter constructed or installed in the city shall meet the following minimum specifications:

     A.    Such seepage pit shall be not less than four feet inside diameter and shall be constructed to a depth where the side wall area of the seepage pit will have sufficient porosity to provide adequate drainage as determined by the director.

     B.     Such seepage pit shall be either rectangular or round. In the case of a rectangular shape, such seepage pit shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, and/or two-inch redwood plank securely braced with four-inch by four-inch redwood timber. In the case of a round shape, such seepage pit shall be constructed of brick, concrete block, and/or one-inch redwood boards of full thickness with supporting two-inch by three-inch redwood timbers placed every five feet so as to form a securely braced octagon shape.

     C.     The top of such seepage pit shall be covered with a concrete slab or cover constructed of concrete reinforced with steel or other approved material, which slab or cover shall extend not less than eighteen inches beyond the outside of the side walls of the seepage pit. (Prior code § 68.347)

 

13.20.250 Minimum requirements applicable to certain systems—Serving ten or less persons.
     The minimum standard for septic tanks, distribution boxes, tile lines and seepage pits, as set forth in this chapter, are the minimum standards for a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit serving a one-family or two-family residence or small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by not more than ten persons. (Prior code § 68.348)

 

13.20.260 Special approval required for certain other systems—Serving more than ten persons.
     Every applicant for a permit to install or construct a subsurface sewage disposal system or unit to serve residences, institutions or industries, other than a one-family or two-family residence or a small institution or industry having sanitary facilities used by more than ten persons, shall submit to the director for approval the detailed plans and specifications of the proposed subsurface sewage disposal system. Upon the filing of the required application, accompanied by such detailed plans and specifications, the payment of the fee prescribed in Section 13.20.090 and the approval of such plans and specifications by the director, the director shall issue a permit for the construction of such subsurface sewage disposal system. (Prior code § 68.349)

 

13.20.270 Construction of provisions—Not to prevent additional requirements.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be con

strued to prevent the director from requiring compliance with higher or more stringent requirements or specifications than those contained in this chapter where compliance with such higher or more stringent requirements or specifications is necessary to maintain a sanitary condition. (Prior code § 68.350)

 

13.20.280 Construction of provisions—Not to prevent reduction of requirements.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the director from establishing lower or less stringent requirements or specifications than those contained in this chapter in such cases where a subsurface sewage disposal unit or system may be maintained at such lower or less stringent requirements or specifications in a sanitary condition without detriment to the public health or safety. (Prior code § 68.351)

 

Article V. Miscellaneous Provisions
13.20.290 Cross connections prohibited.
     No person shall install, or permit to be installed, an interconnection between a drinking water supply and any equipment or connection of any kind, class, or description which may contain water or any liquid or substance unfit for human or domestic consumption. The director shall make, or cause to be made, inspections to determine if such conditions exist, and, if such interconnections are discovered, the director shall require the purveyor of water to discontinue water service unless the condition is abated within a reasonable period of time fixed by the director. No device shall be sold in the city which provides such an interconnection as a means of operation, unless the water supply is adequately protected. (Prior code § 68.360)

 

13.20.300 Surface water not permitted in system.
     No opening shall be provided in any drainage system or in any septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool or other subsurface disposal unit or system for the purpose of receiving the surface drainage from any yard or building. (Prior code § 68.361)

 

13.20.310 Covering work before approval prohibited.
     No person shall cover, or cause to be covered, any septic tank, settling tank, seepage pit, cesspool, subsurface tile line system, or other subsurface disposal system or unit prior to its approval by the director as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 68.362)

 

13.20.320 Connecting plumbing to unapproved system prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to connect any house sewer line or other plumbing to a septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system hereafter installed, constructed or reconstructed, unless such septic tank, settling tank, cesspool, seepage pit or other subsurface sewage disposal unit or system has been approved by the director, as provided in this chapter. (Prior code § 68.363)

 

13.20.330 Disinfection of cesspools, etc.
     No privy vault, privy, cesspool, or water closet shall be allowed by the owner or other person in charge of the premises, upon which the same may be situated, to become foul or offensive; and when, in the opinion of the director, any such privy, vault, or closet or cesspool needs cleaning or disinfecting, it shall be the duty of the director to notify such owner or other person having control to abate the same by such disinfecting or cleaning as in the judgment of the director may be necessary, or, in the case of a defective or offensive cesspool, the owner, if deemed necessary by the director, shall connect the premises to an available public sewer or construct a new sewage disposal system that meets the requirements of this chapter. (Prior code § 68.364)

Chapter 13.24 SOLID WASTE, RECYCLING AND GREEN WASTE COLLECTION
13.24.010 Purpose.
     This chapter establishes methods by which the city of Lemon Grove handles solid waste, including the separate handling of the subcategories of recyclable materials and green waste to protect the health of the community. The city council has the discretion to use the city’s own forces, private contractors or any combination of methods to meet the purposes of this chapter to protect and enhance the environment of the city of Lemon Grove for the benefit of its residents. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the words, terms and phrases as defined in this section shall be construed as hereinafter set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

     “Collection” means the operation of gathering solid waste and transporting the same to approved facilities for processing.

     “Construction or demolition waste” means any solid waste or debris generated as the result of construction or demolition, including without limitation, discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste.

     “Construction site or demolition site” means any real property in the city in, on or from which a building or structure is being fabricated, assembled, erected or demolished, and which produces construction or demolition solid waste which must be removed from the property, and requires the use of commercial refuse containers.

     “Exclusive solid waste handling services” mean any action by the city council, whether by franchise, contract, license, permit, or otherwise, whereby the city itself, or one or more other local agencies or solid waste enterprises, has the exclusive right to provide solid waste handling services of any class or type within all or any part of the territory of the city.

     “Franchisee” means a solid waste enterprise that holds a valid, unrevoked and unexpired franchise agreement to handle solid waste pursuant to this chapter.

     “Green waste” or “yard waste” means the subcategory of solid waste that includes leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic materials generated from landscapes or gardens. Green waste is handled separately from other solid waste.

     “Hazardous waste” means and includes waste defined as hazardous by Public Resources Code Section 40101 as it now exists or may subsequently be amended, namely, a waste or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may do either of the following: (1) cause or significantly contribute to, an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible, illness; (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, or disposed of, or otherwise managed. “Hazardous waste” includes extremely hazardous waste and acutely hazardous waste, and any other waste as may hereafter from time to time be designated as hazardous by the Environmental Protection Agency (“EPA”) or other agency of the United States Government, or by the California Legislature or any agency of the state of California empowered by law to classify or designate waste as hazardous, extremely hazardous or acutely hazardous.

     “Person” means an individual, group of individuals, and/or any legal entity recognized by the laws of the state.

     “Processing” means the reduction, separation and/or conversion of solid waste.

     “Recyclable materials” means the subcategory of solid waste that is suitable for recycling. The city council may, from time to time, designate certain materials as recyclable.

     “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and/or reconstituting materials that would otherwise be landfilled, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40201.

     “Solid waste” means all putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or upon, related to the occupancy of, remaining in or emanating from residential premises or commercial premises, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes, and other solid and semisolid wastes, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 49503, excluding liquid wastes and abandoned vehicles; provided, however, that solid waste shall not include hazardous waste.

     “Solid waste enterprise” means any individual, partnership, joint venture, unincorporated private organization, or private corporation regularly engaged in the business of providing solid waste handling services.     

     “Solid waste handling services” means the collection, transportation, storage, transfer, processing, recycling or disposal of solid waste for residential or commercial customers.

     Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to preclude the city and any solid waste enterprise from incorporating definitions into any franchise agreement relating to their respective contractual rights and obligations which may differ from or augment those set forth herein. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.030 City council authority.
     The city council is authorized and empowered to operate, maintain, repair and manage a system and facilities for the handling of solid waste within the city.

     The city council is authorized to contract through the award of an exclusive franchise agreement with any solid waste enterprise for the handling of solid waste within the city, under such terms and conditions as are contained in this chapter, and as may be prescribed by the city council.

     The city council may, by resolution or an approved franchise agreement, place a limit on the rates franchisees may charge to residential and commercial customers for the handling of solid waste. No franchisee shall charge any rate or fee which is greater than the maximum rate permitted by the city council.

     The city council is authorized to contract for the removal of solid waste, hazardous waste or other pollutants from streets and public places to prevent or reduce the accumulation of such materials that may enter the city of Lemon Grove or the Lemon Grove sanitation district’s stormwater system.

     The city council shall have the authority to establish other necessary rates, fees and charges by resolution for any other activities established under this chapter performed by city or Lemon Grove sanitation district forces. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.040 Franchise agreements.
     The city may at any time enter into an exclusive franchise agreement with a solid waste enterprise. While any such agreement shall be in force, the franchisee shall have the exclusive right to handle solid waste from any premises which may be the subject of such exclusive agreement. Franchise agreements shall contain the applicable franchise fee established by the city council and the terms for its payment on a regular basis.

     No person other than those specified shall:

     A.    Gather, collect or remove any solid waste except as allowed by this chapter;

     B.     Take any solid waste from any container in which the same may be placed for collection or removal;

     C.     Interfere with or disturb any such container, or remove any such container from any location where the same is placed for collection or removal. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.050 Mandatory service.
     A.    Except as set forth in this chapter, all solid waste and recyclable materials collected from residential or commercial premises for a fee, service charge, or other consideration shall be collected by an authorized collector.       

     B.     No person, firm, corporation or solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, shall negotiate or contract for, undertake to receive, collect or transport solid waste or recyclable materials from within the city for a fee, service charge or other consideration therefor, except as specifically provided herein.

     C.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each residential owner and commercial business owner shall utilize the services of the authorized collector for the collection of solid waste and recyclable materials from the residential or commercial premises held or occupied by such owner and shall pay for such services the fees set by the authorized collector. No residential or commercial business owner shall enter into an agreement for solid waste handling services with any person, firm, or corporation other than the authorized collector, except as otherwise provided in this chapter.

     D.    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial business which has its own recycling program for recyclable materials generated by such business and not utilizing a solid waste enterprise which provides collection services for a fee, service charge, or other consideration, from continuing such recycling program, and the recyclable materials included in such program are excepted from any contract between the city and the authorized collector.

     E.     Nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial business owner from selling to a buyer, for a monetary or other valuable consideration, any source separated recyclable materials, including without limitation, any saleable scrap, discard, reject, by-product, ferrous or nonferrous metal, worn-out or defective part, junk, pallet, packaging material, paper or other similar item generated in, on or by a commercial premises or business, and no longer useful to such commercial business but having market value, whether such buyer is a recycler, junk dealer, or other enterprise engaged in the business of buying and marketing such materials in the stream of commerce; provided, however, that such buyer is not engaged in the business of collecting solid waste for a fee or other charge or consideration, and that no such materials are transported for disposition to a landfill or transfer station (as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40200). Source separated recyclable materials within the meaning of this section means recyclable materials separated on the commercial premises from solid waste for the purpose of sale, not mixed with or containing more than incidental or minimal solid waste, and having a market value.

     F.     Nothing in this chapter shall prevent residential households from selling or disposing of recyclable materials generated in or on their residential premises. No residential householder shall pay a fee to anyone to collect such recyclable materials, or employ or engage any solid waste enterprise,

other than the authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill.

     G.    Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, and in addition to the authority granted by Section 13.24.060, nothing in this chapter shall prevent a commercial business owner or residential householder from, on a regular basis, collecting and disposing of solid waste generated in or on their premises, in lieu of availing themselves of the services of the authorized collector. No residential householder or commercial business owner shall employ or engage any solid waste enterprise, other than an authorized collector, to haul or transport such materials to a transfer station or landfill. Provided, however, that any residential householder or commercial business owner who, pursuant to this section seeks to on a regular basis collect and dispose of solid waste generated in or on their premises, must first obtain a self-haul permit from the city. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.060 Exclusions.
     A.    For solid waste generated on their residential premises, no provision of this chapter shall prevent households from hauling occasional loads of solid waste to a legal point of disposal, or from composting green waste or food waste, or from selling recyclable materials.

     B.     No provision of this chapter shall prohibit employees of the city, or any employees of any governmental subdivision of the state, from handling solid waste in the regular course of their duties. Further, notwithstanding Section 13.24.030, the city may contract for the removal of solid waste, hazardous waste or other pollutants from streets and public places to prevent or reduce the accumulation of such materials that may enter the city of Lemon Grove or the Lemon Grove sanitation district’s stormwater system.

     C.     No provisions of this chapter shall prevent a gardener, tree trimmer or person engaged in a similar trade from self-hauling green waste not containing other solid waste when incidental to providing such gardening, tree trimming or similar services.

     D.    No provision of this chapter shall prevent a licensed contractor having a contract for the demolition or construction of a building, structure, pavement, or concrete installation from marketing any saleable items salvaged from such demolition or reconstruction, or from causing such salvageable items or demolition waste to be removed and transported from the premises on which such waste is generated, pursuant to the provisions of the demolition or construction contract in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 13.32 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.070 Collection charges in general.
     The franchisee shall charge and collect compensation from the customer for the services rendered. Such compensation shall not exceed the maximum charges fixed in the franchise agreement with the city, or as modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. The franchisee may be compensated for the administrative costs of collecting fees, rates or charges authorized by the city council on behalf of the city. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.080 Collection charges—Unusual accumulations—Collections in certain places.
     For unusual accumulations of solid waste, and for collection in places not otherwise provided for in the franchise agreement, rates may be charged as shall be agreed upon by the franchisee and the contracting party. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.090 Disputes to be resolved by city manager.
     In all cases where a dispute arises as to the rate charged or to be charged for any service provided for in this chapter, the matter shall be referred to the city manager, who, upon due investigation shall determine and fix such prices as he or she shall deem just and equitable. The determination of the city manager shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.100 Collector complaint procedures.
     A.    The collector shall maintain an office at some fixed location and shall maintain a telephone at the office, listed in the Lemon Grove telephone directory in the firm name by which it conducts business in the city and on the city of Lemon Grove website, and shall at all times during the hours between eight a.m. and five p.m. of each weekday, and between nine a.m. and twelve p.m. on Saturday (if collecting solid waste in the city on that day) have some person at the office to answer inquiries and receive complaints. The telephone number shall be a toll free number from all portions of the city. The collector shall provide to the city an emergency telephone number that can be reached twenty-four hours a day.

     B.     The collector shall maintain at its office a written log of all complaints received. Such log shall contain the date of complaint, the complainant’s name, address and telephone number, the nature of the complaint, the action taken or the reason for non-action, and the date such action was taken. All inquiries and complaints shall be promptly answered and dealt with to the satisfaction of the city. Such log of complaints and other records pertaining to solid waste collection and disposal shall be open to inspection by the city at all reasonable times. All inquiries and complaints shall be promptly answered and dealt with to the satisfaction of the city. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.110 Collection schedule.
     Except for service authorized under Section 13.24.080, all solid waste shall be collected from businesses and residences and all other collection points at least once a week. No container shall be placed out at the curb or alley prior to four p.m. on the day prior to scheduled collection, and all containers shall be removed prior to noon on the day following collection. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.120 Container requirements.
     All solid waste shall be placed out for collection in containers that are in good condition, clean and leak-proof. All solid waste containers shall be provided by the city’s designated solid waste handler and shall be filled in accordance with the designated waste handler’s policy. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.130 Burying or burning prohibited.
     No person shall bury any solid waste in any yard or open space within the city. The burning of any solid waste is prohibited. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.140 Illicit scavenging of recyclable materials prohibited.
     When recyclable materials are placed in collection containers or any designated pickup location, they shall become the property of the city or its duly authorized agent. It is unlawful for any person other than the city or its agent to move, remove, interfere with, disturb, or tamper with said materials or their containers. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

13.24.150 Recycling.
     A.    Every collector shall attempt to improve its methods of collection, storage, handling, processing and disposal of solid waste in order to provide for reduction of solid waste, and reuse of recyclable materials.    

     B.     All recyclable materials and solid waste placed for collection at any residential premises or at any location designated by the city for the collection of such recyclable materials or solid waste shall be and become the property of the city or its authorized collector. No person, unless specifically authorized in writing by the city, shall collect or remove, or cause to be collected or removed, any such recyclable or solid waste materials. Each such collection or removal in violation of this provision shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.

     C.     No person, unless specifically authorized in writing by the city, shall sell or donate to any other person any recyclable materials which have been placed for collection at any residential premises. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

 

 

13.24.160 Penalties.
     The violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute an infraction and shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010(G) or by administrative citation as provided in Chapter 1.24 of this code. (Ord. 398 § 2, 2011)

Chapter 13.28 MANDATORY RECYCLING
13.28.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, certain words and phrases are defined as follows:

     “Aluminum” means recoverable aluminum materials such as used beverage containers, siding and other manufactured items.

     “Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste materials or recyclables at residential, commercial, industrial or governmental sites, and hauling it to a facility for processing, transfer, disposal or burning.

     “Colored plastic bottles” mean plastic beverage bottles and other bottles marked PET or PETE(1) and HDPE(2) on the bottom which have a narrow neck and an opening smaller than the body of the container.

     “Commercial recyclables” mean recyclables from the two commercial subcategories of office buildings (of more than twenty thousand square feet) which are office paper, corrugated cardboard, newspaper and aluminum; and hospitality (restaurants and taverns) which are corrugated cardboard, plastic beverage bottles, glass jars and bottles, white goods (appliances), aluminum, and tin and bi-metal cans.

     “Corrugated cardboard” means post-consumer waste paper grade corrugated cardboard (#11), kraft (brown) paper bags or solid fiber boxes which have served their packaging purpose and are discarded and can later be reclaimed for collection and recovery for recycling.

     “Designated recyclable materials” mean materials that are recyclable and/or reusable within the following categories of residential, commercial (office and hospitality) and industrial as defined more specifically within each category as listed within this chapter.

     “Garbage” means all kitchen and table waste and animal or vegetable waste that attends or results from the storage, preparation, cooking or handling of food stuffs.

     “Glass bottles and jars” mean food and beverage glass containers including container glass covered by the deposit law, and excluding household and kitchen containers such as drinking glasses, cups and cooking and serving dishes.

     “Hospitality industry” means any establishment that offers dining services or food or beverage sales including taverns, bars, cafeterias and restaurants, as well as motels and hotels, hospitals, schools, colleges and other such establishments that have dining services or a restaurant or bar on their premises.

     “Industrial recyclables” mean recyclables from industry/construction waste streams including dirt, asphalt, sand, land-clearing brush, concrete and rock.

     “Mixed paper” means magazines, junk mail, phone books and cereal and other noncorrugated food boxes generated by residential households.

     “Multifamily residential recyclables” mean those specific recyclable materials from the residential waste stream including, but not limited to, newspaper, plastic beverage bottles, other plastic bottles marked PET or PETE (1) and HDPE (2) on bottom of container, aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, yard wastes, white goods (appliances) and glass bottles and jars.

     “Newspaper” means materials printed on newsprint.

     “Office paper” means waste paper grades of white and colored ledgers. Examples include forms, copy paper, stationery and other papers that are generally associated with desk activity.

     “Plastic beverage bottles” mean plastic containers with narrow necks, or mouth openings smaller than the diameter of the container bodies, used for containing milk, juice, soft drinks or water intended for human consumption; to be distinguished from non-food bottles such as those for containing motor oil, detergent or other household products.

     “Putrescible wastes” mean the waste in organic material with the decomposition capacity to emit noticeable quantities of odor and gas by-products. Material in this category includes, but is not limited to, kitchen waste, dead animals, food from containers, etc.

     “Recyclable materials” mean materials which would otherwise become solid waste, and which can be collected, separated and processed and returned to use in the form of raw materials or products.

     “Removal” means the act of taking solid waste materials or recyclables from the place of generation either by an approved collector, agent for the collector, or by a person in control of the premises.

     “Residential recyclables.” (See “Multifamily residential recyclables” and “Single-family residential recyclables.”)

     “Rubbish” means nonputrescible solid wastes such as ashes, glass, bedding, crockery, nonrecyclable plastics, rubber by-products or litter.

     “Segregation of recyclable materials” means any of the following: the placement of recyclables in separate containers; the binding of recyclable material separately from the other waste material; the physical separation of recyclables from other waste material.

     “Single-family residential recyclables” mean those specific recyclable materials from the residential waste stream including, but not limited to, newspaper, mixed paper, plastic beverage bottles, other plastic bottles marked PET or PETE (1) and HDPE (2) on bottom of container, aluminum, tin and bi-metal cans, yard wastes, white goods (appliances) and glass bottles and jars.

     “Solid waste” means any garbage, rubbish and other discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials, resulting from industrial, commercial and residential activities, but excludes recyclable materials.

     “Tin and bi-metal cans” means any steel food and beverage containers with a tin or aluminum plating.

     “White goods” means kitchen or other large enameled appliances.

     “Yard wastes” mean leaves, grass, weeds and wood materials from trees and shrubs. (Ord. 206 § 1, 1993)

 

13.28.020 Designated recyclables.
     The city council, by resolution, shall designate materials to be recycled in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 206 § 1, 1993)

 

13.28.030 Segregation of recyclable materials.
     It shall be mandatory on the dates specified by council resolution designating materials to be recycled that such recyclable materials be segregated from rubbish or garbage for separate collection or removal. (Ord. 206 § 1, 1993)

 

13.28.040 Separation of recyclable materials.
     A.    Containers for designated recyclables shall be provided by trash hauler to each of their customers, for collection of designated recyclables.

     B.     Containers provided to single-family and multifamily residences, commercial and industrial entities shall effectively segregate the designated recyclables for pickup.

     C.     All recyclable materials shall be separated from other garbage and combined refuse, and grouped together and placed for collection in the same manner as when their regular garbage collection occurs. (Ord. 206 § 1, 1993)

 

 

13.28.050 Enforcement.
     The city manager or designee shall have responsibility for the enforcement of all provisions of this chapter and those enforcement policies as designated by council resolution. Violations of this chapter and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter will be addressed in the same manner as other violations of the Municipal Code; however, nothing in the regulations shall prevent the authorized agents or deputies from efforts to obtain voluntary compliance by way of warning, notice of violation or educational means and proceeding by either infraction or misdemeanor for each violation. (Ord. 206 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 13.32 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS DIVERSION DEPOSIT PROGRAM
13.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to promote the recycling of construction and demolition debris in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare and to meet the city’s obligations under Public Resources Code Section 40400 et seq., and its alternative diversion debris requirement approved by the California Integrated Waste Management Board. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “AB 939” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act, codified at California Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq.

     “Construction” means the building of any facility or structure, or any portion thereof including any change, addition, alteration, or renovation to an existing structure. This term also includes pavement overlays.

     “Construction and demolition debris” or “C&D debris” means discarded materials removed from a project site during construction, demolition, or roofing tear-off operations. This term includes, but is not limited to, lumber, drywall, asphalt, concrete, brick, and metals.

     “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume of weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

     “Deconstruction” means the process of carefully dismantling a building or structure in order to salvage components for reuse or recycling.

     “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down, wrecking, or removal of any facility, structure or pavement, whether in whole or in part, including roof tear-offs, whether interior or exterior.

     “Disposal” means the act of transferring solid waste to a permitted landfill.

     “Diversion deposit” means the moneys posted to the city by an owner for a project to incentivize the recycling of C&D debris and land clearing debris.

     “Diversion requirement” means the minimum percentage of C&D debris and land clearing debris for each project that must be diverted from landfills.

     “Divert” or “diversion” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

     “Hazardous waste” has the same meaning as set forth in state and federal law.

     “Land clearing debris” means recyclable natural materials removed from a site during construction or demolition operations, also referred to as clearing and grubbing, on any pavement, house, commercial building, or other structure, in addition to C&D debris. This term includes, but is not limited to, dirt, rock, and any other vegetative or woody land clearing/landscaping materials.

     “Large project” means any project within the city, the total size of which is, or is projected to be, greater than or equal to ten thousand square feet. All phases of a project and all related projects taking place on single or adjoining parcels, as determined by the WMP compliance official, shall be deemed a single project.

     “Owner” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever that undertakes any construction or demolition project within the city. This term also includes owner’s agents and contractors.

     “Project” means any activity that produces C&D debris or land clearing debris.

     “Public project” means any project paid for, in whole or in part, with public funds, performed under the direction or supervision of any political subdivision or district thereof, being constructed within the city. Any public project is deemed a large project for purposes of implementing this chapter.

     “Putrescible” means solid, semisolid, and liquid waste made up of organic matter that decomposes or rots as a result of bacteria and fungi activity.

     “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation.

     “Recycling facility” means a recycling, composting, materials recovery, or reuse facility that accepts C&D debris or land clearing debris.

     “Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition waste.

     “Salvage” means to save or recover parts of a structure, such as lumber, windows, or fixtures, by the controlled removal, or deconstruction, of those materials for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

     “Small project” means any project, the total size of which is, or is projected to be, less than ten thousand square feet. All phases of a project and all related projects taking place on single or adjoining parcels, as determined by the WMP compliance official, shall be deemed a single project.

     “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid, and liquid wastes, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, C&D debris, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, dewatered, treated, or chemically fixed sewage sludge which is not hazardous waste, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. Solid waste does not include hazardous waste, hazardous substances or medical wastes.

     “Transformation” means incineration, pyrolysis, distillation, or biological conversion other than composting. Transformation does not include composting, gasification, or biomass conversion.

     “Waste management plan” or “WMP” means a written plan that documents the owner’s strategy for diverting C&D debris and land clearing debris, for any large project. The WMP must be approved by the WMP compliance official before work begins on the project.

     “Waste management plan form Part I” means the city-provided form on which the owner of a large project shall provide information including, but not limited to, the types and estimated amounts of C&D debris and land clearing debris the project will generate and the calculated diversion level the owner expects to achieve.

     “Waste management plan form Part II” means the city-provided form on which the owner shall provide information including, but not limited to, documentary evidence in a form satisfactory to the WMP compliance official to demonstrate actual diversion and disposal amounts of all C&D debris and land clearing debris generated by the project.

     “WMP compliance official” means the person designated by the city manager who is authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.030 Establishment of diversion deposit schedule.
     The city council shall establish by resolution a schedule of diversion deposits applicable to this chapter. The schedule shall be reviewed and adjusted periodically to ensure the purposes of this chapter are met. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.040 Diversion deposit required.
     No construction or demolition activities shall be permitted unless and until a diversion deposit has been posted with the city. For projects subject to permits, permits shall not be issued unless and until a diversion deposit has been posted with the city. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of permit approval. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.050 Methods of diversion deposit payment.
     Diversion deposits may be made in the form of cash, check, cashier’s check, money order, debit card, or credit cards acceptable to the city. All payments shall be in the exact amount due. Checks, cashier’s checks, and money orders shall be made payable to the “City of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.060 Compliance thresholds.
     A.    Small Project.

     1.     Construction. All construction projects within the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

     2.     Demolition. All demolition projects within the city shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Large Project. All large projects shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter. No large project activities shall be permitted unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved a WMP for the project. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of permit approval. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.070 Diversion of C&D debris.
     A.    For the purposes of this section, diversion of C&D debris and land clearing debris may be achieved by any of the following methods:

     1.     On-site reuse;

     2.     Acceptance of the material by a recycling facility; or

     3.     Salvage, other donation or reuse of the material acceptable to the WMP compliance official.

     B.     C&D debris and land clearing debris shall be measured by weight or by volume; whichever is most accurate and practicable. To the extent practicable, all C&D debris and land clearing debris shall be weighed on a scale.

     1.     For materials that are weighed, the owner shall use a scale that is in compliance with all federal, state, and local regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance of such scale.

     2.     When measurement by weight is not practicable, the owner shall measure by volume and convert the volumetric measurements to weight using the city’s conversion rate tables. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.080 Recycling facilities.
     The city shall make available to each owner a current list of area recycling facilities. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.090 Submission of waste management plan (WMP).
     A.    Owners of large projects shall complete and submit a waste management plan (WMP) Part I before beginning work on the project. The completed WMP shall indicate all of the following:

     1.     The estimated total weight of C&D debris and land clearing debris to be generated by the project;

     2.     The means by which the owner proposes to use to divert C&D debris and land clearing debris:

     a.     In describing the means of diversion other than salvage/reuse, the owner shall state the name of the recycling facility that will be used, by material type,

     b.     In describing the means of diversion proposed for salvage/reuse, the owner shall state the quantity and means of reuse;

     3.     In preparing the WMP for demolition projects, owners shall first consider deconstruction to the maximum extent feasible. Materials generated by this process shall be included in the total amount of C&D debris generated. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.100 Review of waste management plan.
     A.    Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no construction or demolition shall begin on any large project, unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. The WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP after determining that all of the following conditions have been met:

     1.     The WMP provides all of the information set forth in Section 13.32.090;

     2.     The WMP indicates that the diversion requirement will be met;

     3.     When the WMP compliance official determines that these two conditions have been met, the WMP shall be marked “Approved” and a copy shall be returned to the owner.

     B.     Non-approval. If the WMP compliance official determines that the WMP fails: (1) to list all C&D debris and land clearing debris estimated to be generated; (2) to indicate that the diversion requirement will be met; or (3) to have the owner’s signature, the WMP shall be returned to the owner marked “Denied,” including a statement of reasons. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.110 Diversion requirement rates.
     A.    C&D Debris. The diversion requirement rate shall be at least seventy-five percent by weight of the total C&D debris generated. For purposes of meeting the diversion requirement, loads of C&D debris taken to a mixed construction and demolition debris recycling facility, specified and accepted as mixed C&D debris, will receive seventy-five percent diversion credit.

     B.     Land Clearing Debris. The diversion requirement rate shall be one hundred percent by weight of the total land clearing debris generated. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.120 Refund of diversion deposit.
     A.    The WMP compliance official shall authorize the refund of any diversion deposit that was erroneously paid or collected.

     B.     The WMP compliance official shall authorize the refund of any diversion deposit when the project is withdrawn or cancelled before any work has begun.

     C.     An owner may be eligible for a refund of the diversion deposit posted pursuant to Section 13.32.040 provided the owner submits the following materials to the WMP compliance official within sixty calendar days of the final inspection date for the project.

     1.     A completed WMP form Part II, accompanied by evidence, satisfactory to the WMP compliance official, that demonstrates the methods utilized to handle all C&D debris and land clearing debris generated by the project.

 

     a.     The WMP compliance official shall authorize a full refund of a diversion deposit when at least the required diversion of the C&D debris and land clearing debris generated by the project was diverted from landfill disposal.

     b.     The WMP compliance official shall authorize a partial refund of a diversion deposit when less than the required diversion of the C&D debris or land clearing debris generated by the project was diverted from landfill disposal. The partial refund shall not exceed that portion of the diversion deposit that is in the same ratio that the demonstrated amount of diverted C&D debris and land clearing debris bears to the diversion requirement.

     2.     In no event shall the refund be in an amount greater than the posted diversion deposit. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.130 Forfeited diversion deposits and accrued interest.
     Any diversion deposit that is not refunded in accordance with this chapter is deemed forfeited and becomes the property of the city. For purposes of every diversion deposit, the relationship between the owner and the city is that of debtor and creditor, respectively.

     All interest accruing on any diversion deposit is the property of the city, and the owner shall have no claim upon the interest. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.140 Use of forfeited diversion deposits.
     Forfeited diversion deposits and any accrued interest shall be used to fund the cost of programs and activities whose purpose is to divert recyclable waste from landfill disposal. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.150 Enforcement.
     For any project where a diversion deposit has not been posted with the city or the C&D debris and/or land clearing debris is not being diverted from landfill disposal, the project is deemed to be in violation of this chapter. The city may commence action or proceedings for the abatement of the violation according to Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 1.24, Administrative Citations and Fines. Nothing herein prevents the city from using civil or criminal remedies for enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

 

13.32.160 Appeal.
     “Development services director” shall be replaced by “the WMP compliance official.” Appeals shall be limited to whether the owner made a good faith effort to comply with the WMP, and/or whether the amount of the deposit refunded was proper under this chapter. (Ord. 433 § 3, 2015; Ord. 399 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 13.36 USE OF PUBLIC SOLID WASTE RECEPTACLES
13.36.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to control usage of public solid waste receptacles provided by the city of Lemon Grove for general public usage in common areas of commercial locations, public buildings, parks, and other public property. The purpose of the provision of trash receptacles is to provide place for the general public using public areas or facilities to safely dispose of normal non-hazardous solid waste generated during the use of public areas or facilities or commercial areas. This chapter is further intended to protect the environment from pollution that is generated by the general public who have no reasonable alternative method of disposal of solid waste, including incidental liquid waste. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2010)

 

13.36.020 Definitions.
     “Common areas” include publically accessible areas of public facilities, parks and common areas, maintained by the public, of commercial areas.

     “Solid waste receptacle” includes any bin, can or other storage unit used to store waste products, primarily consisting of solid waste used by the general public. Solid waste as the term is used in this chapter, does not include hazardous waste, human waste, or other waste not normally generated by use of common areas covered by this chapter.

     The terms contained in this chapter shall generally be construed as defined in common usage except terms specifically defined herein and as defined in Chapter 1.08 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2010)

 

13.36.030 Restrictions on public use of publically provided solid waste receptacles.
     No person or business establishment shall use trash receptacles provided by the city of Lemon Grove for general public use to dispose of solid or liquid waste of any type or kind generated by the business establishment or person’s business or home for which the business establishment or person has the ability to retain commercial disposal service. Use of publically provided solid waste receptacles in public spaces are only intended for the use of the general public while using the public spaces where the solid waste receptacles are located. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2010)

 

13.36.040 Penalty.
     Violation of any provision of this chapter shall be either a misdemeanor or an infraction and punishable under the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Further, any violation of this chapter shall be considered a public nuisance and the property, residence or business generating the improperly disposed waste shall be subject to the remedies for nuisance allowed by law, including but not limited to, Section 1.14.060(A) of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 392 § 1, 2010)

Title 14 (RESERVED)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 15.06 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
Chapter 15.08 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 15.14 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 15.18 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 15.20 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 15.22 ENERGY CODE
Chapter 15.24 HISTORIC BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.26 FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.28 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.30 GREEN BUILDING CODE
Chapter 15.32 REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 15.33 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
Chapter 15.38 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.44 MOVING AND STORAGE OF BUILDINGS
Chapter 15.48 TRAILER COACHES
Chapter 15.50 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT MEASURES
Chapter 15.52 TRANSPORTATION UNIFORM MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM

Chapter 15.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
15.04.010 Variances from regulations.
     The community development manager shall have and exercise the power and authority granted the building department by Section 17951 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.04.020 Adoption of state regulations.
     Any rules and regulations adopted by the Department of Industrial Relations of the state of California pursuant to the State Housing Law which impose restrictions greater than those imposed by this title are adopted and shall be applicable to the city and shall be enforced by the departments, officers, employees and agents of the city in the same manner as city ordinances regulating the erection, construction, alteration, maintenance, sanitation, occupancy or ventilation of buildings, provided, however, no fees prescribed by such rules or regulations shall be applicable excepting so far as they are greater than the fees prescribed by this title. One copy of Title 24, the 2019 California Code of Regulations, is filed in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.04.030 Severability and validity.
     If any section of this title is declared invalid by a court of law, the remaining sections shall remain valid. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed this title, and each chapter, section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more chapters, sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this title should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.06 ADMINISTRATIVE CODE
15.06.010 Adoption of the California Administrative Code, Part 1, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is hereby adopted by reference that certain document known as the California Administrative Code, Part 1, Title 24 of the 2019 California Code of Regulations. Said document is adopted without change for the purpose of establishing the administration, organization, and enforcement of rules and regulations for the technical codes adopted by the city. All provisions of the California Administrative Code, 2019 Edition, are referred to, adopted and made a part of this code, as though fully set forth herein, excepting such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified or amended. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.08 BUILDING CODE
15.08.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Building Code
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city building code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the 2019 California Building Code. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance of buildings and structures within the city of Lemon Grove shall be in conformance with the 2019 California Building Code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

15.08.020 Findings.
     The city of Lemon Grove has large brush-covered hillsides. The city is subject to frequent Santa Ana conditions consisting of dry gusting winds, which create extreme fire dangers. The city council specifically finds that these geographic and topographic conditions necessitate greater fire protection than that provided by the State Building Code. Therefore, this chapter alters the 2019 California Building Code to require more fire retardant roof coverings. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.08.030 Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2019 California Building Code.
     Deletions, revisions and additions to the 2019 California Building Code shall be as set forth in Sections 15.08.040 through 15.08.060. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

15.08.040 Chapter 1, Scope and Administration, Division II—Deletions, revisions, and additions.
     Section 101.1 is replaced to read:

 

Title. These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of the City of Lemon Grove, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

     Add Section 103.1.1 General.

 

Whenever the terms or the title “administrative authority,” “responsible official,” “Building Official,” “chief inspector,” “code enforcement officer” or other similar designation is used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the person appointed as Building Official by the Lemon Grove City Council or his or her duly authorized representative.

 

     Add Section 105.3.1.1.

 

Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site where the City Engineer determines that a grading permit or public improvements are required until the City Engineer notifies the Building Official that the grading or public improvements work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued. Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that a flooding or geologic condition at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare.

 

     Add Section 105.3.3 Permit denial.

 

The chief building official may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or substandard building as provided in this title, or where unlawful construction exists, or where exists a significant violation of this code.

 

     Add Section 105.5.1 Expiration of Plan Review.

 

Applications for which no permit is issued within one year following the date of application shall expire by limitation, and plans and other data submitted for review may thereafter be returned to the applicant or destroyed by the building official. In order to renew action on an application after expiration, the applicant shall resubmit plans and pay a new plan review fee.

 

     Add Section 109.1.1 Fee Exceptions.

 

The Government of the United States of America, the State of California, and local school districts proposing work exempt from building permits, the County of San Diego, and the City of Lemon Grove shall not be required to pay any fees for filing an application for a building permit pursuant to this code unless City plan review and inspection services are requested. If so requested, the fee schedules adopted in a resolution by the City Council shall apply.

 

     Add Section 109.2.1 Plan Review Fees.

 

When submittal documents are required by Section 107, a plan review fee shall be paid at the time of submitting the submittal documents for plan review. Said plan review fee shall be as shown in a resolution adopted by the City Council. The plan review fees specified in this section are separate fees from the permit fees specified in Section 109.2 and are in addition to the permit fees.

 

When submittal documents are incomplete or changed so as to require additional plan review or when the project involves deferred submittal items as defined in Section 107.3.4.1, an additional plan review fee shall be charged at the rate shown in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

 

     Add Section 109.2.2 Demolition Permit Fee.

 

The fee for a permit to demolish a building or portion of a building shall be as set forth in a resolution duly adopted by the City Council.

 

     Section 109.3 is replaced to read:

 

Building Permit Valuations. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of these codes shall be made by the building official. The value to be used in computing the building permit and building plan review fees shall be the total value of all construction work for which the permit is issued as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, elevators, fire-extinguishing systems and other permanent equipment. The permit fees for those projects subject to State energy code compliance shall be as set forth in a resolution adopted by the City Council.

 

     Section 109.6 is replaced to read:

 

Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of a fee paid or portion of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

 

The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

 

     Section 114.4 is replaced to read:

 

Violation penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code or the Technical Codes shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of separate offenses for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continues or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

     Add Section 114.5 Declaration of Public Nuisance.

 

Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished, equipped, used, occupied or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of any such public nuisance in the manner provided by law. Any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain permit as required by this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the facts that a public nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, removal, conversion or demolition, equipment, use occupancy, or maintenance of a building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished, used, occupied, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.08.060 Appendix Chapters C, H, and I.
     Appendix Chapters C, H and I of the 2019 California Building Code are adopted. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.10 RESIDENTIAL CODE
15.10.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Residential Code, Part 2.5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city residential code for the purpose of establishing provisions for the construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade, the 2019 California Residential Code. Except as otherwise provided by this title of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all construction, alteration, movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, use and occupancy, location, removal or demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories above grade within the city of Lemon Grove, shall be in conformance with the 2019 California Residential Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

15.10.020 Chapter 1, Division II, Administration—Amended.
     Chapter 1, Division II, Administration of the 2019 California Residential Code shall be amended as follows:

     Section R101.1 is replaced to read:

 

Title. These regulations shall be known as the Residential Building Code of the City of Lemon Grove, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

 

     Add Section R103.1.1 General.

 

Whenever the terms or the title “administrative authority,” “responsible official,” “Building Official,” “chief inspector,” “code enforcement officer” or other similar designation is used herein or in any of the technical codes, it shall be construed to mean the person appointed as Building Official by the Lemon Grove City Council or his or her duly authorized representative.

 

     Add Section R105.1.1 Permit denial.

 

The chief building official may deny the issuance of a building permit on any property where there exists an unsafe or substandard building as provided in this title, or where unlawful construction exists, or where a significant violation of this code exists.

 

     Section R105.3.1 shall be amended to add:

 

Permits shall not be issued for construction on a site where the City Engineer determines that a grading permit or public improvements are required until the City Engineer notifies the Building Official in writing that the grading or public improvements work has been satisfactorily completed to allow building permits to be issued.

 

Permits shall not be issued if the City Engineer determines that a flooding or geologic condition at the site may endanger the public safety or welfare.

 

     Add Section R108.1.1:

 

The Government of the United States of America, the State of California, and local school districts proposing work exempt from building permits, the County of San Diego, and the City of Lemon Grove shall not be required to pay any fees for filing an application for a building permit pursuant to this code unless City plan review and inspection services are requested. If so requested, the fee schedules adopted in a resolution by the City Council shall apply.

 

     Section R108.5 is replaced to read:

 

Fee Refunds. The building official may authorize refunding of a fee paid hereunder which was erroneously paid or collected.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the permit fee paid when no work has been done under a permit issued in accordance with this code.

 

The building official may authorize refunding of not more than 80 percent of the plan review fee paid when an application for a permit for which a plan review fee has been paid is withdrawn or canceled before any examination time has been expended.

 

The building official shall not authorize the refunding of any fee paid except upon written application filed by the original permittee not later than 180 days after the date of fee payment.

 

     Section R113.4 is replaced to read:

 

Violation penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Code or the Technical Codes shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of separate offenses for each and every day or portion thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this Code is committed, continues or permitted, and upon conviction of any such violation, such person shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

     Add Section R113.5 Declaration of Public Nuisance.

 

Any building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished, equipped, used, occupied or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the City Council, commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment of any such public nuisance in the manner provided by law. Any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain permit as required by this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the facts that a public nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improvement, movement, removal, conversion or demolition, equipment, use occupancy, or maintenance of a building or structure erected, constructed, enlarged, repaired, moved, improved, removed, converted, or demolished, used, occupied, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.10.040 Appendix Chapter H.
     Appendix Chapter H of the 2019 California Residential Building Code is hereby adopted. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.14 ELECTRICAL CODE
15.14.010 Adoption of the California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city electrical code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for the installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems and permit requirements and inspection thereof, the 2019 California Electrical Code, Part 3, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code based on the National Electrical Code. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all installation, alteration or repair of electrical systems within the city of Lemon Grove shall be in conformance with 2019 California Electrical Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.18 MECHANICAL CODE
15.18.010 Adoption of the California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city mechanical code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for the erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances, the 2019 California Mechanical Code, Part 4, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use or maintenance of any heating, ventilating, cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances shall be in conformance with 2019 California Mechanical Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.20 PLUMBING CODE
15.20.010 Adoption of the California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city plumbing code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for the construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment in or on any building or structure or outdoors on any premises or property, the 2019 California Plumbing Code, Part 5, Title 24 of the 2019 California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901 et seq. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all construction, alteration, moving, demolition, repair and use of all plumbing, gas or drainage piping and systems or water heating or treating equipment within the city of Lemon Grove shall be in conformance with 2019 California Plumbing Code which is based on the Uniform Plumbing Code, published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.22 ENERGY CODE
15.22.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city energy code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for the conservation of energy the 2019 California Energy Code, Part 6, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all construction of buildings where energy will be utilized shall be in conformance with California State Code and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant thereto, including the 2019 California Energy Code, published by the California Energy Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.24 HISTORIC BUILDING CODE
15.24.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Historic Building Code, Part 8, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     The 2019 California Historic Building Code is hereby adopted by reference without change to Buildings and Construction Title 15 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.26 FIRE CODE
15.26.010 California Fire Code, 2019 Edition—Adopted by reference.
     The California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, and including Appendix Chapters 4, B, BB, C, CC, D, H, and O but excluding Sections 109 and 112.4 as published by the International Code Council, is adopted by reference as the fire code of the city (the “fire code”), for protecting the interests of health, life and safety as they relate to the use or occupancy of building or premises. All of the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of the California Fire Code 2019 Edition, are referred to adopt and made a part of this chapter as though fully set out in this chapter, excepting such portions as are added, deleted, modified or amended by this chapter. The California Fire Code is referred to in this chapter as the “CFC” and one copy is on file in the office of the Lemon Grove city clerk.

     Repealing of Previous Ordinance. Ordinance 441-3,2016 of the city of Lemon Grove adopting by reference the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, known as the California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 9 incorporating the International Fire Code, 2018 Edition, published by the International Code Council, and all other ordinances or parts of ordinance in conflict herewith are hereby repealed. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.020 Section 101.1 amended—Title.
     Section 101.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

101.1 Title. These regulations will be known as the Fire Code of the City of Lemon Grove, hereinafter referred to as “this code.”

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.030 Section 105.3.1 amended—Expiration.
     Section 105.3.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

105.3.1 Expiration. An operational permit shall remain in effect until reissued, renewed or revoked, or such a period of time as specified in the permit. Construction permits shall automatically become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within one hundred eighty days after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty days after the time the work is commenced. The max life of any construction permit is three years. If a final inspection is not obtained within the three-year time period, a permit will become invalid and a new permit will be required. Before such work commences, a new permit shall be first obtained and the fee to recommence work, if any, shall be one-half the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original construction documents for such work, and provided further that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year. Permits are not transferable and any changes in occupancy, operation, and tenancy or ownership shall require that a new permit be issued.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

15.26.040 Section 109 amended and 109.1 added—Board of appeals.
     Section 109 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Appeals Board. Appeals to the decisions or determinations made by the Building Official/Fire Marshal, or fire code official relative to the application and interpretation of the fire code adopted by the City, the applicant may appeal the decision to the Lemon Grove City Council within thirty (30) days from the date of the decision appealed.

Section 109.1: Limitations on authority. An Application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the intent of this code or the rules legally adopted hereunder has been incorrectly interpreted, the provision of this code do not fully apply, or an equivalent method of protection or safety is proposed. The board shall not have authority to waive requirements of this code.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.050 Section 110.4 amended—Violation penalties.
     Section 110.4 is amended to read as follows:

 

Violation Penalties. Any person who violates a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall to erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or lawful directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 dollars in the manner established in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 1.12.010(c). Each day that causes any incident and thereby requires the agency to provide emergency response shall reimburse the agency for the cost incurred. A violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time as determined by the fire code official.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.060 Section 112.4 amended—Failure to comply.
     Section 112.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 112.4 Failure to Comply. Any person, who shall continue any work having been served with a stop work notice, except such work as that the person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than $250.00 dollars or more than $1,000 dollars as provided by the Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 1.12.010(c).

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.070 Section 113 amended and added—Schedule of fees.
     Section 106.2 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

106.2 Schedule of fees. The permit fees for all permits authorized by this code shall be as listed in the City of Lemon Grove Schedule of Fees.

 

     Section 106.6 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

106.6 Cost Recovery. This section is to establish authority to obtain reimbursements from responsible individuals for the expenses of any emergency response and/or code enforcement action by the City of Lemon Grove Fire Department to protect the public from fire or hazardous substances and situations as allowed by the general laws of the State of California and the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

 

     Section 106.7 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

106.7 Reimbursements.

        (a)       in accordance with the Health as Safety Code Section 13000 et seq., any individual who acts negligently or in violation of the law and thereby requires the jurisdiction to provide an emergency response to a danger posed by a fire or hazardous substances shall be liable for reimbursement to the agency for the cost incurred.

        (b)      In accordance with Government Code Sections 53150 through 53158, any individual who is under the influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug or the combined influence of an alcoholic beverage or any drug, and whose negligent operation of a motor vehicle, boat or vessel, or civil aircraft caused by that influence, proximately causes any incident and thereby requires that agency to provide an emergency response shall reimburse the agency for the cost incurred.

 

     Section 106.8 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

106.8 Expense Recovery. This section establishes authority to obtain from responsible individuals for the expanse of any emergency response and/or enforcement action by the City of Lemon Grove Fire Department to protect the public from fire, hazardous substances and dangerous situations as allowed under the Lemon Grove Municipal Code and by laws if the State of California.

 

     Section 106.9 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

106.9 Cumulative Remedies. The remedies contained in this code are cumulative and inclusive of other remedies contained in the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Nothing herein prevents the City Attorney or appropriate enforcement officer from pursuing remedies at law or equity to address violations of this code. Nothing herein shall prevent the application of civil remedies authorized by Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 1.12.010(e)

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.080 Section 202 amended—Definitions.
     Section 202 of the CFC is amended by adding the following definitions:

 

Accessory Structure is a building or structure used to shelter or support any material, equipment, chattel, or occupancy other than a habitable building. (A) (See Structure).

 

Combustible Vegetation is material that in its natural state will readily ignite, burn and transmit fire from the vegetation growth to any structure: this includes ground fuels which are any native or landscape vegetation not considered a tree and generally in contact with the ground.

 

Fire Authority Having Jurisdiction (FAHJ) is the designated entity providing enforcement if the fire regulations as they relate to planning, construction, and development. This entity may also provide fire suppression and other emergency services.

 

Fire Department is any regularly organized fire department, fire protection district, a legally formed volunteer fire department recorded with the County of San Diego, or a fire company regularly charged with the responsibility of proving fire protection to the jurisdiction.

 

Fire Hazard is anything that increases or could create an increase of hazard or menace of fire to a greater degree than customarily recognized as normal by persons in the public service regularly engaged in preventing, suppressing or extinguishing fire or anything or act which could obstruct, delay, hinder or interfere with the operations of the fire department or egress of the occupants in the event of fire.

 

Fuel Modification Zone is a strip of land where combustible vegetation has been thinned, modified or both and partially or totally replaced with approved drought tolerant, fire resistant, and/or irrigated plants to provide an acceptable level of risk from vegetation fires. Fuel modification reduces radiant and convective heat, thereby reducing the amount of heat exposure on the roadway or structure and providing fire suppression forces a safer area in which to take action.

 

Hazardous Fire Area is any geographic area mapped by State or local jurisdiction as a high or very high fire hazard area, or as set forth by the FAHJ that contains the type and condition of vegetation, topography, weather, and structure density to potentially increase the possibility of vegetation conflagration fires shall be considered a hazardous fire area.

 

Heavy Timber Construction as described in the California Building Code.

 

Off-site Roadway is a road, street, public highway, or private road, used for fire apparatus access from a publicly maintained road to the boundary of the subject property.

 

On-site Roadway is a road, street, public highway, private road, or driveway used for fire apparatus access within the boundaries of the subject property or land division.

 

Planning Authority Having Jurisdiction (PAHJ) is the identified authority regulating and enforcing planning and/or construction standards.

 

Response Time is the elapsed time from the fire department’s receipt of the first alarm to when the first fire unit arrives on the scene.

Travel Time is the estimated time it would take for a responding agency to travel from the fire station to the furthest structure in a proposed development project, determined by measuring the safest, most direct, appropriate, and reliable route with consideration given to safe operating speeds for heavy fire apparatus.

 

Vegetation Conflagration is an uncontrolled fire spreading through vegetative fuels, and exposing and consuming structures in the advancing path of fire.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.090 Section 503.2.1 amended—Dimensions.
     Section 503.2.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 503.2.1 Dimensions. Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed improved width of not less than twenty (20) feet, except for single family residential driveways not to exceed 150 feet in length from the public-right-a-way and serving no more than two single family dwellings, shall have a minimum of sixteen (16) feet unobstructed improved width. Any of the following, which have separated lanes of one way traffic: gated entrances with card readers; guard stations or center medians, are allowed, provided that each lane is not less that fourteen (14) feet wide. All fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than thirteen feet six inches (13′6″). Vertical clearance or road width shall be increased when, in the opinion of the fire code official, vertical clearances or road widths are not adequate to provide fire apparatus access.

 

Exception: Upon approval of the fire code official. Vertical clearance or road width may be reduced as long as the reduction does not impair access by fire apparatus. In cases where the vertical clearance has been reduced, approved signs shall be installed and maintained indicating the amount of vertical clearance.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.100 Section 503.3.1 added—Fire lane designation.
     Section 503.3.1 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

503.3.1 Fire lane designation. Where the fire code official determines that it is necessary to ensure adequate fire access, the fire code official may designate existing roadways as fire access roadways as provided by Vehicle Code Section 22500.1(public) or 22658(a) (private).

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.110 Section 505.1 amended—Premises identification.
     Section 505.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Section 505.1 Address Identification. Address Numbers. Approved numbers and/or addresses shall be placed on all new and existing buildings and at appropriate additional locations as to be plainly visible and legible from the street or roadway fronting the property from either direction of approach. Said numbers shall contrast with their background, and shall meet the following minimum standards as to size: minimum three inches (3″) high with a one-half inch (½″) stroke for individual suites and apartments, minimum four inches (4″) high with a one-half inch (1/2″) stroke for residential buildings, minimum eight inches (8″) high and one-half (1/2″) stroke for commercial, multi-residential building, and industrial buildings. Additional numbers shall be required where deemed necessary by the fire code official, such as rear access doors, building corners, and entrances to commercial centers. The fire code official may require larger address numbers based on visibility and the needs of emergency response personnel.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.120 Section 505.3 added—Response map updates.
     Section 505.3 of the CFC is added to read as follows:

 

505.3 Response map updates. Any new development, which necessitates updating of the emergency response maps by virtue of new structures, hydrants, roadways or similar features, shall be required to provide map updates in a format compatible with current department mapping services, and shall be charged a reasonable fee for updating all response maps.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.190 Section 5704.2.9.6.1 amended—Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
     Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.200 Section 5706.2.4.4 amended—Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited.
     Section 5704.2.4.4 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

5705.2.4.4 Location where above-ground tanks are prohibited. Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in above-ground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.210 Section 5806.2 amended—Limitations.
     Section 5806.2 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

5802.2 Limitations. Storage of flammable cryogenic fluids in stationary containers outside of buildings is prohibited except for zones classified as commercial or industrial.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.26.220 Section 6104.2 amended—Maximum capacity within established limits.
     Section 6104.2 of the CFC is amended to read as follows:

 

6104.2 Maximum capacity within established limits. The geographic limit in which the bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is prohibited for the protection of heavily populated and congested areas is hereby established as jurisdiction limits of the City of Lemon Grove except for areas zoned for industrial use.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.28 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
15.28.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Existing Building Code, Part 10, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     The California Existing Building Code, 2019 Edition, Chapter 15.28 is adopted by reference without change to Buildings and Construction Title 15 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.30 GREEN BUILDING CODE
15.30.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Green Building Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city green building code for the purpose of prescribing regulations in the city of Lemon Grove for improved public health safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact and encourage sustainable construction practices, the 2019 California Green Building Standards Code, Part 11, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations, a portion of the 2019 California Building Standards Code, as defined in the California Health and Safety Code, Section 18901. Except as otherwise provided by this chapter of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, all construction of buildings shall comply with the design, operation construction, use and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure, unless otherwise indicated in this code shall be in conformance with the California Green Building Code published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.32 REFERENCED STANDARDS CODE
15.32.010 Adoption of the 2019 California Referenced Standards Code, Part 12, Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations.
     The California Referenced Standards Code, 2019 Edition, Chapter 15.32 is adopted by reference without change to Buildings and Construction Title 15 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.33 SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS
15.33.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statute 2014, California Government Code Section 65850.5) in order to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city and facilitating property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the city to achieve those goals while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

 

15.33.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     A.    “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

     1.     E-mail;

     2.     The Internet;

     3.     Facsimile.

     B.     “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

     1.     A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal.

     2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and paragraph (iii) of subdivision (c) of Section 714 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

     3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

     4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city of Lemon Grove.

     C.     “Solar energy system” has the same meaning set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subdivision (a) of Section 801.5 of the Civil Code, as such section or subdivision may be amended, renumbered, or redesignated from time to time.

     D.    “Eligibility checklist” means the submittal checklist required by the city of Lemon Grove to be submitted with the small residential rooftop solar energy system demonstrating compliance.

     E.     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete.

     F.     “Reasonable restrictions” on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits.

     G.    “Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance” means:

     1.     For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: an amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed.

     2.     For photovoltaic systems: an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

 

15.33.030 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city.

     B.     Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the

effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small rooftop energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

 

15.33.040 Solar energy system requirements.
     A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state and the city.

     B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

     C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

 

15.33.050 Applications and documents.
     A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available on the city website.

     B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by e-mail, fax, or the Internet shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

     C.     The planning and building department shall adopt an eligibility checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review.

     D.    Prior to submitting an application, the applicant shall:

     1.     Verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential rooftop solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and

     2.     At the applicant’s cost, verify to the applicant’s reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system including existing line, load, ground and bonding wiring as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system’s current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads.

     E.     The permit application and associated documentation may be submitted to the building division in person, by mail, or by electronic submittal together with required permit processing and inspection fees. In the case of electronic submittal, the electronic signature of the applicant on all forms, applications, and other documents may be used in lieu of a wet signature.

     F.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process and eligibility checklist shall substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

 

15.33.060 Permit review and inspection requirements.
     A.    The planning and building department shall implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems.

     B.     Review of the application shall be limited to the chief building official’s review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements.

     C.     If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited

permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

     D.    If an application is not denied in writing within forty-five days from the date of receipt of the application, the application shall be deemed approved, unless that delay is the result of a reasonable request for additional information.

     E.     Upon confirmation by the building official of the application and supporting documentation being complete and meeting the requirements of the eligibility checklist, the building official shall administratively approve the application and issue all required permits or authorizations. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to connect the small residential rooftop energy system to the local utility provider’s electricity grid. The applicant is responsible for obtaining such approval or permission from the local utility provider.

     F.     The chief building official may require an applicant to apply for a minor use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. If a minor use permit is required, the city may deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission.

     G.    Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost.

     H.    “A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the California Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance.

     I.      Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building division, and may include a consolidated inspection with the fire marshal, for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review.

     J.      The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.

     K.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized; however the subsequent inspection need not conform to the requirements of this section. (Ord. 432 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 15.38 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
15.38.010 Adoption of the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
     There is adopted and incorporated by reference herein as the city code for the abatement of dangerous buildings (for the purpose of providing a method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy provided by the building code, housing code or otherwise available law, whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants may be required to be repaired, vacated or demolished) the Uniform Code for Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, promulgated and published by the International Code Council, including such provisions as are hereinafter added, deleted or amended. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.020 Deletions, revisions and additions.
     The deletions, revisions and additions set forth in Sections 201, 202, 204, 205 and 801 and Chapters 4, 5, 6 and 7 are made to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.030 Section 201 amended.
     Section 201 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Sec. 201.

        (a)       Administration. The community development manager is hereby authorized to enforce the provisions of this code.

The community development manager shall have the power to render interpretations of this code and to adopt and enforce rules and regulations supplemental to this code as he or she may deem necessary in order to clarify the application of the provisions of this code. Such interpretations, rules and regulations shall be in conformity with the intent and purpose of this code.

        (b)      Inspections. The health officer, the fire marshal, the building official and the community development manager or their designees are hereby authorized to make such inspections and take such actions as may be required to enforce the provisions of this code.

        (c)       Right of Entry. Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the community development manager or the manager’s authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building or premises unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the community development manager or the manager’s authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the community development manager by this code, provided that if such building or premises be occupied, the authorized representative shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and request entry. If such entry is refused, the community development manager, or the manager’s authorized representative, shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry.

 

“Authorized representative” shall include the officers and their designees named in Section 201(b) and their authorized inspection personnel.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.040 Section 202 amended.
     Section 202 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Sec. 202. All buildings or portions thereof which are determined after inspection by the community development manager to be dangerous as defined in this code are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal in accordance with the procedure specified in Section 401 of this code.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.050 Section 204 amended.
     Section 204 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Sec. 204. All buildings or structures within the scope of the code and all construction or work for which a permit is required shall be subject to inspection by an Authorized Representative in accordance with and in the manner provided by this code and Sections 110 and 1704 of the 2019 California Building Code.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.060 Section 205 is deleted.
     Section 205 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted from the code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.070 Chapter 4 amended.
     Chapter 4 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

CHAPTER 4

NOTICES AND ORDERS OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MANAGER

 

General.

Sec. 401.

        (a)       Commencement of Proceedings. Whenever the community development manager has inspected or cause to be inspected any building and has found and determined that such building is a dangerous building, the manager shall commence proceedings to cause the repair, vacation or demolition of the building.

        (b)      Notice and Order. The community development manager shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice and order shall contain:

        1.        The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located.

        2.        A statement that the community development manager has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 302 of this code.

        3.        A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the community development manager.

        (i)       If the community development manager has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the community development manager shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances.

        (ii)      If the community development manager has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure shall be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the community development manager to be reasonable.

        (iii)     If the community development manager has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the community development manager shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order, and that the demolition be completed within such time as the community development manager shall determine is reasonable.

        4.        Statements advising that if any required repair or demolition work (without vacation also being required) is not commenced within the time specified, the community development manager:

        (i)       Will order the building vacated and posted to prevent further occupancy until the work is completed, and

        (ii)      May proceed to cause the work to be done and charge the costs thereof against the property or its owner.

        5.        Statements advising.

        (i)       That any person having any record title or legal interest in the building may appeal from the notice and order or any action of the community development manager to the city council, provided the appeal is made in writing as provided in this code and filed with the city clerk within 10 days from the date of service of such notice and order; and

        (ii)      That failure to appeal will constitute a waiver of all right to an administrative hearing and determination of the matter.

        (c)       Service of Notice and Order. The notice and order, and any amended or supplemental notice and order, shall be served upon the record owner and posted on the property; and one copy thereof shall be served on each of the following if known to the community development manager or disclosed from official public records; the holder of any mortgage or deed of trust or other lien or encumbrance of record; the owner or holder of any lease of record; and the holder of any other estate or legal interest of record in or to the building or the land on which it is located. The failure of the community development manager to serve any person required herein to be served shall not invalidate any proceedings hereunder as to any other person duly served or relieve any such person from any duty or obligation imposed on him or her by the provisions of this section.

        (d)      Method of Service. Service of the notice and order shall be made upon all persons entitled thereto either personally or by mailing a copy of such notice and order by certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, to each such person at his or her address as it appears on the last equalized assessment roll of the county or as known to the community development manager. If no address of any such person so appears or is known to the community development manager, then a copy of the notice and order shall be so mailed, addressed to such person, at the address of the building involved in the proceedings. The failure of any such person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this section. Service by certified mail in the manner herein provided shall be effective on the date of mailing.

        (e)       Proof of Service. Proof of service of the notice and order shall be certified to at the time of service by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the persons effecting service, declaring the time, date, and manner in which service was made. The declaration, together with any receipt card returned in acknowledgment of receipt by certified mail shall be affixed to the copy of the notice and order retained by the community development manager.

 

Recordation of Notice and Order.

Sec. 402. If compliance is not had with the order within the time specified therein, and no appeal has been properly and timely filed, the community development manager shall file in the office of the county recorder a certificate describing the property and certifying (i) that the building is a dangerous building and (ii) that the owner has been so notified. Whenever the corrections ordered shall thereafter have been completed or the building demolished so that it no longer exists as a dangerous building on the property described in the certificate, the community development manager shall file a new cer15.10.030, tificate with the county recorder certifying that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building has been demolished or all required corrections have been made so that the building is no longer dangerous, whichever is appropriate.

 

Repair, Vacation and Demolition.

Sec. 403.

        1.        Any building declared a dangerous building under this code shall be made to comply with one of the following:

        (i)       The building shall be repaired in accordance with the current building code or other current code applicable to the type of substandard conditions requiring repair; or

        (ii)      The building shall be demolished at the option of the building owner; or

        (iii)     If the building does not constitute an immediate danger to the life, limb, property or safety of the public it may be vacated, secured and maintained against entry.

        2.        If the building or structure is in such condition as to make it immediately dangerous to the life, limb, property or safety of the public or its occupants, it shall be ordered to be vacated.

 

Notice to Vacate.

Sec. 404. (a) Posting. Every notice to vacate shall, in addition to being served as provided in Section 401(c), be posted at or upon each exit of the building and shall be substantially the following form.

 

DO NOT ENTER

UNSAFE TO OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

 

Community Development Manager, the City of Lemon Grove

 

        (a)       Compliance. Whenever such notice is posted, the community development manager shall include a notification thereof in the notice and order issued by him or her under Subsection (b) of Section 401, reciting the emergency and specifying the conditions which necessitate the posting. No person shall remain in or enter any building which has been so posted, except that entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove such building under permit. No person shall remove or deface any such notice after it is posted until the required repairs, demolition or removal have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.080 Chapter 5 amended.
     Chapter 5 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

CHAPTER 5

APPEAL

 

General.

Section 501.

        (a)       Form of Appeal. Any person entitled to service under Section 401(c) may appeal any notice and order or any action of the community development manager under this code by filing with the city clerk a written appeal within ten (10) calendar days of the date of the written notice. The written appeal shall contain the following:

        1.        Completed application form and processing fee.

        2.        A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the specific order or action protested, together with any material facts claimed to support the contention of the appellant.

        3.        A brief statement in ordinary and concise language of the relief sought and the reasons why it is claimed the protested order or action should be reversed, modified, or otherwise set aside.

        4.        The signatures of all parties named as appellants and their official mailing addresses.

        (b)      Processing of the Appeal. Upon receipt of any appeal filed pursuant to this section, the community development manager shall set the item for a hearing before a hearing officer.

        (c)       Scheduling and Noticing Appeal Hearing. The date of the hearing shall not be less than 10 days nor more than 60 days from the date the appeal was filed with the city clerk. Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given at least 10 days prior to the date of the hearing to each appellant by the city clerk either by causing a copy of such notice to be delivered to the appellant personally or by mailing a copy thereof, postage prepaid, addressed to the appellant at the address shown on the appeal.

        (d)      Hearing Procedures. Hearing procedures shall be governed in the same manner as administrative citation appeal hearings in accordance with Section 1.24.100 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

        (e)       Hearing Officer. Hearing Officer appointment and procedures shall be governed in the same manner as administrative citation hearing officer appointment and procedures in accordance with Section 1.24.090 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

 

Effect of Failure to Appeal.

Section 502. Failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with the provisions of Section 501 shall constitute a waiver of that person’s right to an administrative hearing and adjudication of the notice and order, or any portion thereof.

 

Staying Order Under Appeal.

Section 503. Except for vacation orders made pursuant to Section 403, enforcement of any notice and order of the community development manager issued under this code shall be stayed during the pendency of an appeal therefrom which is properly and timely filed.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

15.38.090 Chapter 6 deleted.
     Chapter 6 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is deleted from the code. (Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.100 Chapter 7 amended.
     Chapter 7 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Chapter 7

ENFORCEMENT OF THE ORDER OF THE COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT MANAGER

 

Compliance.

Sec. 701.

        (a)       General. After any order of the community development manager made pursuant to this code shall have become final, no person to whom any such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey any such order. Any such person who fails to comply with any such order is guilty of a misdemeanor.

        (b)      Failure to Obey Order. If, after any order of the community development manager is made pursuant to this code has become final, the person to whom such order is directed shall fail, neglect or refuse to obey such order, the community development manager may (i) cause such person to be prosecuted under subsection (a) of this section or (ii) institute any appropriate action to abate such building as a public nuisance.

        (c)       Failure to Commence Work. Whenever the required repair or demolition is not commenced within 30 days after any final notice and order issued under this code becomes effective:

        1.        The community development manager shall cause the building described in such notice and order to be vacated by posting at each entrance thereto a notice reading:

 

DANGEROUS BUILDING

DO NOT OCCUPY

It is a misdemeanor to occupy this building or to remove or deface this notice.

 

Community Development Manager, the City of Lemon Grove.

 

        2.        No person shall occupy any building which has been posted as specified in this subsection. No person shall remove or deface any such notice so posted until the repairs, demolition or removal ordered by the community development manager have been completed and a Certificate of Occupancy issued pursuant to the provisions of the Building Code.

        3.        The community development manager may, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, cause the building to be repaired to the extent necessary to correct the conditions which render the building dangerous as set forth in the notice and order; or, if the notice and order required demolition, to cause the building to be sold and demolished or demolished and the materials, rubble and debris therefrom removed and the lot cleaned. Any such repair or demolition work shall be accomplished and the cost thereof paid and recovered in the manner hereinafter provided in this code. Any surplus realized from the sale of any such building, or from the demolition thereof, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the lot, shall be paid over to the person or persons lawfully entitled thereto.

 

Extension of Time to Perform Work.

Sec. 702. Upon receipt of an application from the person required to conform to the order and an agreement by such person that he or she will comply with the order if allowed additional time, the community development manager may, in the discretion of the manager, grant an extension of time, not to exceed an additional 120 days, within which to complete said repair, rehabilitation or demolition, if the community development manager determines that such an extension of time will not create or perpetuate a situation imminently dangerous to life or property.

 

Interference with Repair or Demolition Work Prohibited.

Sec. 703. No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any officer, employee, contractor, or authorized representative of this jurisdiction or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in any building which has been ordered repaired, vacated or demolished under the provisions of this code; or with any person to whom such building has been lawfully sold pursuant to the provisions of this code, whenever such officer, employee, contractor or authorized representative of this jurisdiction, person having an interest or estate in such building or structure, or purchaser is engaged in the work of repairing, vacating and repairing, or demolishing any such building, pursuant to the provisions of this code, or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work or authorized or directed pursuant to this code.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

 

15.38.110 Section 801 amended.
     Section 801 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

Sec. 801.

        (a)       Procedure. When any work of repair or demolition is to be done pursuant to Section 701(c)(3) of this code, the work shall be accomplished by personnel of this jurisdiction or by private contract under the direction of the community development manager. Plans and specifications therefor may be prepared by the community development manager, or his/her representative, or he/she may employ such architectural and engineering assistance on a contract basis as he/she may deem reasonably necessary. If any part of the work is to be accomplished by private contract, standard public works contractual procedures shall be followed.

        (b)      Costs. The cost of such work shall be paid from the repair and demolition fund, and may be made a special assessment against the property involved, or may be made a personal obligation of the property owner, whichever the legislative body of this jurisdiction shall determine is appropriate.

(Ord. 454 § 3, 2019)

Chapter 15.44 MOVING AND STORAGE OF BUILDINGS
Article I. Moving
15.44.010 Permits required.
     No person shall move any building or structure which is to be placed, stored or temporarily located upon any property within the city until there has been first obtained a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 15.08 authorizing the moving and placement of the building or structure on property within the city or a permit issued pursuant to this article authorizing the moving of such building or structure to a storage yard or temporary location approved by the city council pursuant to Section 15.44.040 or approved by the city council pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 433 § 4, 2015; prior code § 54.101)

 

15.44.020 Permit to move on city highway required.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to modify the requirements of Chapter 12.04 of this code requiring the issuance of a permit to move buildings and structures over or along city highways. (Prior code § 54.102)

 

Article II. Storage
15.44.030 Approval of site—Required.
     No building or structure shall be stored on any property or placed temporarily on any property in the city unless such property has been approved by the city council as a site for such storage or temporary location pursuant to Section 15.44.040, or has been approved by the city council as a site for such storage or temporary location pursuant to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 433 § 4, 2015; prior code § 54.201)

 

15.44.040 Approval of site—Requirements.
     A.    Application for approval of a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location shall be made to the city council. Before approving a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location the city council shall determine:

     1.     That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures upon such site will not create a fire hazard;

     2.     That the character of the area or neighborhood within which the site is located is such that the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on said site will not constitute an attractive nuisance to children in the area;

     3.     That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on the site will not create such a breeding place for vermin as would be injurious to the public health;

     4.     That the storage of unused and unoccupied structures on the site will not be dangerous to public morals by creating a shelter for criminal or immoral acts.

     B.     In approving a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location, the city council may impose such reasonable conditions as may be necessary to insure that the use of the property will not create any of the hazards to health, safety or welfare referred to in subsection A of this section. (Prior code § 54.202)

 

15.44.050 Issuance of permit—Bond required.
     Upon approval by the city council pursuant to Section 15.44.040 or upon approval of the city council pursuant to the zoning ordinance of a site for use as a storage yard or temporary location for moved buildings or structures, the building inspector may issue a permit authorizing the moving to such storage yard or temporary location of one or more buildings or structures provided that there is filed with the building inspector a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars for each such storage yard or temporary location. The bond shall be executed by the person, firm, partnership or corporation applying for the permit pursuant to this section and by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, shall be joint and several as to liability, shall inure to the befit of the city, and shall be conditioned upon the removal from the storage yard or temporary location within a period of one year from the date of issuance of the permit of all such buildings and structures so moved on to the storage yard or temporary location. The bond shall be filed with the building inspector prior to the time the permit is issued. No such building or structure moved onto such storage yard or temporary location shall be used or occupied at such storage yard or temporary location. (Ord. 433 § 4, 2015; prior code § 54.203)

 

Article III. Removal of Structures—Penalty
15.44.060 Required upon expiration of permit.
     Upon the date of expiration of the term of any permit for removal and temporary storage of residential structures on a storage yard or temporary location issued pursuant to this chapter, whichever is the later, the permittee shall forthwith remove all such structures from such yard or location. Any person who acquires ownership or right to possession either of the land upon which residential structures are temporarily stored, pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, or of the residential structures themselves which are temporarily stored, pursuant to a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter, shall be equally responsible with the permittee for the removal of such structures from such land following the expiration of the term of any such permit. (Prior code § 54.401)

 

15.44.070 Violation—Declared nuisance.
     A.    Any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, maintained or temporarily stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter is, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance, and any failure, refusal or neglect to obtain a permit as required by the terms of this chapter shall be prima facie evidence of the fact that a nuisance has been committed in connection with the erection, construction, alteration, maintenance or temporary storage of any building or structure erected, constructed, altered, maintained or temporarily stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter. The city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately commence necessary proceedings for the abatement, removal and/or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law.

     B.     All of the remedies provided for in this article shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Prior code § 54.403)

 

15.44.080 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter, including any person who as permittee of a permit for removal and temporary storage of residential structures on a storage yard or temporary location, fails to remove such structures from such yard or location upon the expiration of the term of such permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable therefor as provided in this code. (Prior code § 54.402)

Chapter 15.48 TRAILER COACHES
Article I. General Provisions
15.48.010 Regulated.
     No person shall use, occupy or store any trailer coach in the city except as provided in this chapter; provided, however, that this chapter shall not apply to use, occupancy or storage of trailer coaches in any incidental camping area, mobile home park, recreational trailer park or camping area, temporary trailer park or travel trailer park subject to Part 2.1 (commencing with Section 18200) of Division 8 of the Health and Safety Code (the Mobilehome Park Act) or in any labor camp subject to Chapter 4 (commencing with Section 2610), Part 9, Division 2 of the Health and Safety Code or in any supervised public park, public campground or picnic ground owned, operated and maintained by the federal government, the state or any agency or political subdivision of the state. (Prior code § 56.201)

 

15.48.020 Definition.
     The term “trailer coach,” as used in this chapter, means any vehicle, with or without motive power, designed or used for human occupancy for residential, recreational, industrial, professional or commercial purposes and shall include camp car, mobile home, recreational vehicle and travel trailer as said terms are defined in Part 2.1 of Division 8 of the Health and Safety Code. (Prior code § 56.202)

 

15.48.025 Special use—Trailer coaches used for habitation by fire department personnel.
     Trailer coaches, as defined in Section 15.48.020 of this chapter, may be placed in areas adjacent to or nearby the Lemon Grove Fire Station, located in the General Commercial (GC) zone, to be used as needed for living and/or sleeping purposes by firefighters and other fire department and privately contracted emergency personnel. The fire chief, or designee, shall determine the placement and number of such trailer coaches. Any site used for purposes set forth in this subsection shall be exempt from the requirements of Section 15.48.030 of this Chapter. (Ord. 343 § 1, 2004)

 

15.48.030 Zoning ordinance prevails.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not authorize the use, occupancy or storage of a trailer coach contrary to the provisions of the zoning ordinance. (Prior code § 56.203)

 

15.48.040 Enforcement authority.
     It shall be the duty of the community development director to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The community development director or designee shall be empowered to make arrests and issue citations pursuant to the California Penal Code for violations of this chapter. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

Article II. Permitted Uses
15.48.050 Storage.
     A.    Trailer coaches may be stored only as follows:

     1.     Within an enclosed building;

     2.     On a lot or parcel of property on which there exists a lawfully established and maintained dwelling which is occupied by the owner of the stored trailer coach;

     3.     On a lot or parcel on which there is conducted lawfully operated business for the sale, rental, storage or repair of trailer coaches and such storage is incidental to the operation of the business.

     B.     No stored trailer coach shall be used or occupied and all water, gas, electric and sewer lines shall be and remain disconnected from the trailer coach at all times it is stored; except, that a stored trailer coach may be connected to the foregoing utilities for a forty-eight-hour period for the purpose of maintenance and repairs or for servicing prior to or upon the return from travel. (Prior code § 56.210)

 

15.48.060 Uses allowed with permit.
     No person shall use or occupy a trailer coach in the city except when authorized by and in accordance with a valid unexpired trailer coach use permit issued by the community development director pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 190, 1991)

 

Article III. Use Permits
15.48.070 Uses and period for which permit may be issued.
     The community development director may issue trailer coach permits authorizing the use or occupancy of trailer coaches for the purposes and periods of time specified as follows:

     A.    For temporary construction offices on or adjacent to any site on which a building or construction project is being diligently prosecuted: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed two years and shall expire upon the expiration of the building permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     B.     For a temporary real estate sales office on or adjacent to any subdivision within which ten or more dwelling units are being constructed or have been constructed within the preceding one year: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed one year and shall expire six months after completion of construction of the dwelling units in the subdivision or such earlier date as may be specified in the permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     C.     For a temporary business office incidental to the operation of the business of storing, repairing or sale of trailers on a lot or parcel on which no building is located: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed one year and shall expire on the date specified in the permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     D.    For a temporary business office incidental to and located on a site on which a temporary carnival, circus, amusement center, Christmas tree sales or similar temporary or seasonal business is being lawfully conducted: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed three months and shall expire at such time as the business for which it is issued terminates or at such earlier date as may be specified in the permit.

     E.     For a temporary business office for a financial institution or public utility which is required, as a condition of a franchise granted by the United States, the state or a public agency, to maintain a place of business at a location at which no permanent structure suitable for the purpose is available: Such permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed two years; provided, however, that if a special use permit has been issued pursuant to Section 562, subsection 3, of the zoning ordinance, a permit for a self-propelled, self-contained mobile financial business office may be issued for the term (not to exceed five years) of the special use permit. Said office shall not operate more than three days in any one week.

     F.     For a temporary business office or sales facility on or adjacent to a site on which construction of a permanent business office or sales facility for the use of the permittee is being diligently prosecuted: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed two years and shall expire upon completion of the construction of the permanent business office or sales facility or at such earlier date as may be specified in the permit. This permit as may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     G.    For a temporary dwelling for security personnel on or adjacent to any site on which construction of a major residential, commercial, industrial or public works project is being diligently prosecuted and for which security personnel are employed, a permit may be issued for a period not to exceed two years and shall expire upon completion of the construction project or at such earlier date as may be specified in the permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     H.    For a temporary dwelling for security personnel on any site on which construction of a residential, commercial, industrial or public works project has been completed and for which such security personnel are employed pending construction of permanent dwelling facilities for such security personnel: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed six months and shall expire on the date specified in the permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development director, for good cause, for a period not to exceed six months.

     I.      For a temporary dwelling for the permittee and his or her family on land owned by the permittee and on which the permittee is diligently prosecuting the construction of the first permanent dwelling: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed eighteen months and shall expire upon completion of the construction of the dwelling or at such earlier date as may be specified in the permit. This permit may be extended at the discretion of the community development officer, for good cause, for a period not to exceed nine months.

     J.      For a temporary dwelling to accommodate visiting relatives for a period not to exceed thirty calendar days in any calendar year on land owned or leased by the host and on which there is located a permanent dwelling occupied by the host: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed thirty days and shall expire on the date specified in the permit.

     K.    For a temporary political campaign office located on private property: Such permit may be issued for a period not to exceed one year; provided, however, that such permit shall expire on the 15th day following the next general election to be held after the date of issuance of the permit.

     L.     For a temporary sales office within any governmental or public utility easement where said easement precludes the use of a permanent structure: Such permit shall be issued for a period not to exceed two years, and may be renewed at the discretion of the community development director for a maximum aggregate period of ten years; provided, however, that a special use permit has been granted or extended pursuant to Section 562, subsection 4, of the zoning ordinance. (Prior code § 56.220)

 

15.48.080 Application—General.
     Any person desiring a trailer coach use permit or extension of such permit shall file with the community development director a written application on a form provided by the health department. The application shall be accompanied by such supplementary information as may be required by the community development director. At the time of filing an application for any trailer coach use permit, except a permit for owner-occupied mobile home, the applicant shall pay an application fee of ten dollars, which fee shall not be refundable. (Prior code § 56.221)

 

15.48.090 Mandatory conditions.
     Every trailer coach use permit shall be issued subject to the following conditions:

     A.    That the trailer coach complies with the requirements of Section 18550 of the Health and Safety Code applicable to mobile homes.

     B.     That no accessory building, structure or external appurtenance used or designed to be used incidental to the use or occupancy of the trailer coach shall be erected, constructed or maintained on the site on which the trailer coach is located; provided, however, that an awning which complies with the requirements of the regulations issued pursuant to the California Health and Safety Code may be attached to the trailer coach.

     C.     That the trailer coach be connected to a sewage disposal system which complies with the requirements of the regulations issued pursuant to Section 18554 of the Health and Safety Code or that the trailer coach be equipped with self-contained sanitary facilities which have been determined to be adequate by the director of public health; provided, however, that if the trailer coach is not used as an owner-occupied mobile home and such system is not available on the site, the sanitary facilities deemed adequate by the community development director are located within two hundred feet of the location of trailer coach and are available to the user or occupant of the trailer coach, the permit may be issued subject to the condition that the trailer coach may be used or occupied without being connected to a sewage disposal system, so long as such facilities remain available to the user or occupant of the trailer coach.

     D.    That the trailer coach shall not be permanently connected to any water, gas or electricity source or to any sewer system or sewage disposal facility, but may be temporarily connected to such utility source or sewage system or facility in a manner approved by the community development director.

     E.     That the trailer coach shall be placed and maintained only at such location on the lot or site as is designated on a plot plan which has been approved by the community development director; provided, however, that no owner occupied mobile home shall be situated within the front, rear, or side yard of the lot or site, as established by the zoning ordinance, unless a variance therefore has been granted pursuant to Article XXXI (commencing with Section 700) of the zoning ordinance.

     F.     That the trailer coach is not to used in any manner which would violate state law, city code or the zoning ordinance.

     G.    All owner-occupied mobile homes shall have a potable or domestic water supply approved by the community development director. (Prior code § 56.222)

 

15.48.100 Discretionary conditions.
     The community development director may, in his or her discretion, issue a permit subject to such additional conditions as he or she deems necessary to assure that the use or occupancy of the trailer coach is restricted to that authorized by the permit and that such use and occupancy will conform to state law, the city code and the zoning ordinance. (Prior code § 56.223)

 

15.48.110 Expiration.
     A permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on the date therein specified, which date shall be fixed by the community development director subject to the limitations specified in this article and in consideration of the intended use of the trailer coach. (Prior code § 56.224)

 

Article IV. Revocation or Suspension
15.48.120 Grounds.
     Failure of any permittee to comply with any condition of his or her trailer coach permit shall constitute grounds for revocation of the permit pursuant to the procedural provisions of this article. Whenever grounds for revocation exist, the community development director may revoke the permit or, at discretion, may suspend the permit for a period of time which, in his or her opinion, is adequate to allow the permittee to make corrections necessary to comply with the conditions of the permit If the permit is suspended and the permittee has not complied with all conditions of the permit by the end of the period of suspension, the community development director may revoke the permit. (Prior code § 56.230)

 

15.48.130 Notice—Contents.
     A.    Whenever the community development director determines that the conditions of a permit are being violated, he or she shall notify the permittee. Such notice may served by mailing to the address given on the application for permit or by posting on the property on which the trailer coach is located.

     B.     The notice shall be in writing and shall contain the following information:

     1.     A statement of the condition which is being violated;

     2.     A statement that the permit will be revoked or suspended, as the case may be, effective ten days from the date of the notice;

     3.     If the permit is to be suspended, a statement of the period of suspension;

     4.     A statement that the permittee may, within ten days of the date of the notice, request a hearing before the community development director on the question of whether or not the conditions of the permit have been violated. (Prior code § 56.231)

 

15.48.140 Hearing before community development director.
     If the permittee requests a hearing, the community development director shall fix a time and place for a hearing and notify the permittee. If such a request is made, the community development director shall take no further action prior to the hearing to suspend or revoke the permit. At the time and place of the hearing, the permittee may appear and be heard on the question of whether the conditions of the permit were violated. (Prior code § 56.232)

 

15.48.150 Order.
     If no request for a hearing is received, the community development director may revoke or suspend the permit on the date of revocation or suspension specified in the notice of revocation or suspension. If a hearing is requested and, at the conclusion of the hearing, the health officer determines that grounds for revocation exist, he or she may revoke or suspend the permit forthwith In either case, an order of revocation or suspension shall be mailed to the permittee at the address shown on the application for the permit or posted on the property on which the trailer coach is located. (Prior code § 56.233)

Chapter 15.50 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT MEASURES
15.50.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council through the urgency adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:

     A.    To protect human life and health;

     B.     To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     C.     To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    To minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     E.     To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazards;

     F.     To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;

     G.    To insure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    To insure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.020 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:

     A.    Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

     D.    Controlling fill, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.030 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply in this chapter.

     “Accessory structure, low-cost and small” means a structure that is:

     1.     Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or limited storage (small, low cost sheds); and

     2.     Accessory structures shall not exceed four hundred square feet in floor area or eleven thousand dollars assessed value as determined by the building official.

     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone-shaped or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

     “Apex” means the point of highest elevation on an alluvial fan, which on undisturbed fans is generally the point where the major stream that formed the fan emerges from the mountain front.

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.

     Area of Special Flood Hazard. See “Special flood hazard area (SFHA).”

     “Backfill” means the placement of fill material within a specified depression, hole or excavation pit below the surrounding adjacent ground level as a means of improving floodwater conveyance or to restore the land to the natural contours existing prior to excavation.

     “Base flood” means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the one-hundred-year flood”).

     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

     Building. See “Structure.”

     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove.

     “City council” means the elected governing and legislative body of the city.

     “Critical feature” means an integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.

     “Curvilinear line” means the border on either a flood hazard boundary map or flood insurance rate map that delineates the special flood, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazard areas and consists of a curved or contour line that follows the topography.

     “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to building or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures or development into a floodplain, which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

     “Fill” is the placement of fill material at a specified location to bring the ground surface up to a desired elevation.

     “Fill material” can be natural sand, dirt, soil or rock. For the purpose of floodplain management, fill material may include concrete, cement, soil cement, brick or similar material as approved on a case-by-case basis.

     “Flood elevation determination” means a determination by the administrator of the water surface elevations of the base flood, that is, the flood level that has a one percent or greater chance of occurrence in any given year.

     “Flood elevation study” means an examination, evaluation and determination of flood hazards and, if appropriate, corresponding water surface elevations, or an examination, evaluation and determination of mudslide (i.e., mudflow) and/or flood-related erosion hazards.

     “Flood, flooding, or floodwater” means (a) a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from (1) the overflow of inland or tidal waters, (2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source, and/or (3) mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined in (a)(2) of this definition, and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current; and (b) the collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusually high water level in a natural body of water, accompanied by a severe storm, or by an unanticipated force of nature, such as flash flood or an abnormal tidal surge, or by some similarly unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in (a)(1) of this definition.

     “Flood hazard boundary map” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated the areas of flood hazards.

     “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     “Flood insurance study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodplain administrator” the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations shall be the city’s public works director/city engineer.

     “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of “flooding”).

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances such as floodplain management regulations.

     “Flood-proofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.

     “Flood protection system” means those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the area within a community subject to a special flood hazard and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood-modifying works are those constructed to conform with sound engineering standards.

     “Floodway encroachment lines” means the lines marking the limits of floodways on federal, state and local floodplain maps.

     “Floodway fringe” is the area of a floodplain on either side of the designated floodway where encroachment may be permitted.

     “Fraud and victimization” related to Section 15.50.070, Variance procedure, of this chapter means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the planning commission will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

     “Freeboard” means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed.

     “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and shipbuilding and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     “Hardship” as related to Section 15.50.070, Variance procedure, of this chapter means the hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The planning commission requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as exceptional hardships. All of these problems can be resolved through other means, without granting a variance. This is so even if the alternative means are more expensive or complicated than building with a variance, or if they require the property owner to put the parcel to a different use than originally intended, or to build elsewhere.

     “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

     “Landfill” means a permitted location for the disposal, placement or dumping of garbage, trash, debris, junk or waste material.

     “Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

     “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building’s lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter. (Note: This definition allows attached garages to be built at grade. Below-grade garages are not allowed as they are considered to be basements.)

     “Map” means the flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) or the flood insurance rate map (FIRM) for a community issued by the Flood Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

     “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s flood insurance rate map are referenced.

     “Minimum necessary” related to Section 15.50.070, Variance procedure, of this chapter means the minimum necessary to afford relief to the applicant of a variance with a minimum deviation from the requirements of this chapter. In the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the planning commission need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, for example, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only that level that the commission believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

     “Mudslide” (i.e., mudflow) describes a condition where there is a river, flow or inundation of liquid mud down a hillside usually as a result of a dual condition of loss of brush cover, and the subsequent accumulation of water on the ground preceded by a period of unusually heavy or sustained rain.

     “Mudslide (i.e., mudflow) prone area” means an area with land surfaces and slopes of unconsolidated material where the history, geology and climate indicate a potential for mudflow.

     “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start construction” commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

     “Obstruction” means and includes but is not limited to any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

     “One-hundred-year flood” or “100-year flood” means a flood which has a one percent annual probability of being equalled or exceeded. It is identical to the base flood, which will be the term used throughout this chapter.

     “Planning commission” means the land use decision-making body appointed by the city council.

     “Principal structure” means a structure used for the principal use of the property as distinguished from an accessory use.

     “Public safety and nuisances” as related to Section 15.50.070, Variance procedure, of this chapter means the granting of a variance must not result in additional threats to public safety or create nuisances. This chapter is intended to help protect the health, safety, well-being and property of the local citizens. This is a long-range community effort made up of a combination of approaches such as adequate drainage systems, warning and evacuation plans, and keeping new property above flood levels. These long-term goals can only be met if exceptions to the requirements of this chapter are kept to a bare minimum.

     “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land area that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height.

     “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area having special flood hazards, and shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, A1-A30, AE or A99.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

     “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either. (1) any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or (2) any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure.

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, (or other datum, where specified) of flood of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

     “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.040 General provisions.
     A.    Lands to Which this Chapter Applies. This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city.

     B.     Basis for Establishing the Areas of Special Flood Hazard. The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration (FIA) of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the flood insurance study (FIS) dated March 16, 1988, and the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), dated March 16, 1988, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This flood insurance study (FIS) and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter, and which are recommended to the city council by the flood administrator. The study and flood insurance rate maps (FIRMs) are on file at Lemon Grove City Hall, Office of the Public Works Director/City Engineer 3232 Main Street, Lemon Grove, California 91945.

     C.     Compliance. No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.

     D.    Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another chapter, easement, covenant or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.

     E.     Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     1.     Considered as minimum requirements;

     2.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     3.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes.

     F.     Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering consideration. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.

     G.    Severability. This chapter and the various parts thereof are declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.050 Administration.
     A.    Establishment of Development Permit. A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.50.040(B). Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the floodplain administrator and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions and elevation of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:

     1.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;

     2.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure will be flood-proof;

     3.     All appropriate certifications listed in subsection (C)(4) of this section; and

     4.     Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

     B.     Designation of the Floodplain Administrator. The public works director/city engineer is appointed to administer, implement and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions.

     C.     Duties and Responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator. The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     Permit Review.

     a.     Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied,

     b.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained,

     c.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding, and

     d.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. For purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point;

     e.     All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

     2.     Use of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.50.040(B), the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Section 15.50.060. Any such information shall be submitted to the city council for adoption;

     3.     Whenever a watercourse is to be altered or relocated:

     a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to such alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency,

     b.     Require that the flood-carrying capacity of the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse is maintained;

     4.     Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed:

     a.     The certification required by Section 15.50.060(A)(3)(a) (floor elevation),

     b.     The certification required by Section 15.50.060(A)(3)(b)(iii) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures),

     c.     The certification required by Section 15.50.060(A)(3)(c)(i) or 15.50.060(A)(3)(c)(ii) (wet floodproofing standard),

     d.     The certification of elevation required by Section 15.50.060(C) (subdivision standards),

     e.     The certification required by Section 15.50.060(D)(1)(a)(floodway encroachments);

     5.     Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.50.070(B);

     6.     Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.50.040(C) of this chapter.

     7.     Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

     a.     The floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) within six months of information becoming available or upon project completion, whichever occurs first.

     b.     The floodplain administrator shall require that all LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits shall not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition. Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.060 Provisions for flood hazard reduction.
     A.    Standards of Construction. In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

     1.     Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     2.     Construction Materials and Methods.

     a.     All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.

     b.     All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage.

     c.     All new construction and substantial improvement shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.

     3.     Elevation and Flood-proofing.

     a.     New construction and substantial improvement shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation. Nonresidential structures may meet the standards in subsection (A)(3)(c) of this section. Upon completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor, or verified by the city’s building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification or verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     b.     Nonresidential construction shall either be elevated to conform with subsection (A)(3)(a) of this section, or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:

     i.      Be flood-proofed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     ii.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     iii.    Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the standards of this subsection are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     c.     Require, for all new construction and substantial improvement that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement, and which are subject to flooding shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum criteria:

     i.      Either a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided. The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade (openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater); or

     ii.     Be certified to comply with a local flood-proofing standard approved by the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

     4.     Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.

     a.     Attached garages and small, low cost accessory structures:

     i.      A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. Areas of the garage below the FFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials.

     ii.     A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry flood-proofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.

     b.     Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.

     i.      Accessory structures used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) and limited storage or that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

     a.     Use of accessory structure(s) must be limited to parking or limited storage;

     b.     The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;

     c.     The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent floatation, collapse and lateral movement;

     d.     Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated above the BFE or flood-proofed;

     e.     The accessory structure must comply with the floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.50.060; and

     f.      The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Section 15.50.060(A)(4)(a)(i).

     ii.     Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.50.060A.

     B.     Standards for Utilities.

     1.     All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharge from systems into floodwaters.

     2.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.

     C.     Standards for Subdivisions.

     1.     All preliminary subdivision proposals shall identify the flood hazard area and the elevation of the base flood.

     2.     All subdivision plans shall provide the elevation of proposed structure(s) and pad(s). If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the final first floor and pad elevations shall be certified by a registered professional engineer or surveyor and provided to the floodplain administrator.

     3.     All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     4.     All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     5.     All subdivisions shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards.

     D.    Floodway.

     1.     Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.50.040(B) are areas designated as floodways. Since the floodway is an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of floodwaters which carry debris, potential projectiles and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     a.     Prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvement, and other new development unless certification by a registered professional engineer or architect is provided demonstrating that encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

     b.     If Section 15.50.060(D)(1)(a) is satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this section. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

 

15.50.070 Variance procedure.
     A.    Nature of Variances.

     1.     The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. Though these standards vary from jurisdiction to jurisdiction, in general, a properly issued variance is granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants or the property owners.

     2.     It is the duty of the city to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling, and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in this chapter are quite rare. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate.

     B.     Appeals Board.

     1.     The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this chapter.

     2.     The planning commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter.

     3.     In passing upon such applications, the planning commission shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and:

     a.     The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     b.     The danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     c.     The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

     d.     The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     e.     The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     f.      The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     g.     The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     h.     The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     i.      The safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     j.      The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

     k.     The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, and streets and bridges.

     4.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

     i.      The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage; and

     ii.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property.

     A copy of the notice shall be recorded in the office of the San Diego County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

     5.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency.

     C.     Conditions for Variances.

     1.     Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.50.050 and 15.50.060 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     2.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures (as defined in Section 15.50.030 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     3.     Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     4.     Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary (as defined in Section 15.50.030 of this chapter), considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.

     5.     Variances shall only be issued upon:

     i.      A showing of good and sufficient cause;

     ii.     A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship (as defined in Section 15.50.030 of this chapter) to the applicant; and

     iii.    A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances (as defined in Section 15.50.030 of this chapter), cause fraud or victimization (as defined in Section 15.50.030 of this chapter) of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     6.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of subsections (C)(1) through (C)(5) of this section are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.

     7.     Upon consideration of the factors of subsection (B)(3) of this section and the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2007; Ord. 273, 1997)

Chapter 15.52 TRANSPORTATION UNIFORM MITIGATION FEE PROGRAM
15.52.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Lemon Grove Regional Transportation Congestion Improvement Program.” (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.020 Findings.
     In adopting this chapter, the city council of the city of Lemon Grove finds and determines that:

     A.    The city is a member agency of the San Diego Association of Governments (“SANDAG”), a joint powers agency consisting of the city, the county of San Diego, and the seventeen other cities situated in San Diego County. Acting in concert, the member agencies of SANDAG developed a plan whereby the shortfall in funds needed to enlarge the capacity of the regional arterial system of highways and arterials in San Diego County (the “regional arterial system”) could be made up in part by a transportation uniform mitigation fee on future residential development. As a member agency of SANDAG, the city participated in the preparation of a certain “RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study,” dated September 5, 2006 (the “Nexus Study”) prepared pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act.

     B.     The city council has been informed and advised, and finds, that future development within San Diego County and the cities therein will result in traffic volumes exceeding the capacity of the regional arterial system as it presently exists.

     C.     The city council has been further informed and advised, and finds, that if the capacity of the regional arterial system is not enlarged, the result will be substantial traffic congestion in all parts of San Diego County and the city, with unacceptable levels of service throughout San Diego County by 2030.

     D.    The city council has been further advised, and so finds that funding, in addition to those fees adopted pursuant to the Nexus Study, will be inadequate to fund construction of the regional arterial system. Absent implementation of a regional transportation improvement plan (“RTCIP”) fee based on the Nexus Study, existing and known future funding sources will be inadequate to provide necessary improvements to the regional arterial system, resulting in an unacceptably high level of traffic congestion within and around San Diego County and the city.

     E.     The city council has reviewed the Nexus Study, and finds that future development within the county and city will substantially adversely affect the regional arterial system, and that unless such development contributes to the cost of improving the regional arterial system, the regional arterial system will operate at unacceptable levels of service.

     F.     The city council finds and determines that the failure to mitigate growing traffic impacts on the regional arterial system within San Diego County and the city will substantially impair the ability of public safety services (police and fire) to respond. The failure to mitigate impacts on the regional arterial system will adversely affect the public health, safety and welfare.

     G.    The city council further finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the use of the RTCIP fee and the type of development projects on which the fees are imposed because the fees will be used to construct the transportation improvements that are necessary for the safety, health and welfare of the residential and nonresidential users of the development projects on which the RTCIP fee will be levied.

     H.    The city council finds and determines that there is a reasonable and rational relationship between the need for the improvements to the regional arterial system and the type of development projects on which the RTCIP fee is imposed because it will be necessary for the residential users of such projects to have access to the regional arterial system. Such development will benefit from the regional arterial system improvements and the burden of such development will be mitigated in part by the payment of the RTCIP fee.

     I.      The city council further finds and determines that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for constructing the regional arterial system improvements, and that the amount of the RTCIP fee expected to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share cost to such development.

     J.      The city council further finds that the cost estimates set forth in the Nexus Study are reasonable cost estimates for the facilities that comprise the regional arterial system, and that RTCIP fee program revenues to be generated by new development will not exceed the total fair share of these costs.

     K.    The fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall be used to help pay for the construction and acquisition of the regional arterial system improvements identified in the Nexus Study. The need for the improvements is related to new development because such development results in additional traffic, thus creating the demand for the improvements.

     L.     The city council finds that the Nexus Study proposes a fair and equitable method for distributing a portion of the unfunded costs of improvements to the regional arterial system.

     M.    The city council adopts the Nexus Study and incorporates it in this chapter as though set forth in full. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.030 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the following meanings:

     “Commission” means the San Diego County regional transportation commission, formed pursuant to the San Diego County Regional Transportation Commission Act (Cal. Pub. Util. Code section 132000, et seq.), which is governed by the board of directors of SANDAG.

     “Development project” or “project” means any project undertaken for the purpose of residential development, or development that includes, as a component, residential development, such as “mixed use” development, including the issuance of a permit for construction.

     “Low income residential housing” means new moderate, low, very low, and extremely low income residential units as defined in Health and Safety Code Sections 50079.5, 50093, 50105, and 50106, and by reference in Government Code section 65585.1.

     “Multifamily residential property” means property, which, under the current city land use plan or any specific plan, is designated as RM, RMH, RP, CC, and CG, zones found in Chapter 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, with or without any overlay, or equivalent.

     “Nexus Study” means the RTCIP Impact Fee Nexus Study pursuant to California Government Code Section 66000 et seq., which Nexus Study is on file in the City clerk’s office.

     “Residential dwelling unit” means a building or portion thereof used by one family and containing but one kitchen, which is designed primarily for residential occupancy including single-family and multifamily dwellings. “Residential dwelling unit” shall not include hotels or motels.

     “RTCIP administrative plan” means the TransNet Extension Ordinance and Extension Plan adopted by the San Diego County regional transportation commission Ordinance No. 04-01 on May 28, 2004, containing the detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter the RTCIP program, as may be amended from time to time, a copy of which is on file in the city clerk’s office.

     “SANDAG” means the San Diego Association of Governments, a joint powers agency consisting of the city, the county of San Diego, and the eighteen cities situated in San Diego County.

     “Single-family residential unit” means each residential dwelling unit in a development on property, which, under the current city land use plan, special treatment area or any specific plan, is designated as RL, RLM, and RM, zones found in Chapter 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, with or without any overlay, or equivalent. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.040 Establishment of the transportation uniform mitigation fee.
     A.    Adoption. The schedule of fees shall be adopted by resolution approved by the city council (“resolution”).

     B.     Fee Calculation. The fees shall be calculated according to the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, as may be amended from time to time. The Nexus Study is applicable to specific residential construction impacts in Lemon Grove, including but not limited to those referenced in Table A1 of the Study within the boundaries of the city. Nothing herein prevents the city from collecting fees pursuant to any other fee program for other impacts from residential or nonresidential development not specifically addressed in the Nexus Study for other infrastructure within the city. The amount of fees adopted under this chapter may also exceed the amount allowed by the Nexus Study based on further studies prepared by the city or SANDAG that justifies an increased amount.

     C.     Fee Adjustment. The fee schedule may be periodically reviewed and the amounts adjusted by the San Diego County regional transportation commission. By amendment to the resolution, the fees may be increased or decreased to reflect changes in actual and estimated costs of the regional arterial system including, but not limited to, debt service, lease payments and construction costs. The adjustment of the fees may also reflect changes in the facilities required to be constructed, in estimated revenues received pursuant to this chapter, as well as the availability or lack thereof of other funds with which to construct the regional arterial system. SANDAG shall review the RTCIP fee program no less than every ten years after July 1, 2009

     D.    Purpose. The purpose of the RTCIP fee is to fund those certain improvements to the regional arterial system identified in the Nexus Study.

     E.     Applicability. The RTCIP shall apply to all new development projects within the City, which include the development of one or more residential dwelling units, unless otherwise exempted by the provision of this chapter.

     F.     Exemptions. The following new development shall be exempt from the Lemon Grove regional transportation congestion improvement program (“RTCIP”) fee:

     1.     Low income residential housing;

     2.     Government/public buildings, public schools and public facilities;

     3.     The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing residential dwelling unit;

     4.     All new, rehabilitated, and/or reconstructed nonresidential structures;

     5.     Development projects which are the subject of a public facilities development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq., prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited; provided however that, if the term of such a development agreement is extended by amendment or by any other manner after July 1, 2008, the RTCIP fee shall be imposed;

     6.     Guest dwellings, as defined in Title 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code;

     7.     Kennels and catteries established in connection with an existing residential unit and as defined in Title 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code;

     8.     The sanctuary building and/or meeting hall of a church, mosque, synagogue, or other house of worship, eligible for a property tax exemption;

     9.     Residential units that have been issued a building permit prior to July 1, 2008; and

     10.   Condominium conversions.

     G.    Credit. Regional arterial system improvements may be credited toward the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan and the following:

     1.     Regional Tier.

     a.     Arterial Credits. If a developer funds or constructs arterial improvements identified on SANDAG’s regional arterial system and/or that arise out of SANDAG’s congestion management program, the developer shall receive credit for all costs associated with the arterial improvements, offsetting the revenue requirements of the RTCIP administrative plan.

     b.     Other Credits. In special circumstances, when a developer constructs off-site improvements such as an interchange, bridge, or railroad grade separation, credits shall be determined by the city in consultation with the developer.

     c.     The amount of the development fee credit shall not exceed the revenue requirements of the city’s most current funding program (determined by the most current unit cost assumptions) for its share of the regional arterial system or actual costs, whichever is less.

     2.     Local Tier.

     a.     The city shall compare facilities in local fee programs against the regional arterial system and eliminate any overlap in its local fee program except where there is a recognized financing district has been established.

     b.     If there is a recognized financing district established, the city may credit that portion of the facility identified in both programs against the RTCIP fee in accordance with the RTCIP administrative plan. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.050 Reimbursements.
     Should a developer construct regional arterial system improvements in excess of the RTCIP fee obligation, the developer may be reimbursed based on actual costs or the approved unit cost assumptions, whichever is less. Reimbursements shall be enacted through a three party agreement including the developer, SANDAG and the city, contingent on funds being available. In all cases, however, reimbursements under such special agreements must coincide with construction of the transportation improvements as scheduled in the five-year capital improvements program adopted annually by SANDAG. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.060 Procedures for the levy, collection and disposition of fees.
     A.    Authority of the Public Works Department. The director of public works, or his or her designee, is authorized to levy and collect the RTCIP fee and make all determinations required by this chapter.

     B.     Payment. Payment of the fees shall be as follows:

     1.     The fees shall be paid at the time a certificate of occupancy is issued for the development project or upon final inspection, whichever come first (the “payment date”). However, this section should not be construed to prevent payment of the fees prior to issuance of an occupancy permit or final inspection. Fees may be paid at the time application is made for a building permit and the fee payment shall be calculated based on the fee in effect at that time, provided the developer tenders the full amount of his or her RTCIP fee obligation. If the developer makes only a partial payment prior to the payment date, the amount of the fee due shall be based on the RTCIP fee schedule in place on the payment date. The fees shall be calculated according to fee schedule set forth in the resolution and the calculation methodology set forth in Table 11 of the Nexus Study, in effect on the payment date.

     2.     The fees required to be paid shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time of payment is due under this chapter, not the date the ordinance approving this chapter is initially adopted. The city shall not enter into a development agreement, which freezes future adjustments of the TUMF.

     3.     If all or part of any development project is sold prior to payment of the fee, the property shall continue to be subject to the requirement for payment of the fee. Accordingly, the fees shall run with the land.

     4.     Fees shall not be waived.

     C.     Disposition of Fees. All fees collected hereunder shall be transmitted to a fund established and designated by the city for deposit, investment, accounting and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act.

     D.    Appeals. Appeals shall be filed with the city council in accordance with the provisions of RTCIP administrative plan and administrative rules adopted by resolution of the city council. Issues subject to appeal shall be the application of the fee, application of credits, application of reimbursement, application of the legal action stay and application of exemption.

     E.     Reports to SANDAG. The finance director, or his or her designee, shall prepare and deliver to the executive director of SANDAG and to the independent taxpayer oversight committee (ITOC), periodic reports as will be established under Section 15.52.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

 

15.52.070 Appointment of the RTCIP fee administrator.
     A.    The director of public works is appointed as the administrator of the transportation uniform mitigation fee program. He or she or designee is authorized to receive all fees generated from the RTCIP fee within the city, and to invest, account for and expend such fees in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and the Mitigation Fee Act. The detailed administrative procedures concerning the implementation of this chapter shall be contained in the RTCIP administrative plan. Furthermore, the RTCIP administrator shall use the Nexus Study for the purpose of calculating a developer’s RTCIP fee obligation. In addition to detailing the methodology for calculating all RTCIP fee obligations of different categories of new development, the purpose of the Nexus Study is to clarify for the RTCIP administrator, where necessary, the definition and calculation methodology for uses not clearly defined in this chapter.

     B.     SANDAG shall expend only that amount of the funds generated from the RTCIP fee for staff support, audit, administrative expenses, and contract services that are necessary and reasonable to carry out its responsibilities and in no case shall the funds expended for salaries and benefits exceed two percent of the annual net amount of revenue raised by the RTCIP fee. The RTCIP administrative plan further outlines the fiscal responsibilities and limitations of the administrator. (Ord. 372 § 2, 2008)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.08 FEES AND DEPOSITS
Chapter 16.12 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.16 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.17 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
Chapter 16.20 ENFORCEMENT

Chapter 16.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.04.010 Citation.
     This title shall be known and cited as the subdivision ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove or as this title.

 

16.04.020 Compliance.
     No person shall create a subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this title.

 

16.04.030 Application of subdivision map act.
     Except as otherwise expressly provided in this title, all of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act which apply to subdivisions as defined in that Act, and all of the provisions of this title apply to subdivisions as defined in this title. This title shall be inapplicable to:

     A.    The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within a duplex, multiple dwelling, apartment building, industrial building, commercial building, mobile home park or trailer park;

     B.     Mineral, oil or gas leases;

     C.     Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code of the state.

 

16.04.040 Extent of regulations.
     No real property, improved or unimproved, consisting of a single unit or two or more contiguous units and owned by the same person or persons shall be divided into two or more lots, including any lot retained by the owner, except in accordance with the provision of this title.

 

16.04.050 Advisory agency designation.
     A.    Major Subdivisions. The planning commission is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, for major subdivisions and shall have the authority to perform the actions as set forth in Section 16.12.260 of this title. The planning commission may prescribe, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations as are necessary or advisable with respect to the form and content of tentative maps required by the Subdivision Map Act or this title and the data to be furnished with such tentative maps.

     B.     Minor Subdivisions. The planning director is designated as the advisory agency, as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, for minor subdivisions and shall have the authority to perform the actions as set forth in Section 16.16.360 of this title. The planning director may prescribe, subject to the approval of the city council, such rules and regulations as are necessary or advisable with respect to the form and content of tentative parcel maps required by this title. Also, the planning director, subject to the approval of the city council, may prescribe rules and regulations as to the form and content of adjustment plats and the data to be filed with such plats.

 

16.04.060 Environmental impact review.
     All tentative maps and tentative parcel maps shall be subject to environmental review in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the city council pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended. Consequently, decisions to approve, conditionally approve or deny any tentative map or tentative parcel map shall be subject to the following:

     A.    Tentative Maps.

     1.     Negative Declaration. Upon receipt of a negative declaration with respect to any tentative map, the planning commission, or on appeal the city council, may proceed to consider the tentative map without an environmental impact report.

     2.     Environmental Impact Report. With respect to any tentative map for which an environmental impact report is required, the planning commission, or on appeal the city council, shall consider such report as independent evidence in determining whether to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative map. In addition to any other discretion granted by law, the planning commission, or on appeal, the city council, shall have the authority to consider the adequacy of the environmental impact report and refer it back to the planning director for preparation of a supplementary report in any case in which such report is deemed necessary for a decision on the tentative map. In cases where a proposal has changed substantially since the time of initial review, such director or commission or council may require a supplementary environmental impact report.

     B.     Tentative Parcel Maps.

     1.     Negative Declaration. Upon receipt of a negative declaration with respect to any tentative parcel map, the planning director, or on appeal, the planning commission or city council, may proceed to consider the tentative parcel map without an environmental impact report.

     2.     Environmental Impact Report. With respect to any tentative parcel map for which an environmental impact report is required, the planning director, or on appeal, the planning commission or city council, shall consider such report as independent evidence in determining whether to approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map. In addition to any other discretion granted by law, the planning commission, or on appeal, the city council, shall have the authority to consider the adequacy of the environmental impact report and refer it back to the planning director for preparation of a supplementary report in any case in which such report is deemed necessary for a decision on the tentative map. In cases where a proposal has changed substantially since the time of initial review, such director or commission or council may require a supplementary environmental impact report.

 

16.04.070 Security for payment of taxes and special assessments—Release.
     Whenever security is filed with the city council pursuant to Section 66493 of the Government Code to secure the payment of taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien on the property to be subdivided but not yet payable, the city clerk, upon notification by the tax collector that the total amount of such taxes or special assessments have been paid in full, may release the security.

 

16.04.080 Definitions.
     A.    Meaning. Words used in this title that are defined in the Subdivision Map Act but not specifically defined in this chapter, shall have the same meaning as is given to them in the Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the following words are used in this title, they shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this chapter.

     B.     Listing.

     1.     “Adjustment plat” means a plat prepared pursuant to Article III of Chapter 16.16 of this title and certified by the planning director as having been approved pursuant to this title and filed in the planning department.

     2.     “Bicycle” means a device, upon which any person may ride, propelled by human power through a belt, chain or gears, and having either two or three wheels in a tandem or tricycle arrangement.

     3.     “Bicycle route” means the generic term for all facilities that explicitly provide for bicycle travel by a course which is to be traveled.

     4.     “Cable television lines” means electronic cable, conduit, and any other appurtenances thereto, which distribute television signals.

     5.     “Certificate of compliance” means a document describing a unit or contiguous units of real property and stating that the division thereof complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto.

     6.     “City standards” means those standards and specifications, including standard drawings, as may be adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. These standards are to be on file in the office of the city clerk.

     7.     “Director of public health” means the city manager or a designee.

     8.     “Filing date” means the date on which a tentative map or tentative parcel map receives a negative declaration or notice of completion from the planning director. The time limits specified in the Subdivision Map Act for reporting and acting on maps shall commence with the filing date as defined above.

     9.     “Fire marshal” means that person designated by the city council, pursuant to Section 2.12.020 of this code.

     10.   “Improvement” means:

     a.     Such street work and utilities, including street lights and walkways, to be installed or agreed to be installed by the subdivider on land to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements, as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic, drainage, flood control, fire protection and sanitation needs as a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map or final map.

     b.     Such other specific improvements or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the city or by a combination thereof, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the general plan required by Article 5 (commencing with Section 65300) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code, or any specific plan adopted pursuant to Article 8 (commencing with Section 65450) of Chapter 3 of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code.

     11. a. “Lease” means and includes an oral, as well as a written lease, tenancy at will, month-to-month or similar tenancy.

     b.     This title shall not apply to the leasing of apartments, offices, stores or similar space within an apartment building, industrial building, commercial building, or trailer park, except as provided in subsection 12 of this section, nor shall this title apply to mineral, oil or gas leases. Except in the case of subdivisions, as defined by Section 66424 of the Subdivision Map Act, the provisions of this title shall not apply to short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined as such by Section 230 of the Public Utilities Code.

     12.   “Lease project” means a development wherein two or more residential or commercial buildings are constructed and maintained on a parcel of land and apartments, offices, stores or similar space are leased within one or more of the buildings, overall control of the land and buildings comprising the project being retained by the lessor. The following shall not be included when computing the number of buildings within a lease project:

     a.     Accessory or satellite buildings;

     b.     Parking structures;

     c.     Commercial buildings having a floor area of less than four hundred square feet.

     13.   “Lot” means a lot, parcel or tract of real property.

     14.   “Lot area” means the horizontal areas within the boundary lines of a lot exclusive of:

     a.     The area of any street right-of-way or road easement;

     b.     Any flood control easement or walkway which, as a condition of approval of the subdivision map on which the lot is shown, must be fenced; and

     c.     Any portion of the lot which is less than thirty-five feet wide for a distance of fifty feet or more and which is designed or used to provide vehicular or pedestrian access to the part of such lot which is designed for use as a building site.

     15.   “Major subdivision” means a subdivision of five or more lots.

     16.   “Minor subdivision” means a subdivision of four or fewer lots.

     17.   “Notice of violation” means a document describing a unit or contiguous units of real property, naming the owners thereof, and describing the manner in which such real property has been divided, or has resulted from a division, in violation of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto.

     18.   “Parcel map” means a map prepared pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 66444), Chapter 2, Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code (Subdivision Map Act).

     19.   “Planning director” means the community development director of the city.

     20.   “Remainder parcel” means the largest of four or fewer lots created by the division of an original lot or parcel, which largest lot contains a gross area equal to or greater than the sum of the areas of the other lot or lots created, but not less than forty acres.

     21.   “Street” means all highways, streets, roads, and alleys both public and private, as well as public and private easements for ingress and egress.

     22.   “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who proposes to divide, divides or causes to be divided real property into a subdivision for himself or for others except that employees and consultants of such persons or entities, acting in such capacity are not subdividers.

     23.   “Subdivision” means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or units improved or unimproved land, or any portion thereof, shown on the latest equalized county assessment roll as a unit or as contiguous units, for the purposes of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future, except for leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if separated by roads, streets, utility easements or railroad rights-of-way. “Freeway,” as defined in Section 23.5 of the Streets and Highways Code, shall not be considered as roads or streets for the purpose of interpreting this section. Subdivision includes a condominium project, as defined in Section 1350 of the Civil Code, a community apartment project, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code, or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code. As used in this section, “agricultural purposes” means the cultivation of food or fiber or the grazing or pasturing of livestock.

     24.   “Subdivision Map Act” means the Subdivision Map Act as set forth in Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the state of California.

     25.   “Tentative map” means a map made for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed subdivision and the existing conditions in and around it and need not be based upon an accurate or detailed final survey of the property.

     26.   “Tentative parcel map” means a map prepared for the purpose of showing the design and improvement of a proposed minor subdivision.

     27.   “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or nearly parallel streets.

     28.   “Vesting tentative map” means a tentative map for a subdivision which conforms with all applicable requirements of the State Subdivision Map Act and the city subdivision ordinance, and confers upon the subdivider certain rights established by the city subdivision ordinance.

     29.   “Vesting tentative parcel map” means a vesting tentative map prepared in conjunction with a parcel map.

Chapter 16.08 FEES AND DEPOSITS
16.08.010 Establishment of fees and deposits.
     The amount of any fee or deposit required in accordance with this chapter shall be established by resolution of the city council, which may revise such amount from time to time as is appropriate. Such fees and deposits shall be sufficient to compensate the city fully for the actual costs of conducting the applicable inspection, review, processing or other activity, as specified in this chapter.

 

16.08.020 Refund of deposit.
     If the actual costs of conducting a particular subdivision processing activity are less than the amount paid, then a refund shall be authorized to the subdivider for the excess amount.

 

16.08.030 Insufficient deposit.
     If the actual costs of conducting a particular subdivision processing activity exceed the amount paid, then the subdivider shall pay an amount deemed sufficient to cover the remainder of costs. If the subdivider fails or refuses to pay such amount upon demand, the city may recover the same by action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such amount is paid in full, the particular processing activity shall not be completed, nor any related materials released, nor any additional processing activity conducted.

 

16.08.040 Deposit and refund procedure.
     All deposits made will be deposited in the name of the owner or subdivider. All notices for additional deposits or refunds will be sent to the owner or subdivider of record. No refunds will be made until all engineering, construction of improvements, plans, maps, documents and reports are approved, and/or accepted and/or recorded as required in this title. However, a letter from the owner or subdivider to the city engineer stating that the project has been cancelled prior to the recording of the parcel map with the county recorder, or approval of the final subdivision map by the city council, shall release all moneys eligible for refund. No refunds shall be made to any other than the owner or subdivider or his/her legal representative.

 

16.08.050 Future street exclusion.
     When computing fees and charges to be imposed in accordance with this chapter, which are based upon the number of parcels and lots or total site area, any streets, lots, parcels or other areas which are reserved for future street or other right-of-way development, shall not be considered.

 

16.08.060 Fees and deposit categories.
     A.    Filing of Tentative Map. At the time of filing a tentative map with the planning commission, there shall be paid to the planning department tentative map examination fees and deposits as follows:

     1.     A fee for each tentative map; plus

     2.     A fee based upon the number of lots or acres within the tract divided by the tentative map, whichever produces the larger fee; plus

     3.     A deposit to pay for the actual costs incurred by the city engineer in reviewing, investigating and making recommendations on the tentative map, including the cost of determining the need for a soils engineering report and/or an engineering geology report, the review of any other required reports, and the preparation of all necessary documents related to the tentative map.

     B.     Revision of Tentative Map. At the time of filing a revised tentative map with the planning commission, there shall be paid to the planning department a revised tentative map examination fee as follows:

     1.     For the area or portion thereof included in both the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map and the subdivision shown on the revised tentative map, a fee for such area or portion thereof;

     2.     For any additional area included in the subdivision shown on the revised tentative map, there shall be added a fee for each lot or acre within the additional area. For the purpose of computing this fee, portions of lots included within the additional area shall be regarded as entire lots.

     C.     Expired Tentative Map. At the time of refiling a tentative map after proceedings thereon have been terminated by reason of expiration of two years from the date of approval or conditional approval of such tentative map, a new tentative map filing fee shall be paid to the planning department.

     D.    Final Map Examination. A deposit shall be paid to the city engineer to cover the actual costs to the city of examining and certifying final maps, including the review of any required reports and the preparation of all necessary documents.

     E.     Parcel Map Examination. A deposit shall be paid to the city engineer to cover the actual costs to the city for examining, certifying, and recording parcel maps, including the review of any required reports and the preparation of all necessary documents, and including the fee required for filing the parcel map in the office of the county recorder.

     F.     Tentative and Tentative Parcel Map—Improvement Inspection. All construction and installation of improvements shall be subject to inspection by the city engineer or other appropriate department, and the subdivider shall arrange for such inspection prior to starting construction or installation of the improvement. A deposit shall be paid to cover the actual costs to the city in examining improvement plans and inspecting improvements and monuments. Before submitting improvement plans for examination, the subdivider shall deposit with the city engineer a sum estimated by the city engineer to be sufficient to cover such actual costs.

     G.    Other Tentative Parcel Map Fees and Deposits.

     1.     Planning Department Examination Fee. At the time of submission of a tentative parcel map, there shall be paid to the planning director examination fees as follows:

     a.     A fee for each tentative parcel map; plus

     b.     A fee based upon the number of lots shown thereon; plus

     c.     A deposit to pay for the actual costs incurred by the city engineer in reviewing, investigating and making recommendations on the tentative parcel map, including the cost of determining the need for a soils engineering report and/or an engineering geology report, the review of any other required reports and the preparation of all necessary documents related to the tentative parcel map.

     2.     Revision Fee. A fee shall be paid at the time of submitting a revised tentative parcel map to the planning department.

     3.     Expiration Fee. A fee shall be paid at the time of refiling a tentative parcel map which has expired.

     4.     City Engineer Examination Fee. At the time of submission of a tentative parcel map, there shall be paid an examination fee to the city engineer for review of drainage impact.

     5.     Amendment to Final Notice of Approval Fee. A fee shall be paid upon the submission of a written request to the planning director for an amendment to a condition of approval on the final notice of approval of a tentative parcel map.

     6.     Appeal Fee. A fee shall be paid to the planning director upon the filing of any appeal allowed under this title with respect to a tentative parcel map.

     H.    Adjustment Plat. At the time of filing an adjustment plat, an examination fee shall be paid to the city for each such plat.

Chapter 16.12 MAJOR SUBDIVISIONS
Article I. Tentative Maps
16.12.010 Tentative map required.
     A.    Any person proposing to create a major subdivision shall file a tentative map pursuant to this chapter. The city council shall not approve a final map, unless prior thereto, a tentative map of the subdivision, shown thereon, has been filed with and reported on by the planning commission.

     B.     Where a parcel map is authorized for a major subdivision, pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the city engineer shall not approve such map, unless prior thereto, a tentative map of the subdivision, shown thereon, has been filed with and reported on by the planning commission.

 

16.12.020 Tentative map form and content.
     A.    All tentative maps shall be prepared by or under the direction of a California-registered civil engineer or a California-licensed land surveyor and shall display such engineer’s or surveyor’s license number.

     B.     All tentative maps shall be in the form and shall contain and be accompanied by the data specified by the rules and regulations prescribed by the planning commission and approved by the city council and shall be accompanied by either an environmental impact initial study, or a draft environmental impact report prepared in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the city council pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended.

 

16.12.030 Tentative map required information.
     A tentative map filed pursuant to Section 16.12.010 shall be accompanied by a written statement disclosing the following information:

     A.    The names of all persons having an interest in the application as well as the names of all persons having any ownership interest in the property involved.

     B.     If any person identified pursuant to subsection A of this section is a corporation or partnership, the names of all persons owning more than ten percent of the shares in the corporation or owning any partnership interest in the partnership.

     C.     If any person identified pursuant to subsection A of this section is a nonprofit organization or a trust, the names of any person serving as director of the nonprofit organization or as trustee or beneficiary or trustor of the trust.

 

16.12.040 Tentative map grading plan.
     There shall be filed with each tentative map, a grading plan showing a level of detail and precision as deemed necessary by the city engineer. The grading plan shall also show grading for construction or installation of all improvements to serve the subdivision and feasible grading for the creation of building sites on each lot, together with driveway access thereto. In the event the subdivider does not intend to grade the building sites as part of the improvements, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the tentative map; provided however, this provision shall not be construed as relieving the subdivider of the obligation of providing a feasible grading plan showing building sites, unless the planning director determines this to be unnecessary.

 

16.12.041 Soil stability survey report.
     There shall be filed with each tentative map, a soils and geologic survey report of the subject property conducted by a competent individual or firm. This soils and geologic survey report shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the following: the name(s) and license and/or registration number(s) of the person(s) or firm preparing the soils and geologic survey, a brief description of the proposed project and project location, a description of the methodology used to perform the field investigation, laboratory test results, if applicable, a map of this project site clearly indicating topography, boring sites, soils types found on the property, and any other appropriate information. This report shall also include the existence of faults, landslides, or other geologic phenomena, conclusions, and recommendations regarding grading and site preparation for the proposed construction, the type of footings or foundations capable of supporting any proposed structures and measures necessary to provide adequate project site drainage. Additional information is necessary to adequately address potential soils and geologic problems affecting the proposed subdivision.

 

16.12.050 Tentative map revision.
     A.    Where a subdivider desires to revise or alter a proposed subdivision for which a tentative map has been approved by the planning commission or the city council, the subdivider may file with the planning commission a revised tentative map on payment of the fee prescribed in Chapter 16.08 of this title.

     B.     A revised tentative map shall conform to the following requirements:

     1.     The proposed subdivision shown on such map shall generally conform to the street and lot pattern shown on the approved tentative map.

     2.     The proposed subdivision shown on each map shall include only one contiguous area consisting of all or a portion of the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map, together with such additional land, if any, as the subdivider desires to include.

     3.     The map shall contain all of the information required on tentative maps and shall be accompanied by such data as is required to be filed with tentative maps.

     C.     A revised tentative map may be filed within two years after the approval of the tentative map by the planning commission or city council, or if an extension of time is granted, within the period specified.

     D.    Upon the filing of a revised tentative map and payment of the prescribed fee, such revised tentative map shall be treated in all respects as an original tentative map and shall be reported on approved, conditionally approved, or disapproved in the same manner as a tentative map; provided however, that the subdivider shall have two years from the approval or conditional approval of the original tentative map within which to record a final map, which two-year period may be extended by the planning commission or city council, such extension not to exceed two years, pursuant to Section 16.12.070.

     E.     Nothing in this section shall be construed as a limitation on the power of the city council or planning commission to approve alterations of a tentative map approved by such council or commission, or to modify conditions imposed as a part of the approval of a tentative map.

 

16.12.060 Tentative map replacement.
     A replacement tentative map shall be submitted when the planning commission finds that the number or nature of the changes necessary for conditional approval are such that they can be shown more clearly and simply by such a map.

 

16.12.070 Tentative map expiration.
     A.    Time Limit. Within the time limits specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6 and 66452.13 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps, in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved, the subdivider must cause the subdivision, or any part thereof, to be surveyed and a final map to be prepared in accordance with the tentative map as approved or conditionally approved and in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title, or the tentative map shall expire.

     B.     Extension. Prior to the expiration of the time limits specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6 and 66452.13 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps, in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved, the subdivider may file with the planning commission a written application for an extension, and the planning commission, or on appeal, the city council may, at any time, within ninety days of the expiration of the time limit, grant an extension not exceeding the time limits for such extensions specified by Sections 66452.11, 66425.6 and 66452.13 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps. In the event the planning commission denies a subdivider’s application for extension, the subdivider may file an appeal to the city council within fifteen days of the denial. Following the hearing on an appeal from the decision of the planning commission, the city council shall grant or deny the extension, or grant the extension subject to specified conditions.

 

16.12.080 Tentative map refiling.
     A.    Where a subdivider desires to refile a tentative map, after proceedings thereon have terminated by reason of the expiration of two years from the date of approval or conditional approval of such tentative map, and no extension of the tentative map expiration date was requested within the two-year time period, such tentative map may be refiled with the planning commission upon payment of the fee prescribed in Chapter 16.08 of this title, provided the planning director determines that all of the following conditions are present.

     1.     No part of the land included within the subdivision shown on the approved tentative map has been sold or transferred.

     2.     Establishment of the street pattern or lot design shown on the approved tentative map has not been made impractical or impossible by the installation of utilities, establishment of easements or rights-of-way, or the construction or establishment of buildings or structures on land within the subdivision or adjacent thereto.

     3.     No final map or parcel map conflicting with the design shown on the approved tentative map has been recorded or filed for record.

     4.     Establishment of the street pattern or lot design shown on the approved tentative map has not been made impractical or impossible by the approval of any other tentative map.

     5.     No plan or ordinance has been adopted, no regulation established and no annexation to the city has taken place since the approval or conditional approval of the approved tentative map which would require any change in the size, shape or design of the lots, or the location, alignment, width or improvement of the streets within the subdivision or adjacent to the boundaries thereof.

     6.     No inspection of the property by any city officer or department will be required other than to determine that the above enumerated conditions are present.

     7.     No more than two and one-half years shall have elapsed since the date on which the approved tentative map was approved or conditionally approved.

     B.     The planning director may require an affidavit of the subdivider that the conditions specified in subsection A of this section are true.

     C.     A tentative map filed pursuant to this section shall expire two and one-half years from the date on which the first tentative map was approved or conditionally approved.

 

Article II. Final Maps
16.12.090 Final map conformance.
     Within the time limits specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66463.5 and 66452.13 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term to tentative maps in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved, the subdivider may file with the city engineer a parcel map in substantial conformance with the tentative parcel map as approved or conditionally approved, and in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title; provided, however, that if prior to the expiration of the time limits for the extensions specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66463.13 and 66452.5 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps the subdivider filed with the planning director, or, on appeal the planning commission or city council, may at any time within ninety days of the expiration of the time limits by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66452.13 and 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved. In the event the planning director denied a subdivider’s request for extension of time, the subdivider may appeal to the planning commission. An appeal of a decision of the planning commission may be filed with the city council within fifteen days of the decision.

 

16.12.100 Final map approval as to form.
     All final maps filed with or submitted to the city council shall be first submitted to the city attorney and approved as to form by the city attorney.

 

16.12.110 Waiver of final map.
     Unless otherwise provided in this title, a final subdivision map shall be prepared and filed pursuant to an approved tentative map for every major subdivision. However, in lieu of filing a final map, unless otherwise required by the Subdivision Map Act, a parcel map in the form specified in Article II of Chapter 16.16 may be filed pursuant to an approved tentative map when any of the following conditions prevail:

     A.    The land before division contains less than five acres, each parcel created by the division abuts upon a maintained public street or highway and no dedications or improvements are required by the planning commission or, in the event of an appeal, the city council.

     B.     The land consists of a parcel or parcels of land having approved access to a public street or highway which comprises part of a tract of land zoned for industrial or commercial development and which has the approval of the planning commission or, in the event of an appeal, the city council as to street alignments and widths, and no dedication is required by the planning commission or, in the event of an appeal, the city council.

 

16.12.120 Final map required information.
     Every final map shall include the following information.

     A.    Contain a general description of the land subdivided by references to recorded deeds, recorded maps and official United States surveys. Reference to tracts, recorded deeds and recorded maps shall be spelled out, worded identically with original records and show the book and page of records or map numbers.

     B.     Show the basis of bearings used, and the north point of the map on each sheet thereof.

     C.     Show all easements to which the land is subject or is to be subjected.

     D.    Clearly indicate existing monuments found, and describe them.

     E.     Show the area of all parcels.

     F.     Clearly indicate, by description or a distinctive boundary line, any area subject to flooding at times of heavy rainfall, and state that such area is subject to flooding at times of heavy rainfall. Such areas shall be fixed by the planning commission or the city council at the time the tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

     G.    Show a solid line, separating from public streets and all private ways, easements and other rights-of-way not to be accepted as public streets and shown on the map, and clearly designate their nature and the manner in which the right-of-way is reserved or granted.

     H.    Show the tract number assigned by the planning department for the subdivision on every sheet of the map. If the tentative map contains two or more units and the final map is to be filed separately by unit, the tract number shall also contain a numerical unit suffix assigned by the planning department. Such tract number shall be the only designated name of the subdivision appearing on the map, and shall be preceded by the words “City of Lemon Grove Tract.”

 

16.12.130 Final map soil reports.
     When a soil report of the soil conditions within a subdivision has been prepared prior to the approval of the final map by the city engineer, that fact, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report, shall be noted on the final map or on a separate document recorded concurrently with the final map. Where a separate document is used, reference to the document shall be made on the face of the final map.

 

16.12.140 Required offer of dedication.
     As a condition precedent to the approval by the city council of any final map, all parcels of land shown thereon and intended for any public use shall be offered for dedication for public use, except those parcels, other than streets, intended for the exclusive use of the lot owners in the subdivision, their licensees, visitors, tenants and servants.

 

16.12.150 Grant of open space easement.
     In the event that a grant of an open space easement is to be made over any portion of the subdivision, the final map shall contain a certificate signed and acknowledged by those parties having any record title interest in the subdivided land granting such open space easement and stating the conditions of the grant.

 

16.12.160 Additional certificates.
     In addition to certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, every final map shall bear the following certificates or endorsements.

     A.    A certificate by the city treasurer and the city engineer to the effect that there are no unpaid special assessments or bonds shown by the records in their offices against the subdivision or any part thereof.

     B.     A certificate by the city clerk that the provisions of Division 2, Title 7 of the Government Code have been complied with regarding deposits for taxes on the property within the subdivision.

     C.     Certificate of the county recorder as to the filing of the map.

     D.    A certificate by the engineer who performed any percolation test which is required by this title, identifying those lots on which percolation tests were performed. If percolation tests were performed on less than all of the lots, a certificate of the health officer, approving such waiver or modification of the percolation testing requirement, shall be included.

 

16.12.170 Title company certificate and report.
     A.    Every final map submitted to the city council shall bear the certificate of a qualified title company that the parties who executed the owners certificate required by Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act are all the parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided, or a reference shall be made to a separate document bearing the certificate that is recorded concurrently with the final map. The certificate shall also set forth the names of the parties owning the interest set forth in Section 66436 of the Act, together with a description of the interests and the reasons the parties did not execute the owners certificate.

     B.     The city clerk shall notify the title company making such certificate of the date the final map will be transmitted to the county recorder. Such notification shall be made at least forty-eight hours before such date. The title company shall, on the date, present to the county recorder, a letter stating that on such date the names of the parties and the other facts set forth in the title company’s certificate were the same as shown by the certificate.

 

16.12.180 Title company subdivision guarantee.
     A.    In lieu of the title company certificate required by Section 16.12.170, there may be filed with the city engineer a subdivision guarantee from a qualified title insurance company which guarantees that the parties named therein are the only parties having any record title interest in the land subdivided.

     B.     The owner’s certificate required by Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act shall bear the signatures of all parties owning any record title interest in the land subdivided, except those which have been omitted pursuant to Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act. The names of any parties, who own interests described in Section 66436 of the Subdivision Map Act and who have not signed the owners certificate, shall be set forth in the owners certificate together with a description of their respective interests and reasons why they have not signed the certificate.

     C.     The city clerk shall notify the title company furnishing the subdivision guarantee of the date the final map will be transmitted to the county recorder. Such notification shall be made at least forty-eight hours before such date. The title company shall, on such date, present to the county recorder, pursuant to the requirements of Section 66465 of the Subdivision Map Act, a letter stating that, at the time of filing of the final or parcel map in the office of the county recorder, the parties consenting to such filing are all of the parties having a record title interest in the real property being subdivided, whose signatures are required by Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, as shown by the records in the office of the county recorder.

 

16.12.190 Stamping or printing of certificates.
     The affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments and approvals required or permitted by this article or the Subdivision Map Act to appear upon maps may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink in such a manner as will guarantee a permanent record in black upon the tracing cloth or polyester base film. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

 

16.12.200 Agreement to improve.
     A.    Plans and Specifications. Where the subdivider elects to agree to construct improvements or, if authorized by the city council, to contract to initiate and consummate special assessment district proceedings in lieu of constructing improvements, all as provided in Section 66462 of the Subdivision Map Act, he shall prepare and deposit with the city clerk, detailed plans and specifications of the improvements to be constructed, and such plans and specifications shall be made a part of any such agreement and of the improvement security.

     B.     Subdivision Improvement Agreement. Prior to the approval by the city council of the final subdivision or parcel map filed in lieu of a final map, the subdivider shall execute and file an agreement with the city, which agreement shall specify the period within which the subdivider shall complete all improvement work to the satisfaction of the city engineer, and providing that if the subdivider fails to complete such work within such period, the city may complete the improvement work and recover the full cost and expense thereof from the subdivider. This agreement shall also provide for inspection of all improvements by the city engineer. A fee as set by resolution of the city council must be paid by the subdivider for the cost of such inspection. The subdivision improvement agreement and the form of security to be employed shall be approved by the city attorney.

     C.     Subdivision Improvement Security. To guarantee the performance of any action or agreement with regard to the proposed subdivision, security shall be furnished as follows:

     1.     A faithful performance security for the purpose of subdivision improvement set at an amount determined by the city engineer equal to one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement.

     2.     A labor and materials security furnished as an additional amount determined by the city engineer equal to fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement, or the performance of the required act, securing payment to the contractor, his subcontractors, and to persons furnishing labor, materials, or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act.

     3.     The monumentation agreements shall be accomplished by a faithful performance security in a sum equal to the cost of setting such monuments, guaranteeing the faithful performance of all such work of setting monuments and furnishing notes.

     D.    Improvement Security Release.

     1.     Ninety percent of the faithful performance subdivision improvement security shall be released upon completion and acceptance of the work required under the agreement for the guarantee and warranty of the work. The remaining ten percent of the faithful performance subdivision improvement security shall continue in effect for a period of one year following the completion and acceptance of the work.

     2.     The procedure for release shall be a written communication from the city clerk to the subdivider and the maker of the bond or holder of the surety. The city clerk shall make such a release letter only upon the recommendation of the city engineer. Prior to making such a recommendation, the city engineer shall ensure that all actions or improvements affecting other departments or agencies have been properly completed to the satisfaction of such departments or agencies including, but not limited to the planning director and fire chief, and agencies handling water, sewer, electricity, gas and street lighting.

     E.     Forms of Security.

     1.     Cash deposits or acceptable equivalent where the subdivider may deposit with the city a sum of money equal to the required amount of the security for the faithful performance thereof. No separate labor and material bond shall be required when cash surety is used, however, an amount equal to the required labor and material bond will not be released until six months following completion and acceptance of the improvements and then such release will be less any unsettled claim.

     2.     An instrument of credit from one or more financial institutions subject to the regulations by the state or federal government and pledging that the funds necessary to carry out the act or agreement are on deposit and guaranteed for payment.

     3.     Other forms of security will be permitted when approved by the city attorney. These may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, a bond or bonds furnished by a surety company authorized to write such bonds in the state of California, assignment bank or savings and passbook accounts, and completion of proceedings under one of the state Assessment District Acts.

 

16.12.210 Final map approval.
     No final map shall be filed in the office of the county recorder until approved by the city council.

 

16.12.211 Modification of final/parcel map.
     Final/Parcel maps may be amended pursuant to Section 66469 et seq. of the Government Code.

 

Article III. Development Requirements
16.12.220 Design standards.
     All major subdivisions shall conform to the following requirements as to design.

     A.    No lot shall include land in more than a single tax code area.

     B.     Every lot shall contain the minimum lot area specified in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located at the time the final map is submitted to the city council for its approval.

     C.     Every lot shall front on a dedicated street or a street offered for dedication.

     D.    Every lot shall meet the minimum width and depth requirements as specified in the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located.

     E.     Lots, whose side lines are approximately radial to the center of a cul-de-sac or the center of the intersection of two dead-end streets, shall have at least thirty-three feet of frontage measured at the right-of-way line.

     F.     Panhandle-shaped or flag-shaped lots shall have minimum frontage of thirty feet on a dedicated street, except where the panhandle or flagpole portions of two panhandle-shaped or flag-shaped lots are adjacent to one another, in which case each shall have a minimum frontage of twenty feet on a dedicated street.

     G.    Through lots shall not be allowed, unless vehicular access rights are relinquished to one of the abutting streets.

     H.    The side lines of all lots shall be at right angles or radial to the street upon which the lots front with a maximum deviation of up to ten degrees allowed.

     I.      Lot depth shall be no greater than three times the average width.

     J.      Whenever practicable, subdivision of residential property abutting arterial routes shown on the circulation element of the Lemon Grove general plan, railroads, transmission lines and open channels shall be designed so that the lots do not face on such rights-of-way.

     K.    Whenever practicable, side and rear lot lines shall be located along the top of man-made slopes instead of at the toe or at intermediate locations on such slopes.

     L.     Bicycle routes shown on the city’s bicycle master plan shall be included in the subdivision when such routes pass through or abut the subdivision, provided such routes are reasonably related to the traffic caused by the subdivision.

 

16.12.230 Required dedications.
     A.    The subdivider shall offer to dedicate right-of-way for streets within the subdivision in accordance with city standards.

     B.     No final map shall be approved unless the street or streets providing primary access to the subdivision are dedicated to and maintained by a city, county, or state and such street or streets meet city standards of right-of-way width.

     C.     Streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a subdivision shall have a dedicated width of not less than forty feet together with a strip of land one foot wide on its outer edge which shall be offered to the city for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

     D.    All streets proposed to be terminated at the subdivision boundary shall include a strip of land one foot wide across the street at its point of termination at the boundary which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

     E.     All streets entering upon any other street shall have their centerline located directly opposite each other or separated by a minimum of two hundred feet.

     F.     Where it is necessary to extend a street beyond the boundaries of a subdivision to provide adequate circulation for residents of the subdivision, the subdivider shall cause the required easements to be dedicated to the city and shall improve the easements in accordance with city standards.

     G.    Where a drainage facility or flood control facility is necessary for the use of lot owners or for the protection of lots, adequate rights-of-way for such drainage facilities or flood control facilities shall be offered for dedication to the city or to such other public entities as the planning commission designates, and shall be shown on the map.

     H.    Where it is necessary to extend a drainage facility or flood control facility beyond the boundaries of the subdivision for adequate drainage or flood control needs, the required rights-of-way shall be offered for dedication and a note regarding the dedication shall be shown on the map.

     I.      Drainage facilities and flood control facilities within and without the subdivision shall be provided so as to carry storm runoff both tributary to and originating within the subdivision.

     J.      The subdivider shall offer to dedicate land for park purposes, pay fees in lieu thereof, or do a combination of both, pursuant to Chapter 18.36 of the municipal code.

     K.    The subdivider shall offer to dedicate in accordance with city standards the necessary right-of-way for bicycle routes when such routes, as shown on the city’s bicycle master plan, pass through or abut the subdivision.

     L.     Any tentative map, approved subject to the condition that there be dedicated an interest in real property outside the boundaries of the subdivision, shall also be subject to the condition that no grading permit shall be issued pursuant to the tentative map, unless and until either:

     1.     The interests in real property have been acquired by the subdivider or the public agency concerned, in a form satisfactory to the city engineer; or

     2.     The city council has agreed to acquire the interests in real property.

 

16.12.240 Required improvements.
     A.    Before approving a final map the city council shall require and before approving a parcel map of a major subdivision, the city engineer shall require the following improvements:

     1.     That the subdivider grade and improve, or agree to grade and improve, all land dedicated or to be dedicated for streets or easements, bicycle routes, and all private streets and private easements laid out on a final map or parcel map, in such manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the use of the lot owners in the subdivision and locate neighborhood traffic and drainage needs, and in accordance with the city standards.

     2.     That the subdivider install or agree to install all drainage and flood control structure and facilities required by the city engineer, which drainage and flood control structures and facilities shall conform to the city standards.

     3.     That the subdivider provide proof satisfactory to the director of public health that there exists an adequate potable water supply available to each lot or parcel, and that the subdivider install or agree to install water supply pipes of a minimum six inches in diameter, provided that the city engineer may require such other diameter of water supply pipe as may be recommended by the water district serving the subdivision.

     4.     That the subdivider install, or agree to install, as required by the planning commission, fire hydrants and connections, which hydrants and connections shall be of a type approved by the city fire marshal.

     B.     If the city council rejects the offer of dedication of streets delineated on the map pursuant to Section 66477.1 of the Subdivision Map Act, no surfacing shall be required on any street so rejected by the council; provided, however, the city council may require the subdivider to:

     1.     Grade such rejected streets to grades and widths required by the city standards.

     2.     Install all drainage structures and facilities required by the city engineer and which shall conform to the city standards.

     3.     Install water supply pipelines, fire hydrants and connections as may be required by the planning commission or city council.

     C.     All new and existing utility distribution facilities, including cable television lines, within the boundaries of any new subdivision or within any half street abutting a new subdivision shall be placed underground. The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this subsection, and shall make the necessary cable television operators for the installation of such facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other facilities necessarily appurtenant to such underground utilities and street lighting systems may be placed above ground. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to the installation and maintenance of overhead electric transmission lines in excess of thirty four thousand five hundred volts and long distance and trunk communication facilities. The installation of cable television lines may be waived when, in the opinion of the planning commission and upon consideration of a report by the planning director, no license cable television operator is found to be willing and able to install cable television lines in the subdivision.

     D.    The subdivider shall construct or shall cause to be constructed, at his cost, a street lighting system conforming to city standards. This requirement may be waived or modified by the city council.

     E.     Where the city has adopted a flood control element or drainage element of the general plan, wherever possible, any improvements shall conform to such element.

 

16.12.250 Monuments.
     A.    Every final map shall show the following monuments which shall be set by a California-licensed surveyor or California-registered civil engineer. All monuments shall conform to the requirements of Section 8771 et seq. of the Business and Professions Code.

     1.     Boundary Monuments. The exterior boundary of the subdivision shall be monumented with permanent monuments not smaller than two-inch (interior diameter) iron pipes at least twenty-four inches long or equivalent monument of substantial character and to the satisfaction of the city engineer set at each corner, at intermediate points along the boundary, not more than one thousand feet apart, and at the beginning and end points of all curves; provided, if any existing record and identified monument meeting the foregoing requirements is found at any such corner or point, such monument may be used in lieu of a new monument.

     2.     Lot Corner Monuments. All lot corners, except when coincident with exterior boundary corners, shall be monumented with permanent monuments of one of the following types:

     a.     Three-fourth inch diameter iron pipe at least eighteen inches long.

     b.     One-half inch diameter steel rod at least twelve inches long.

     c.     Lead plug and copper identification disks set in concrete sidewalks or curbs.

     3.     Such additional monuments to mark the limiting lines of streets as the city engineer may require.

     4.     All other monuments set or proposed to be set.

     B.     The subdivider shall cause the monuments referred to in subsection A of this section to be set by a California-licensed surveyor or a California-registered civil engineer.

     C.     All monuments and their installation shall conform to the city standards.

     D.    All of the monuments referred to in subsection A of this section shall be set prior to the approval of the map by the city council, unless the setting thereof is deferred in accordance with Section 66496 of the Subdivision Map Act; provided, however, the setting of exterior boundary monuments shall not be deferred, unless the city engineer determines that such monuments might be disturbed by the construction of improvements.

     E.     Where the setting of monuments is deferred following filing of a final map, such monuments shall be set within thirty days after the completion of the required improvements and the acceptance thereof by the city. The setting of monuments shall not be deferred if a parcel map is filed.

 

Article IV. Administration
16.12.260 Planning commission duties.
     The planning commission is authorized and directed to carry out the following actions.

     A.    Provide notice according to the following procedures and conditions:

     1.     Publish notice of the time and place of any public hearing once, in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated within the city, at least ten days before the hearing.

     2.     Notify by mail the owners of property within a radius of three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the property covered by any tentative map that the commission will be considering; the names and addresses of such owners shall be determined according to Section 65905 of the Government Code, and the notices shall be deposited in the United States mail with the postage prepaid not less than ten days prior to the date of such consideration.

     3.     Notice as specified in this subsection shall not be required in cases where the question before the commission is a request for an extension of time for filing a final map or a modification to a previously approved resolution of conditional approval not affecting any design or improvement.

     B.     Investigate each map filed pursuant to this chapter of the Subdivision Map Act, and the improvements proposed to be constructed and installed in or to serve the subdivision; make a report with respect to design and improvements of the subdivision and the kind, nature, an extent of the proposed improvements.

     C.     Obtain the recommendations of the city engineer, director of public health, planning director, or their authorized representatives, with respect to the design of the proposed subdivision and the kind, nature and extent of the proposed improvements; and the city fire marshal with respect to fire hydrants and connections to be installed wherever such installations are proposed.

     D.    Recommend to the city council approval, conditional approval, or disapproval of tentative maps filed pursuant to this title or the Subdivision Map Act within fifty days of the filing date. The time specified in this subsection may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the community development director; however, in no case shall this time period exceed one year from the filing date. The planning commission shall make its findings and determinations for recommending approval, conditional approval, or denial by written resolution and present the same to the council, and shall forthwith transmit a copy thereof to the applicant.

     E.     Where the planning commission recommends approval or conditional approval or denial of the tentative map to the city council, it shall prescribe, pursuant to the provisions of this title, the kind, nature and extent of the improvements to be constructed or installed in or to serve the subdivision for which such tentative map is filed; provided, however, where the planning commission does not prescribe the kind, nature or extent of the improvements to be constructed or installed, improvements shall be constructed and installed in accordance with the city standards.

 

16.12.270 City council assignment of responsibilities.
     A.    The responsibilities set forth in Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1 and 66474.6 of the Government Code, are assigned to the city council with respect to those tentative maps. The planning commission shall make a recommendation to the city council to approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative maps.

     B.     The city council shall hold at least one public hearing on the proposed tentative map, and may approve, modify, or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. The city council shall fix the meeting date at which the tentative map will be considered by them within thirty days after the planning commission recommendation has been filed. The council shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map within that thirty-day period.

     C.     The council may refer any tentative map back to the planning commission for recommendation that has been significantly modified due to new testimony or evidence that was not heard by the commission, but the planning commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing thereon. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after such reference shall be deemed to be a recommendation for approval of the proposed modification. The decision to approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map by the city council is final.

 

16.12.280 Modification of regulations.
     Whenever the planning commission finds with respect to a subdivision or, the council finds that the real property to be divided is of such size or shape, or is subject to such title limitations of record, or is affected by such topographical location or conditions, or is to be devoted to such usage, that it is impossible or impractical in that particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the requirements of this title, the planning commission may recommend to the council that the requirements be waived or modified, or the city council may waive or modify such requirements as it deems reasonably necessary; provided, however, any such waiver or modification shall be in conformity with the spirit and purpose of the Subdivision Map Act and of this title. The planning commission may recommend to council that such requirements be waived or modified, or city council may waive or modify such requirements, upon such reasonable conditions as it deems appropriate.

Chapter 16.16 MINOR SUBDIVISIONS
Article I. Tentative Parcel Maps
16.16.010 Tentative parcel map required.
     A.    Any person proposing to create a minor subdivision pursuant to this title shall file with the planning director a tentative parcel map pursuant to the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, an adjustment plat may be filed in lieu of a tentative parcel map under the conditions specified in Section 16.16.250.

     B.     The city engineer shall not certify a parcel map pursuant to Section 66450 of the Subdivision Map Act, unless, prior thereto, a tentative parcel map of the minor subdivision shown thereon has been filed with and approved by the planning director, or, on appeal, by the planning commission or the city council.

 

16.16.020 Exclusions.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply under the following conditions:

     A.    The conveyance, transfer, creation or establishment of an easement for sewer, water or gas pipelines and appurtenances or electrical or telephone poles and lines or conduit and appurtenances.

     B.     The conveyance or transfer of land or any interest there in by or to the United States, state, county, city, school district, special district or public utility.

 

16.16.030 Tentative parcel map application.
     The subdivider applying for a minor subdivision shall file an application with the planning director. The applications shall be accompanied by a fee as set forth in Chapter 16.08 which will not be refundable, together with copies of a tentative parcel map as required by the planning director, prepared in accordance with the requirements as set forth in Sections 16.04.050(B) and 16.16.040 of this title.

 

16.16.040 Tentative parcel map form and content.
     Such information as may be prescribed by the rules and regulations approved by the city council, and such additional information as the planning director may find necessary with respect to any particular case to implement the provisions of this title, shall accompany the tentative parcel map at the time of submission. The tentative parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a California-registered civil engineer or a California-licensed land surveyor and shall display the engineer’s or surveyor’s license number. In addition, all tentative parcel maps shall be accompanied by either an environmental impact initial study, or a draft environmental impact report prepared in accordance with rules and procedures adopted by the city council, pursuant to the Environmental Quality Act of 1970, as amended.

 

16.16.050 Tentative parcel map grading plan.
     There shall be filed with each tentative parcel map, a grading plan, showing a level of detail and precision as deemed necessary by the city engineer. The grading plan shall also show graded building site elevations and grading proposed for the creation of feasible building sites on each lot, together with driveway access thereto and for construction or installation of improvements. The grading plan together with the original topographical contours may both be shown on the tentative parcel map. In the event no such grading is proposed, a statement to that effect shall be placed on the tentative parcel map; provided, however, this provision shall not be construed as relieving the subdivider of the obligation of providing a feasible grading plan showing building sites, unless the planning director determines this to be unnecessary.

 

16.16.060 Sewer and water availability letters.
     A tentative parcel map will not be accepted for processing until the subdivider submits the following letters referenced by the property owner’s name and assessor’s parcel number, to the planning department.

     A.    A letter from San Diego County department of public works, land development division-permit and project processing center, stating that sewers can and will be installed to each lot.

     B.     A letter from the Helix Water District certifying that water can and will be provided to each lot, at a minimum pressure of twenty-five pounds per square inch.

 

16.16.070 Tentative parcel map revision.
     Where a subdivider desires to revise an approve tentative parcel map, he or she may file with the planning director, prior to the expiration of the approved tentative parcel map, a revised tentative parcel map on payment of the fees specified in Chapter 16.08.

 

16.16.080 Tentative parcel map replacement.
     A replacement tentative parcel map shall be submitted when the planning director finds that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original tentative parcel map.

 

16.16.090 Tentative parcel map expiration.
     Within the time limits specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66463.5 and 66452.13 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps, in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved, the subdivider may file with the city engineer a parcel map in substantial conformance with the tentative parcel map as approved or conditionally approved, and in conformance with the Subdivision Map Act and this title; provided, however, that if prior to the expiration of the time limits for such extensions specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66452.13 and 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps, the subdivider filed with the planning director, or, on appeal the planning commission or city council, may at any time within ninety days of the expiration of the time limits specified by Sections 66452.11, 66452.6, 66452.13 and 66463.5 of the Subdivision Map Act or subsequent revisions thereof, relating to the term of tentative maps, in effect on the date the tentative map is approved, or conditionally approved. In the event the planning director denies a subdivider’s request for an extension of time, the subdivider may appeal to the planning commission. An appeal of a decision of the planning commission may be filed with the city council within fifteen days of the decision.

 

16.16.100 Expired tentative parcel map refiling.
     A.    Where a subdivider desires to refile a tentative parcel map after proceedings thereon have terminated by reason of expiration of twenty-four months from the date of approval or conditional approval, and no extension of the tentative parcel map expiration date was requested within the twenty-four month time period, such tentative parcel map may be refiled upon payment of the fee prescribed in Chapter 16.08 of this title, provided the planning director determines that all of the following conditions are present.

     1.     No part of the land shown on the approved tentative parcel map has been sold or transferred.

     2.     Establishment of the street pattern or lot design shown on the approved tentative parcel map has not been made impractical or impossible by the installation of utilities, establishment of easements or rights-of-way, or the construction or establishment of buildings or structures on land within the map or adjacent thereto.

     3.     No final map or parcel map conflicting with the design or location of streets shown on the approved tentative parcel map has been recorded or filed for record.

     4.     Establishment of the street pattern or lot design shown on the approved tentative parcel map has not been made impractical or impossible by the approval of any other tentative map or tentative parcel map.

     5.     No plan or ordinance has been adopted, no regulation established and no annexation to the city has taken place since the approval or conditional approval of the approved tentative parcel map which would require any change in the size, shape or deign of the lots or the location, alignment, width or improvement of streets within the map or adjacent to the boundaries thereof.

     6.     No inspection of the property by any city officer or department will be required, other than to determine that the above enumerated conditions are present.

     7.     Not more than two and one-half years shall have elapsed since the date on which the approved tentative parcel map was approved or conditionally approved.

     B.     The planning director may require an affidavit of the owner that the conditions specified in subdivisions 1 and 2 of subsection A of this section are true.

     C.     The tentative parcel map filed pursuant to this section shall expire two and one-half years from the date on which the first tentative parcel map was approved.

 

Article II. Parcel Maps
16.16.110 Parcel map requirement.
     No person shall create a minor subdivision, except in accordance with a parcel map approved pursuant to this title and the Subdivision Map Act and filed in the office of the county recorder, unless such requirement for a parcel map is otherwise waived pursuant to Section 16.16.130 of this chapter.

 

16.16.120 Parcel map conformance.
     All parcel maps shall conform to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title and also shall conform to the requirements specified in the report of the planning director approving or conditionally approving the tentative parcel map, unless an appeal is taken by the subdivider to the planning commission or the city council, and the planning commission or city council modifies, rejects or overrules the recommendations of the planning director, in which event the map also shall conform to the requirements of the planning director as modified by the planning commission or city council and the requirements imposed by such commission or council.

 

16.16.130 Waiver of parcel map.
     A.    Other provisions of this title to the contrary notwithstanding, the requirement that a parcel map be prepared, filed with the city engineer, and recorded, may be waived for the following types of minor subdivisions, provided a finding is made by the planning director, or, on appeal, by the planning commission or the city council, that the proposed subdivision complies with the requirements as to area, improvement and design, flood and water drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, environmental protection, and other requirements of this title and the Subdivision Map Act:

     1.     A minor subdivision only for the purpose of leasing the lot resulting from such subdivision.

     2.     A minor subdivision wherein each resulting lot or parcel was previously a legally created separate lot under separate ownership, but which subsequently came into the same ownership as adjoining parcels, such that the total quantity of real property under the same ownership is shown on the latest equalized city assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units.

     B.     An applicant for a subdivision pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section shall file a tentative parcel map pursuant to this article together with a written request that the parcel map requirement be waived.

     C.     An applicant for a subdivision pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section shall pay the fee prescribed by Chapter 16.08 for tentative parcel maps and shall file an application and request for parcel map waiver, which shall contain sufficient information in the opinion of the planning director, to enable the planning director, or, on appeal, the planning commission or the city council, to make the finding required by subsection A of this section. The processing of any application pursuant to subsection (A)(2) of this section shall be subject to the same time requirements and appeal procedures as are provided in this chapter for tentative parcel maps.

     D.    In any case where waiver of the parcel map is granted by the planning director, or, on appeal, by the planning commission or city council, the director shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of this title.

 

16.16.140 Land subject to inundation.
     Lots or portions of lots shown on a parcel map which are subject to inundation as determined by the city engineer shall be identified and so labeled. No lot may be created if any portion of the building envelope as defined in Section 16.16.291 would be subject to inundation.

 

16.16.150 Official roadway lines.
     All centerlines, right-of-way lines, proposed street widening lines or building lines which have been established pursuant to Article II of Chapter 15.08, or pursuant to Chapter 12.12, or pursuant to any provision of this title, shall be shown at the appropriate location on the parcel map and clearly labeled so as to identify its function.

 

16.16.160 Private road easements.
     In the event a private road easement for road purposes is required within the boundaries of the land to be subdivided pursuant to this title, such easement shall be delineated on the parcel map and the easement, as delineated, shall be conveyed to subsequent purchasers of the parcels created.

 

16.16.170 Additional certificates.
     In addition to the certificates and other material required by the Subdivision Map Act and this title, every parcel map shall bear the following certificates:

     A.    A certificate by the city engineer that the map does not appear to be a map of a major subdivision for which a final map is required pursuant to Section 66426 of the Subdivision Map Act.

     B.     A certificate by the city engineer that the map conforms with all the provisions of this title and (1) in the case of a minor subdivision, such map conforms to the approved tentative parcel map; and (2) in the case of a parcel map for a major subdivision filed pursuant to Section 16.12.110 of this title, such map conforms to an approved tentative map.

 

16.16.180 Stamping or printing of certificates.
     The affidavits, certificates, acknowledgments and approvals required or permitted by this chapter or the Subdivision Map Act to appear upon maps may be legibly stamped or printed upon the map with opaque ink in such a manner as will guarantee a permanent record in black upon the tracing cloth or polyester base film. If ink is used on polyester base film, the ink surface shall be coated with a suitable substance to assure permanent legibility.

 

16.16.190 Owner’s certificate.
     A certificate, signed and acknowledged by all parties having any record title interest in the real property subdivided, consenting to the preparation and recordation of the parcel map, shall be required pursuant to Section 66465 of the Government Code.

 

16.16.200 Agreement to improve.
     The subdivider may elect to agree to construct or install improvements required by Section 16.16.340 which are to be located in public and private easements or rights-of-way. In the event the planning commission or the city council authorizes the subdivider to agree to construct or install improvements, the subdivider shall provide a good and sufficient improvement security as defined in Section 16.12.200 of this title, and shall prepare and deposit, with the city clerk, detailed plans and specifications of the improvements to be constructed, and such plans and specifications shall be made a part of any such agreement and of the improvement security. Such agreement and improvement security shall be in a form acceptable to the city attorney.

 

16.16.210 Exemption from improvements.
     Other provisions of this title, to the contrary notwithstanding, the following minor subdivisions shall not be subject to the public improvement or dedication requirements of this chapter, except insofar as is necessary to comply with the Subdivision Map Act, including Sections 66426 and 66428 thereof.

     A.    The creation of not more than two lots for financing purposes only.

     B.     The leasing of land or building for commercial or industrial purposes or vehicle parking areas.

 

16.16.220 Agreement to road improvement district.
     In lieu of constructing or agreeing under Section 16.16.200 to construct the improvements required by Section 16.16.340 which are to be located in public easements or rights-of-way, the planning director, upon recommendation by the city engineer, may require that the subdivider execute a covenant not to oppose the formation of a road improvement district. The covenant executed under authority herein may be used to secure future improvements in easements, rights-of-way or irrevocable offers of dedication and may be used when streets serving adjacent properties and/or the area in general are below city standards to a degree that public action, such as assessment district proceedings, would be required in the future in order to improve such streets to city standards.

 

16.16.240 Approval of city engineer.
     No parcel map shall be filed in the office of the county recorder until the map has been approved by the city engineer.

 

Article III. Adjustment Plats
16.16.250 Eligibility for adjustment plats.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this title to the contrary, the procedure set forth in this article shall govern the processing of and requirements for adjustment plats. Any adjustment plat may be filed pursuant to the provisions of this article to adjust the boundaries between two, three or four lots, provided the planning director determines that the exchange of property does not involve the following situations.

     A.    Create any new lots.

     B.     Include any lots or parcels created illegally, unless such lot or parcel has been approved by the planning director or, on appeal, the city council, pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of this title, and a certificate of compliance relative thereto has been filed with the county recorder.

     C.     Impair any existing access or create a need for new access to any adjacent lots or parcels.

     D.    Impair any existing easements or create a need for any new easements serving any adjacent lots or parcels.

     E.     Require substantial alteration of any existing improvements or create a need for any new improvements.

     F.     Deviate from the development requirements of Section 16.16.290.

     G.    Structures on any lots involved in the adjustment fail to conform to all appropriate setback requirements of Title 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

 

16.16.260 Adjustment plat application process.
     A.    Application. The applicant desiring approval of an adjustment plat shall file an application for approval with the planning director. The application shall consist of an adjustment plan in such form and accompanied with such information as required by Section 16.16.040 of this title for tentative parcel maps, and a fee as set forth in Chapter 16.08 of this title which will not be refundable. The adjustment plat shall be prepared by or under the direction of a California-registered civil engineer or a California-licensed land surveyor and shall display the engineer’s or surveyor’s license number. The planning director may refer copies of such plat to other public agencies for review and comment thereon.

     B.     Sewer and Water Availability. An adjustment plat will not be accepted for processing until the applicant submits the following letters referenced by the property owner’s name and assessor’s parcel number, to the planning department:

     1.     A letter from the San Diego County Department of Public Works, Land Development Division—Permit and Project Processing Center, stating that sewers can and will be installed to each lot, or that sewer service is already available to each lot.

     2.     A letter from the Helix Water District certifying that water can and will be provided to each lot, at a minimum pressure of twenty-five pounds per square inch.

     C.     Approval. Within fifteen calendar days after the application for approval of an adjustment plat has been filed, the planning director shall approve, or conditionally approve or disapprove such plat. The applicant shall be notified of the planning director’s action by written notice. Notice shall be deemed to have been given upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail with postage thereon prepaid.

     D.    Certification. If the planning director determines that the adjustment plat meets the requirements of this title, he or she shall certify on the adjustment plat that it has been approved pursuant to this title and file it in the planning department. A revised adjustment plat shall be submitted for certification when the planning director finds that the number or nature of the changes necessary for approval are such that they cannot be shown clearly or simply on the original adjustment plat.

 

16.16.270 Approval conditions.
     Whenever applicable, the planning director may prescribe the following requirements as conditions of approval of an adjustment plat.

     A.    Parcel Boundaries. Relocation of lot lines to provide lots that meet the requirements of the health department, comply with any applicable zoning regulations, and conform to standards of lot design specified in Section 16.12.220.

     B.     Access. The provisions of safe and adequate access to each lot or parcel within the adjustment plat.

     C.     Flood Line. The addition of a distinctive boundary line, clearly labeled, which delineates the limits of any area determined by the city engineer to be subject to flooding. The plat shall contain an appropriate note stating the area is subject to flooding.

     D.    Monuments. All parcel or lot line(s) shall be monumented pursuant to the requirements of Section 16.16.350 of this title.

 

16.16.280 Deadline to file revised adjustment plat.
     When required by the planning director, the failure to file a revised adjustment plat within six months from the date of conditional approval of the original plat shall terminate all proceedings.

 

16.16.290 Design.
     Except as otherwise provided in this title, all minor subdivisions shall conform to the lot design requirements of Section 16.12.220 of this title.

 

16.16.291 Residential lot design standards.
     A.    All lots shall maintain a minimum building envelope (area within which a dwelling may be constructed) of twenty-eight feet by fifty feet, exclusive of required yards.

     B.     The creation of access easements which are not necessary to provide primary access to lots will not be permitted.

     C.     The width and area of the private access easement shall not be included in the determination of minimum lot width and area.

     D.    Off-site access easements which provide access to minor subdivisions shall not be allowed to decrease the width, depth, and/or area of the parcel(s) over which the easement is granted to less than the width, depth, and/or area permitted by the city subdivision and zoning codes.

 

16.16.292 Relinquishment of access rights to arterial streets.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 16.12.220(J), when a property which abuts a street shown as an “Arterial Street” on the circulation element of the general plan is to be divided into four or fewer lots, and when the subject property is not capable of division into any more than four lots, the planning director may waive the requirement for relinquishment of access to the street.

 

16.16.300 Panhandle-shaped lots
     Other provisions of this title notwithstanding, panhandle-shaped or flag-shaped lots shall have a minimum frontage to twenty feet on a dedicated street. Panhandles may not serve as access to any lot except the lot of which the panhandle is a part, nor shall any panhandle have a length of more than two-thirds the distance from the street, on which the panhandle fronts, to the rear lot line. No portion of a panhandle may be used to satisfy the required lot area for the zone in which the lot is located.

 

16.16.310 Dedicated and access requirements.
     No parcel map filed pursuant to this chapter shall be approved by the city engineer, unless and until the following conditions have been satisfied:

     A.    Except as provided in Section 16.16.320, there shall be offered for dedication, pursuant to Section 16.16.330 of this title, right-of-way for streets in accordance with city standards within the boundaries of the land to be subdivided. The planning director shall condition his/her approval of the tentative parcel map upon acceptance by the city of the offered dedication prior to the final approval of the parcel map.

     B.     Streets providing access to the land to be subdivided shall be offered for dedication to the city in accordance with city standards or to the county or the state; provided, that in lieu thereof, access to land to be subdivided which is located in any zone other than a multiple residence, commercial, or industrial zone, may be provided by a private road easement under the following circumstances:

     1.     When no access to the land to be subdivided exists, or if access thereto was established after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, and practical difficulty in obtaining rights over intervening land makes an offer of dedication impossible or circumstances such as location, traffic volume or use make such offer of dedication unwarranted, a private easement not less than forty feet wide may be approved in lieu thereof; or

     2.     When access less than forty feet wide to the land to be subdivided existed as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, such access may be approved, provided that, prior to certification of the parcel map by the city engineer, the access is recorded; and, provided further, that no parcel served by such access as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title, may be split into lots of an average size of less than one acre. No minor subdivision shall be approved when access from a maintained public street or highway to the land to be subdivided is less than twenty feet wide.

     C.     Streets which are proposed on the boundaries of a minor subdivision shall be offered for dedication to a width of no less than thirty feet. In the event that the offer of dedication for such streets is to be accepted prior to final approval of the parcel map, a strip of land one foot wide extending along the outer edge of the land offered for dedication may be required to be offered to the city for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

     D.    Offers of dedication for streets which will be accepted before final approval of the parcel map and which streets are proposed to be terminated at the boundary of the minor subdivision may be required to include a strip of land one foot wide extending across the street at its point of termination at the boundary which shall be portions of the adjacent lots, offered for street purposes and over which access rights are relinquished.

     E.     Easements for public utilities and drainage ways shall be offered for dedication in the manner prescribed by Section 16.16.330 of this title, as required by the planning director when he or she determines that such offers of dedication are necessary to serve the subdivision and/or are a reasonable and logical extension of such facilities as exist in the vicinity.

 

16.16.320 Dedication and access requirements in single-family zones.
     When dedication of right-of-way is required pursuant to Section 16.16.310 of this title and all of the land to be subdivided is in any zone other than a multiple residence, commercial or industrial zone, then any provision of the city standards to the contrary notwithstanding, the following standards of dedication shall apply:

     A.    No offer of dedication for street purposes shall be required within the boundary of a minor subdivision when such street is necessary only to serve lots created by the minor subdivision, in which case a private road easement, not less than twenty feet wide may be approved in lieu of such offer of dedication; provided, however, that no more than four such lots may ever be created from the original parcel, nor shall such easement provide access to any adjacent property, until an offer of dedication for street purposes has been made.

     B.     Offers of dedication for rights-of-way for highways other than highways shown as collectors, arterials or freeways on the circulation element of the city’s general plan shall be made in accordance with the city standards.

     C.     Offers of dedication for rights-of-way for highways shown as collectors, arterials or freeways on the circulation element of the general plan shall be required only as follows:

     1.     Sufficient right-of-way shall be dedicated to provide thirty feet of right-of-way from the centerline of the highway to the boundary line of each lot or parcel of land included within the parcel map which abuts upon the highways. The right-of-way so dedicated shall be shown on the parcel map.

     2.     The definite location of the centerline of every such highway, as such location is established by the city engineer, shall be shown on every such parcel map.

     3.     The full width of every such highway shown on every such parcel map shall be identified by a line drawn at the appropriate location and labeled “limit of proposed street widening.” The full width of such highway is as follows:

     i.      Collector: forty-two feet on each side of centerline.

     ii.     Arterial: fifty-one feet on each side of centerline.

     iii.    Freeway: sixty-three feet on each side of centerline.

     4.     A building line is established on each side of and parallel to the centerline of every highway shown on the circulation element of the general plan, except in multiple residence, commercial and manufacturing zones. The distances in feet from the centerline of the highway to the building line shall be as follows:

     i.      Collector: sixty-two feet on each side of centerline.

     ii.     Arterial: seventy-one feet on each side of centerline.

     iii.    Freeway: eighty-three feet on each side of centerline.

     5.     Whenever any such highway is shown on a parcel map, the building line shall be shown at the appropriate location and labeled “Building Line.” No building or structure of any kind may be constructed or altered on any lot abutting a street which is shown on the circulation element of the general plan, and no change may be made in the use or occupancy of any such building or structure, if any portion of the building or structure protrudes into the area between the building line and the centerline of the highway.

     6.     No building or structure shall be constructed or altered and no change may be made in the use or occupancy of a building within those triangles formed at the intersection of streets which are general plan highways or of a street which is a general plan highway, with any other street by the building lines parallel to such intersecting streets for a distance of twenty feet, from such intersection on each of such lines and a line connecting the points on such lines which are twenty feet from the intersection. If there is no building line on one such street, the front yard setback line established by the zoning ordinance for the zone in which the lot is located shall be used in lieu thereof.

 

16.16.330 Dedication procedure.
     Pursuant to Section 66447 of the Subdivision Map Act, all dedications or offers of dedication required by the provisions of this chapter shall be by separate instrument and shall be completed prior to filing of the parcel map. An offer of dedication shall be in such terms as to be binding on the owner, his or her heirs, assigns or successors in interest and, except as provided in subsection (b) of Section 66477.2 of the Government Code, shall continue until the city council accepts or rejects such offer. Any such dedication or offer of dedication shall be free of any burden or encumbrance which would interfere with the purposes for which the dedication or offer of dedication is required. The subdivider shall provide a current preliminary title report or equivalent proof of title satisfactory to the city engineer.

 

16.16.340 Required improvements.
     As a condition precedent to the approval of a parcel map for a minor subdivision filed pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act and this title, it shall be required that the subdivider meet the following requirements.

     A.    Improve in accordance with the city standards all rights-of-way offered for dedication for street purposes which are accepted by the city prior to the approval of the parcel map.

     B.     Install other improvements and facilities in accordance with the requirements set forth in Section 16.12.240 of this title; except, that improvement of private road easements shall be as set forth in subsection C of this section and fire hydrants shall be installed as provided in subsection D of this section.

     C.     Pave all private road easements with asphalted concrete or Portland concrete over an approved base in accordance with the private street standards for the city of Lemon Grove. In order to insure a well-drained roadway, the city engineer may require the installation of curbs, gutters, culverts, and other drainage facilities.

     Private access easement roads shall have a minimum width as follows, except as provided in Section 16.16.310 (B)(2):

 

 

 

POTENTIAL LOTS*

EASEMENT WIDTH

PAVEMENT WIDTH

PARKING WITHIN
EASEMENT

0 – 4

20 ft.

18 ft.

Not permitted

5 – 8

30 ft.

28 ft.

One side only

9 or more

40 ft.

36 ft.

Both sides

*     Maximum number of lots which may ever be created from the parcel to be subdivided or from other parcels which must use this private easement road for access to a publicly maintained street.

 

 

 

 

     D.    Fire hydrants will be required by the city fire chief in a manner consistent with the Uniform Fire Code or ordinances adopted by the city amending the provisions of such code.

     E.     Provide proof satisfactory to the director of public health that there exists an adequate potable water supply available to each lot or parcel.

     F.     Provide proof satisfactory to the planning director that there exists an adequate water supply available to each required fire hydrant.

 

16.16.350 Monuments and flagging.
     A.    Every parcel map shall show monuments which shall be set by a California-licensed land surveyor or California-registered civil engineer in accordance with Section 16.12.250 of this title; provided, that two-inch iron pipes, at least twenty-four inches long for exterior boundary monumentation, are not required unless the city engineer determines that the exterior boundary cannot be adequately monumented by monuments of a lesser standard; and, further provided, that monumentation of the exterior boundary of a remainder parcel need not be placed or shown on the parcel map.

     B.     The city engineer may require the subdivider to flag the land for which a tentative parcel map has been submitted. Such flagging, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, may be required prior to consideration of the tentative parcel map for approval by the planning director.

 

Article IV. Administration
16.16.360 Planning director duties.
     The planning director is authorized and directed to carry out the duties assigned by this title, including, but not limited to, the following:

     A.    Investigate each tentative parcel map filed pursuant to this chapter and indicate by written report the kind, nature and extent of improvements required to be installed on or to serve the land to be subdivided.

     B.     Obtain the recommendations of the city engineer and the director of public health, or their authorized representatives, with respect to the design of the proposed subdivision and the kind, nature, and extent of the proposed improvements, and the city fire marshal, with respect to fire control measures and improvements, and other city departments, governmental agencies, or special districts as may be deemed appropriate or necessary by the planning director in order to carry out the provisions of this title.

     C.     Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove tentative parcel maps, and report, as provided in this chapter, the planning director’s approval, conditional approval, or disapproval, directly to the subdivider.

     D.    Waive the requirement for filing and recordation of a parcel map for certain subdivisions as provided for in this title.

 

16.16.370 City council assignment of responsibilities.
     The responsibilities of the city council, pursuant to Sections 66473.5, 66474, 66474.1, and 66474.6 of the Government Code, are assigned to the planning director with respect to those tentative parcel maps filed pursuant to this chapter.

 

16.16.380 Distribution and comment timetable.
     Within five working days after a tentative parcel map has been filed, the planning director shall transmit copies of the map, together with accompanying information, to such public agencies and public and private utilities as the planning director determines may be concerned. Each of the public agencies and utilities may, within ten working days after the map has been sent to such agency, forward to the planning director a written report of its findings and recommendations thereon.

 

16.16.390 Review and decision timetable.
     A.    Time for Consideration. Within fifty calendar days after a tentative parcel map is filed, the planning director shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove such map. The time limit specified in this subsection may be extended by mutual consent of the subdivider and the planning director; however, in no case shall this time period exceed one year from the filing date. If the tentative parcel map is disapproved, the reasons therefore shall be stated in the notice of disapproval.

     B.     Preliminary Decision and Request for Review.

     1.     The subdivider shall be notified of the planning director’s preliminary decision to conditionally approve or disapprove a tentative parcel map, along with the conditions of conditional approval or the reasons for disapproval, within forty days after the tentative parcel map is filed. If the subdivider is dissatisfied with such preliminary decision or with any condition pertaining thereto, he or she may request in writing that such preliminary decision be reviewed. Such request must be received by the planning director within ten calendar days after the date of the preliminary decision, but in no case later than forty-nine calendar days after the tentative parcel map is filed.

     2.     Upon receipt within the time prescribed of the written request for review of a preliminary decision, the planning director shall arrange a time and place for such review and shall notify the subdivider and appropriate city departments and agencies thereof. In the event that a review cannot be arranged or completed prior to fifty days after the tentative parcel map is filed, the request to extend for review shall be deemed to constitute consent of the subdivider to extend for a reasonable period the time limit in which the planning director must approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative parcel map. After completion of the review, the planning director shall render his or her final approval, conditional approval or disapproval of the tentative parcel map as provided in this section.

     3.     In the event no written request for review is received within the time prescribed, the preliminary decision shall become final and the subdivider shall be notified as provided in this section.

     C.     Notice. The subdivider shall be informed of the preliminary decision and of the final decision of the planning director by written notice. Notice shall be deemed to have been given upon deposit of the notice in the United States mail with postage thereon prepaid.

 

16.16.400 Disapproval of tentative parcel map.
     The planning director shall not approve a tentative parcel map under any of the following circumstances.

     A.    The land proposed for division is a lot or parcel which is shown on a plat or map as described in subdivisions 1 and 2 of this subsection and which was approved or recorded less than one year prior to the filing for approval of the subject tentative parcel map, except that the division of any lot or parcel into not more than two lots for financing purposes only may be approved within the one-year period.

     1.     A parcel map approved pursuant to this title and recorded in the office of the county recorder; or

     2.     An approved tentative parcel map wherein the parcel map requirement was waived pursuant to provisions of this title and a certificate of compliance has been filed with the county recorder pursuant to Chapter 16.20 of this title.

     B.     The land proposed for division is a lot or parcel created illegally, unless the lot or parcel has been approved by the planning director, or, on appeal, by the city council, pursuant to Chapter 16.20, and a certificate of compliance relative thereto has been filed with the county recorder.

     C.     The subdivision proposes creation of five or more lots.

     D.    The planning director finds that the tentative parcel map does not meet the requirements of this title.

     E.     The planning director makes any of the following findings:

     1.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans.

     2.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with the applicable general and specific plans.

     3.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development.

     4.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development.

     5.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat.

     6.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems.

     7.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements of record or easements established by court judgment, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the planning director may approve a map if he or she finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.

 

16.16.410 Modification of regulations.
     Whenever the planning director, or, on appeal, the planning commission or city council finds, with respect to a tentative parcel map, that the land to be divided is of such size or shape, or is subject to such title limitations of record, or is affected by such topographical conditions, or is in such location, or is to be devoted to such usage that it is impossible or impractical in the particular case for the subdivider to conform fully to the requirements of this title, the planning director, or on appeal, the planning commission or city council may waive or modify such requirements as deemed reasonably necessary; provided, however, any such waiver or modification shall be in conformity with the spirit and purpose of this title.

 

16.16.420 Appeals.
     A.    The planning commission is designated as the appeal board referred to in Section 66452.5 of the Government Code. Where the subdivider is dissatisfied with any action of the planning director with respect to a tentative parcel map or adjustment plat, he or she may appeal to the planning commission, and the subdivider or the planning director may appeal to the city council from any action of the planning commission as provided in Section 66452.5 of the Government Code.

     B.     Any interested person may appeal to the planning commission or city council from any decision of the planning director made relative to the responsibilities assigned to him or her in Section 16.16.370. Any such appellant shall be entitled to the same notice and rights regarding testimony as apply to the subdivider under Section 66452.5 of the Government Code.

     C.     An appeal filed pursuant to this section shall be accompanied by a written statement disclosing the following information:

     1.     The names of all persons having an interest in the application, as well as the names of all persons having the ownership interest in the property involved.

     2.     If any person identified pursuant to subdivision 1 of this subsection is a corporation or partnership, the names of all persons owning more than ten percent of the shares in the corporation or owning any partnership interest in the partnership.

     3.     If any person identified pursuant to subdivision 1 of this subsection is a nonprofit organization or a trust, the names of any person serving as director of the nonprofit organization or as trustee or beneficiary or trustor of the trust.

Chapter 16.17 VESTING TENTATIVE MAPS
16.17.010 Citation and authority.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code of the State of California (hereinafter referred to as the Vesting Tentative Map Statute), and may be cited as the “Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance.”

 

16.17.020 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of this title. Except as otherwise set forth in the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this title shall apply to the Vesting Tentative Map Ordinance.

 

16.17.030 Consistency.
     No land shall be subdivided pursuant to a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map for any purpose which is inconsistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan or not permitted by Title 17 or other applicable provisions of this municipal code.

 

16.17.040 Application.
     A.    Whenever a provision of the Subdivision Map Act or this title requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative parcel map, a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map may instead be filed, in accordance with the provisions hereof.

     B.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction, or work preparatory to construction.

 

16.17.050 Filing and processing.
     Applications for approval of vesting tentative maps and vesting tentative parcel maps shall be considered by the planning commission in a public hearing. The decision of the planning commission to approve, conditionally approve or deny approval of such maps shall be final unless the decision is appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.12.290.

     Except as provided in this section and subsections A and B hereof, a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in this title for a tentative map or tentative parcel map.

     A.    At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, it shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “Vesting Tentative Map.” If the map is a vesting tentative parcel map, the words “Vesting Tentative Parcel Map” shall appear conspicuously on its face.

     B.     A planned development permit application, pursuant to Section 17.28.030 shall be filed concurrently with the vesting tentative map and/or vesting tentative parcel map and shall be processed concurrently therewith. A vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall not be approved if all other discretionary permits or approvals have not been approved either prior to or concurrently with approval of the map. The planned development permit application shall comply fully with the requirements of Section 17.28.030 and, in addition, shall include the following specific details in a form satisfactory to the community development director and the city engineer:

     1.     The height, bulk, location, occupancy, and construction type of proposed buildings.

     2.     Architectural renderings of all elevations of proposed buildings.

     3.     Detailed information regarding the location of lot lines, lot dimensions, gross and net site area, location of existing and proposed easements.

     4.     Detailed design and specifications for all proposed and required public facilities including, but not limited to, on- and off-site sewer, water, drainage, streets with final graded and alignment.

     5.     Detailed geological, drainage, flood control, soils, traffic, or other reports deemed necessary by the community development director or city engineer to permit a complete review of the design and improvements for the subdivision.

     6.     Detailed final grading and drainage plans prepared by a registered civil engineer, showing existing and proposed finished grades at contour intervals satisfactory to the city engineer.

     7.     Detailed landscape plans prepared in accordance with city ordinances, policies and standards.

     8.     Environmental assessment or environmental impact report.

     9.     All local, state and federal permits or approvals required for development of the proposed project, except those requiring a final map as a prerequisite. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

16.17.060 Processing fees.
     Upon filing an application for a vesting tentative map or a vesting tentative parcel map, the subdivider shall pay the processing fee as adopted by resolution of the city council for tentative maps or tentative parcel maps and shall also pay the processing fee required for a planned development permit application.

 

16.17.070 Expiration.
     The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall expire at the end of the same time period, and shall be subject to the same extensions, established by this title for the expiration of the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map or tentative parcel map.

 

16.17.080 Rights conferred.
     A.    Approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the date the city has determined that the application is complete as described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Section 66474.2 of the Government Code is repealed, the approval of a vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the application for the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map was deemed complete. Any disputes regarding whether a development substantially complies with the approved or conditionally approved map or with the ordinances, policies, or standards described in this subsection, shall be resolved by the city council.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension, or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

     1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to health or safety, or both;

     2.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

     C.     The rights conferred by a vesting tentative map or a vesting tentative parcel map shall expire if a final map or parcel map is not approved and recorded prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map, as provided in Section 16.17.070. If the final map or parcel map is approved and recorded, the vested development rights shall extend for the following periods of time:

     1.     An initial time period of one year from the date the final map or parcel map is recorded. If several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

     2.     The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit, or for design or development review if such processing exceeds thirty days from the date a complete application is filed.

     3.     A subdivider may apply to the planning commission for a one year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C) (1) of this section expires. An extension may be granted only if the planning commission finds that the map still complies with the requirements of this chapter. The planning commission may approve, conditionally approve or deny an extension in its sole discretion. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal the denial to the city council within fifteen days.

     4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the period of time specified in subsections (C)(1) through (3) of this section, the right referred to herein shall continue until the expiration of that permit or any extension of that permit.

     5.     Upon the expiration of the time limits specified in subsection (C)(1) through (4) of this section, all rights conferred by this section shall cease and the project shall be considered to be the same as any subdivision which was not processed pursuant to this chapter.

     6.     Notwithstanding vested rights enumerated in this section, the amount of any fees which are required to be paid, either as a condition of the map approval or by operation of any law, shall be determined by the application of the law or policy in effect at the time the fee is paid. The amounts of the fees are not vested upon approval of the vesting tentative map or vesting tentative parcel map.

Chapter 16.20 ENFORCEMENT
16.20.010 Duty of planning director.
     Whenever the county assessor or the head of any city department finds that the provisions of this title or of the Subdivision Map Act have been violated, he or she shall report such violation to the city engineer, building inspector and planning director. It shall be the duty of the planning director to investigate such report and enforce the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act.

 

16.20.020 Determination of map status.
     When a map is filed with the city engineer pursuant only to the requirements of Chapter 15, Division 3 of the Business and Professions Code, the city engineer shall immediately submit to the planning director a print of such map. The planning director shall determine if such map constitutes or creates a subdivision. If it does not constitute or create a subdivision or if it does constitute a subdivision which conforms to a final division plat or approved adjustment plat or parcel map, the planning director shall so inform the city engineer. If the final map or parcel map or a final division plat or approved adjustment plat on file in the office of the county recorder, the planning director shall give written notice to the engineer or surveyor filing such map, that any sale, lease or transfer of property conforming to the parcel or parcels shown thereon will constitute a violation of this title. The city engineer shall not file such map until notice by the planning director that the provisions of this title have been complied with, or in the absence of such notification, until the last day required by law for filing.

 

16.20.030 Notice of violation.
     Whenever the planning director has knowledge that real property has been divided, or has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or city or San Diego County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, applicable at the time such violation occurred, he or she shall cause to be filed for record with the county recorder a notice of violation. Such notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such real property.

 

16.20.040 Permits and approvals withheld.
     A.    No building permit, grading permit, nor any other permit shall be issued, nor any approval granted, that is necessary to develop any real property which has been divided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act or city or San Diego County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto applicable at the time such division occurred, unless the planning director, or, on appeal, the city council, finds that development of such real property is not contrary to the public health or public safety. The authority to deny such a permit or such approval shall apply whether the applicant therefor was the owner of the real property at the time of such violation or whether the applicant therefor is the current owner of the real property with, or without, actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of the acquisition of his interests in such real property.

     B.     Upon receipt of a written notification from the permit issuing authority, or the body authorized to grant approval, that a permit or approval is being sought to develop real property which has been subdivided, or which has resulted from a division, in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or city or San Diego County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, or upon receipt of a written request from the owner of such real property, the planning director, or, on appeal, the city council, shall determine whether such real property is or is not approved for development and shall so inform the owner thereof and the authority or body which has originated the notification. If it is determined that such real property is approved for development, the planning director or the city council, whichever has made such determination, may impose such conditions as would have been applicable to the division of the property at the time the current owner of record acquired the property and are appropriate to satisfy public health and safety considerations and other considerations as are specified in subsection C of this section, and the planning director shall cause a certificate of compliance relative to the subject real property and reflecting such conditions to be filed with the county recorder pursuant to Section 16.20.050 of this chapter.

     C.     In determining whether approval or conditional approval should be granted for development of real property divided, or resulting from a division, in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or city or San Diego county ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, the planning director or city council shall give consideration to the following factors:

     1.     Whether the owner of the real property can rescind the agreement by which he or she acquired the real property and recover the consideration paid therefor.

     2.     Whether the real property meets the requirements of the applicable zoning regulations.

     3.     Whether the real property is served by a public sewer or is approved by the health department for installation of a sewer disposal system in accordance with the septic tank ordinance, Chapter 13.24.

     4.     Whether the real property has a potable water supply satisfactory to the director of public health.

     5.     Whether the real property has legal access to a city-maintained road.

     6.     Whether the current owner would have been required to dedicate land for any public purpose or construct or install any improvements pursuant to the terms of the Subdivision Map Act or city or San Diego County ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, had the subdivision, by which the real property was created, been submitted for approval at the time the current owner acquired the property.

 

16.20.050 Issuance of certificates of compliance.
     A.    Any owner of real property may request in writing that the planning director make a determination whether such real property complies with applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto. Within fifty days after receipt of such written request, the planning director shall make a determination that such real property complies with the applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, or that such real property does not comply with such provisions, and shall so notify the owner thereof setting forth the particulars of such compliance or noncompliance.

     B.     If the subject real property is found to be in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and city ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, the planning director shall cause a certificate of compliance, relative to such real property, to be filed for record with the county recorder.

     C.     Certificates of compliance shall be issued only for real property that satisfies at least one of the following conditions:

     1.     Was divided, or resulted from a division, in compliance with city or San Diego County ordinances regulating the division of real property and the Subdivision Map Act applicable at the time such real property was divided or resulted from such division.

     2.     Has been approved for development pursuant to Section 16.20.040 of this chapter. Such certificates of compliance may be granted subject to conditions as specified in Section 16.20.040 and such conditions may be fulfilled and implemented by the property owner who has applied for a certificate of compliance or by a grantee of such property owner. If such conditions are not fulfilled or implemented by the applicant property owner or the grantee, the certificate of compliance shall have no force or effect upon any subsequent transfer of the property, and any subsequent transferee or assignee shall make a new application for a certificate of compliance and the certificate of compliance shall be subject to such conditions as would have been applicable at the time such assignee or transferee acquired the property. In any case, no permit or other approval necessary to develop such real property shall be issued or granted until such conditions have been fulfilled and implemented.

Title 17 ZONING
Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.12 ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
Chapter 17.16 ZONING DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.20 SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS
Chapter 17.24 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.28 PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 17.32 MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
17.04.010 Citation.
     This title shall be known and cited as the “zoning ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove,” or as this title.

 

17.04.020 Adoption of zoning ordinance.
     There is adopted a zoning ordinance for the city of Lemon Grove, California, such zoning ordinance being consistent with and based on the adopted general plan for the city and the zoning ordinance consisting of the establishment of various districts within which certain regulations shall be in effect, as set forth in this title. The regulations specified in this title shall be subject to the general provisions and expectations as set forth in this chapter.

 

17.04.030 Purposes of zoning ordinance.
     The ordinance is adopted to promote, protect and preserve the public health, safety, peace, comfort and general welfare, and to achieve the following purposes:

     A.    To promote the achievement of the policies and provisions of the Lemon Grove general plan;

     B.     To guide, control and regulate the future growth and development of the city in accordance with the adopted general plan of the city;

     C.     To protect the established character of and to enhance the social and economic stability of residential, commercial, industrial and other areas within the city, and to assure the orderly and beneficial development thereof as parts of a well-coordinated community;

     D.    To promote excellence of design in all future developments in order to preserve both the internal beauty and established character of the areas within the city.

 

17.04.040 Establishment of districts.
     The zoning ordinance consists of the establishment of various districts within the incorporated territory of the city of Lemon Grove. Within these districts, the following activities are regulated: the erection, construction, alteration, movement, location and maintenance of certain buildings and structures, the carrying out of certain trades or occupations, and the conduct of certain uses of land or of buildings. The form and content of the regulations and the permitted uses may vary from one district to another, as specified in Chapter 17.12.

 

17.04.050 Unlawful uses a public nuisance.
     Any building or structure set up, erected, altered, built or moved, or any use of property contrary to the provisions of this title are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and the city attorney may, upon order of the city council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement and removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to abate and remove such building or structure or such use of property and restrain and enjoin any person from setting up, erecting, building, or moving any such building or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title.

 

17.04.060 Remedies.
     All remedies provided for in this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive.

 

17.04.070 Penalties for violations.
     A.    Violations Charged as Misdemeanors.

     Any person, whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any of the provisions of this title, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment in the county jail for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this title is caused, allowed or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable as herein provided.

     B.     Violations Charged as Infractions.

     The city attorney shall have the discretion to charge any violation of the provisions of this title as an infraction instead of a misdemeanor. Such infraction shall be punishable by (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for the first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same ordinance within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same ordinance within one year.

 

17.04.080 Improperly issued permits void.
     All departments, officials and public employees of the city which are vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall issue no such permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this title, and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this title, shall be null and void.

 

17.04.090 Separability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this title is for any reason declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this title. The Lemon Grove city council declares that it would have adopted the ordinance codified in this title and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses and phrases might be declared invalid.

 

17.04.100 Minimum standards specified.
     In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, unless otherwise stated, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, peace, comfort and general welfare.

 

17.04.110 Conflict with other regulations.
     A.    Where conflict occurs between the regulations of this title and any other regulations effective within the city, the more restrictive of any such regulations shall apply.

     B.     It is not intended that this title shall interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenants or other agreements now in effect; provided, however, that where this title imposes a greater restriction upon the uses of buildings or premises or upon the height of buildings or requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by agreements, the provisions of this title shall apply.

     C.     Nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to repeal or amend any regulation of the city requiring a permit or license, or both, to cover and business, trade, or occupation, nor shall anything in this title be deemed to repeal or amend the various building codes of the city.

 

17.04.120 Applicability.
     The provisions of this title are applicable not only to private persons, agencies, and organizations, but also to all public agencies and organizations to the full extent that they may now or at a future time be enforceable in connection with the activities of any such public agency or organizations.

Chapter 17.08 DEFINITIONS
17.08.010 Purpose and applicability.
     The purpose of this chapter is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the zoning regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases defined in this chapter shall apply throughout the zoning regulations, except where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning or construction. Where words are not defined here or elsewhere in the municipal code, their common meaning shall apply.

 

17.08.020 Rules for construction of language.
     The following general rules of construction shall apply to the text of the zoning regulations:

     A.    The particular shall control the general.

     B.     In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text of any provision and any caption or illustration, the text shall control.

     C.     The word “shall” is always mandatory and not discretionary. The word “may” is discretionary.

     D.    References in the masculine and feminine genders are interchangeable.

     E.     Words used in the present tense include the future, and words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.

     F.     The words “activities” and “facilities” include any part thereof.

     G.    The word “permitted” means permitted without the requirements for a conditional use permit but subject to all applicable regulations.

     H.    Unless the context clearly indicates to the contrary, the following conjunctions shall be interpreted as follows:

     1.     “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply.

     2.     “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination.

     3.     “Either . . . or” indicates that the connected items or provisions shall apply singly but not in combination.

     I.      All public officials, bodies, and agencies to which reference is made are those of the city unless otherwise indicated.

     J.      The word “city” means the city of Lemon Grove; “commission” means the planning commission of the city; “council” means the city council of the city; “director” means the planning director of the city.

     K.    The word “days” means calendar days except as otherwise noted in these regulations and includes weekends and legal holidays.

 

17.08.030 Definitions.
     Throughout this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings found in this section:

     “Abatement” means the act of causing a public nuisance to cease, terminate, or come to an end.

     “Abut or abutting” means to physically touch or border upon; to share a common property or district line. Abutting shall mean the same as “adjacent,” “adjoining” or “contiguous.”

     “Access” means a way or means of approach to provide physical entrance to a property or use.

     “Accessory building” means a building which is incidental to, and customarily associated with a specific principal use or facility, and located on the same lot.

     “Accessory rental dwelling unit or ARDU” means a dwelling unit with a maximum floor area of six hundred forty square feet or thirty percent of floor area of the primary unit whichever is greater, located within, attached to, or detached from a single-family dwelling on the same lot for rental occupancy. It is commonly referred to as a “granny flat.”

     “Accessory use” means a use incidental to and customarily associated with a specific principal use, and located on the same lot.

     “Acreage” means unsubdivided land, other than a lot or lots of record.

     “Addition” means any construction which increases the size of a building or facility, occurring after the completion of the original.

     Adjacent or Adjoining. See “Abut.”

     “Advisory body” means a group of individuals that hears and provides recommendations about a proposed project. The advisory body has no decision-making authority. The community advisory commission sits as an advisory body for zoning and land use matters when designated by city council resolution.

     “Agriculture” means the science and art of farming; producing crops, floriculture and horticulture; being the work of cultivating the soil.

     “Alcoholic beverage” means alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer, and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

     “Alley” means any public or private way for the use of pedestrians and/or vehicles which affords only a secondary means of access to abutting property, and is not intended for general traffic circulation.

     “Alteration” means any construction of physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a building or structure, or moving of a building or structure, or substantial change in appearance of any building or structure.

     “Amendment” means a change in wording, context or substance of this title or a change in the zone boundaries upon the zoning maps, a part of this title, when adopted by ordinance passed by the city council in the manner prescribed by law.

     Animal Hospital. See “Veterinary services.”

     “Antique” means any work of art, piece of furniture, decorative object, or the like, created or produced at least one hundred years before date of purchase.

     “Apartment” means a dwelling unit within a duplex or multifamily dwelling.

     “Appellate body” means a group of individuals that hears and decides appeals of decisions made by a lower body. The planning commission and the city council are the appellate bodies in Lemon Grove.

     “Application package” means a set of materials, such as application forms and checklists established by the community development director accompanied by maps, studies, etc., filed by an applicant to officially request a permit subject to this title.

     “Approved” refers to those uses, facilities, and structures that have successfully completed all applicable permitting processes.

     “Arcade” means a building, room or portion thereof, or other area either open or enclosed, which contains a concentration of coin or token operated pinball, electronic video, or other similar game machines, manipulated by players to attain scores.

     “Assembly space” means indoor or outdoor areas designed for gatherings such as worship, recreation, or entertainment.

     “Bar” means a public establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are served.

     “Berm” means a mound or embankment of earth, together with necessary retaining structures.

     “Block” means a unit of land bounded by streets or by a combination of streets and public land, railroad rights-of-way, waterways or any other barrier to the continuity of development.

     “Block face” refers to the group of front lot lines of a block.

     “Boarding care” means the housing, care, and feeding of household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC 18.16 that is provided for stays exceeding twenty-four hours, such as in a kennel or as part of medical treatment.

     “Boardinghouse” means a dwelling or part thereof (not residential care facilities), where lodging with or without meals is provided for compensation. The boardinghouse shall have no more than five guest rooms (without separate cooking facilities), nor accommodate more than ten persons total. Lodging shall be provided for a time period of more than thirty days.

     “Building” means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any person, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials of any kind or nature.

     “Building coverage” means the horizontal area measured within the outside of the exterior walls of the ground floor of all principal and accessory buildings on a lot.

     “Building height” means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade around the building to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys and permitted accessory projections.

     “Building site” means the ground area of a building or a group of buildings together with all open space as required by this title. The building site may encompass more than one lot.

     “Business” means a use or activity involving the sale or rental of goods or the sale or furnishing of services of any kind authorized according to Chapter 5.04.

     “Carport” means a permanently roofed structure open on one or more sides used or intended to be used for vehicular parking.

     “Certificate of occupancy” means a document or the completed final inspection document issued by the proper authority allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying that the structure or use has been constructed or will be used in compliance with all the applicable municipal codes and ordinances.

     “Clinic” means an establishment where persons receive examination, treatment or advice concerning physical or mental matters, where patients are not lodged overnight.

     “Club” means an association of persons for some common nonprofit purpose, but not including groups organized primarily to render a service, which is customarily carried on as a business.

     “Cluster development” means a form of residential development involving more than one dwelling unit, which permits a reduction in lot area and yard requirements, provided there is no increase in the number of units permitted under conventional standards and the resultant land area is devoted to open space.

     “Cocktail lounge” means a public room in a hotel, club, or restaurant where cocktails and other alcoholic drinks are served from a separate bar.

     “Code” means the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     “Code enforcement” means enforcement of locally adopted ordinances or regulations which specify minimum standards for the use of property, involving monitoring for compliance and corrective and/or punitive measures for violations.

     “Communications facilities” means a variety of physical components that compose wireless communications.

     “Complete” or “deemed complete” means adequate submittal of an application package, including, but not limited to, application forms, fees, studies, illustrations, maps, and written narrative necessary to provide staff, officials, and the public with a thorough understanding of the proposed project that allows a decision to be rendered on the merits of the application.

     “Conditional use” means a use which may be appropriate in a zone, depending on the location proposed for the use, its scale of activity, and its relationship to surrounding uses and the area in general. A conditional use may be denied the approval of a particular location because the use is not compatible with surrounding uses at that location, or its operation, as proposed, may be conditioned to the extent necessary to assure compatibility and acceptance of the use among other uses permitted in a zone.

     “Condominium” means an undivided interest in common in a portion of real property coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan in sufficient detail to locate all boundaries thereof. The area within these boundaries may be filled with air, earth, water, or fixtures, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. The description of the unit may refer to: (1) boundaries described in the recorded final map, parcel map, or condominium plan; (2) physical boundaries, either in existence, or to be constructed, such as walls, floors, and ceilings of a structure or any portion thereof; (3) an entire structure containing one or more units; or (4) any combination thereof.

     “Condominium project” means a real property development consisting of condominiums as defined herein and under Civil Code Sections 4125 and 6542, as amended.

     “Court” means an open space, unobstructed from ground to sky, other than a yard, that is on the same lot with and bounded on two or more sides by the walls of a building.

     “Covenant” means a formal recorded agreement between two or more persons to do or not do something specified.

     Coverage. See “Building coverage.”

     “Covered parking” means a carport or garage that provides full overhead protection from the elements with ordinary roof coverings. Canvas, lath, fiberglass, and vegetation are not ordinary roof coverings and cannot be used in providing a covered parking space.

     “Day care” means a facility, licensed and equipped as required by law, which provides non-medical care and supervision for periods of less than twenty-four hours. This term shall include nursery schools.

     1.     “Small family day care” means day care that is provided in a single-family dwelling for up to eight people in accordance with Section 1597 of the California Health and Safety Code. The day care provider shall reside in the home.

     2.     “Large family day care” means day care that is provided in a single-family dwelling for up to fourteen people in accordance with Section 1597 of the California Health and Safety Code. The day care provider shall reside in the home.

     3.     “Day care center” means a day care, regardless of size or capacity that is located in a commercial zone or commercial structure.  “Days” means calendar days, unless otherwise noted.

     “Decision” means the written approval, denial, conditional approval, or other determination. A decision may be in the form of a notice of intent, resolution, report, or other dated instrument that memorializes the date of determinations subject to this title.

     “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise allowable maximum residential density under the applicable zoning ordinance and land use element of the general plan. The developer may elect to accept a lesser percentage of density bonus.

     Density, Gross. “Gross density” means the number of dwelling units per unit measurement of land; calculation includes all the land within the boundaries of the particular area being considered, excluding nothing.

     Density, Net. “Net density” means the number of dwelling units per unit measurement of land, where the particular area being considered in the calculation is exclusive of all streets, easements and water areas.

     “Development services director” means the director that oversees the department, which is delegated the principal responsibility over urban planning, permitting of development and improvement of private property, zoning, subdivisions and other land use matters under state and local law.

     “Discretionary” means exercising judgment on the merits of the application. The community development director, planning commission, and the city council may exercise discretion.

     “Drive-in use” means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or by packaging procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.

     “Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels, motels, or boardinghouses.

     1.     “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended as separate living quarters, with private sanitary and kitchen facilities, for the exclusive use of one household.

     2.     Dwelling, Single-Family. “Single-family dwelling” means a freestanding building, built on, or assembled pursuant to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code, or a mobile home as defined in the National Mobile Home Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 (42 U.S.C. Sec. 5401, et seq.), installed on a permanent foundation, designed or used exclusively for occupancy by one household and containing one dwelling unit.

     3.     Dwelling, Duplex. “Duplex dwelling” means a building designed or used exclusively for occupancy by two households and containing two dwelling units.

     4.     Dwelling, Multifamily. “Multifamily dwelling” means a building, or a portion of a building, containing three or more dwelling units.

     5.     Dwelling, Studio. “Studio dwelling” means a dwelling unit consisting of not more than one habitable room together with kitchen or kitchenette and sanitary facilities.

     “Easement” means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation, or another person or entity.

     “Effective date” means the date at which a decision becomes final. A decision is final either at the end of the prescribed appeals period if no appeal is submitted, or at the conclusion of the appeals process.

     “Emergency homeless shelter” means housing with minimal supportive services for homeless persons that is limited to occupancy of six months or less by a homeless person. No individual or household may be denied emergency shelter because of an inability to pay.

     “Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit, including transitional and supportive housing, and living as a single household. The term “family” shall not be construed to include a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons occupying a hotel, boardinghouse, or institution of any kind.

     “Finished grade” means the average elevation of the finished ground surface within five feet of all walls of a building. In case walls are parallel to and within five feet of a sidewalk, the above ground should be measured at the sidewalk.

     “Fitness club” means a business that operates a building or room designed and equipped for indoor sports, exercise, or physical education.

     “Floor area” means the total of the gross horizontal areas of all floors, including usable basements and cellars, below the roof and within the outer surfaces of the main walls of principal or accessory buildings or the center lines of party walls separating such buildings or portions thereof or within lines drawn parallel to and two feet within the roof line of any building or portion thereof without walls, but excluding the following:

     1.     Areas used for off-street parking spaces or loading berths and driveways and maneuvering aisles relating thereto;

     2.     Areas which qualify as usable open space under the usable open space regulations;

     3.     In the case of nonresidential facilities: arcades, porticoes, and similar open areas which are located at or near street level, which are accessible to the general public, and which are not designed or used as sales, display, storage, service, or production areas.

     “Frontage” means that side of a lot abutting on a street; the front lot line.

     Garage, Private. “Private garage” means an enclosed accessory building or an accessory portion of the main building, designed and used primarily for the shelter or storage of operable vehicles owned or operated by the occupants of the main building.

     Garage, Public. “Public garage” means a building other than a private garage used for the storage, or care, or repair, or servicing of automobiles.

     “Garbage” means animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, storage, sale, preparation, cooking or serving of foods.

     “General plan” means the comprehensive, long-term general plan for the physical development of the city, as required by California Government Code Section 65300, and as adopted by the council, in its present form or as hereafter amended.

     “Guest house” means living quarters having no kitchen facilities, located within an accessory building located on the same premises with a main building and occupied for the sole use of members of the family, temporary guests or persons permanently employed on the premises.

     “Home occupation” means an occupation customarily conducted as a secondary use entirely within a dwelling by the occupant of the dwelling; and gives no indication of other than residential use, and which is not detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood by virtue of traffic flow, noise, odor, or other adverse conditions.

     “Hospital” means an institution providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured.

     “Hotel” means a facility offering transient lodging accommodations to the general public, containing six or more guest rooms, and which may provide additional services and facilities such as dining, recreation and meeting space.

     “Household” means one or more individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and kitchen areas and facilities within the dwelling unit. This may include transitional and supportive housing.

     “Improvement” means any man-made item which becomes part of, placed upon, or affixed to property.

     “Intersection” means where two or more roads connect at grade.

     “Junk” means used machinery, scrap iron, steel, other ferrous and nonferrous metals, tools, implements or portions thereof, glass, plastic, paper, building materials or other waste, which has been abandoned from its original use.

     “Junkyard” means any premises used for the keeping, storage or salvaging of junk.

     “Kennel” means any lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises that provide boarding care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC 18.16, whether such keeping is for pleasure, profit, breeding, or exhibiting.

     “Kitchen” means a room designed, intended or used for the preparation of food for consumption, which contains a sink and either a suitable gas connection or provision for an electric stove.

     “Kitchenette” means an area within a room, intended for the preparation of food for consumption, and equipped similarly to a kitchen.

     “Landscaping” means the addition of lawns, trees, plants and other natural and decorative features to land.

     “Land use” means the way in which property is utilized or occupied.

     “LGMC” means the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     “Loading space” means an area used for loading or unloading of goods from a vehicle in connection with the use of the site on which such space is located.

     “Lot” means a designated parcel, tract or area of land established by plat, subdivision, or as otherwise permitted by law, to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.

     1.     “Corner lot” means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection, or upon a curvature of a single street, where such streets or curvature form an interior angle of one hundred thirty-five degrees or less.

     2.     “Flag lot” means a lot not fronting on or abutting directly a public road, where access to the public road is by a narrow, private right-of-way, and the lot is located generally to the rear of another lot or lots.

     3.     “Interior lot” means a lot abutting only one street.

     4.     “Through lot” means a lot which fronts upon two streets which are either parallel or do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.

     “Lot area” means the total horizontal area within the lot lines of a lot, excluding any street right-of-way, private road easement, and excluding any portion of a flag lot providing access to a street.

     “Lot depth” means the horizontal distance from the midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line; where there is no rear lot line, the lot depth shall be measured by a line perpendicular to the front lot line to the most distant point on any other lot line.

     “Lot line” means any boundary of a lot.

     1.     “Front lot line” means, on an interior lot, the lot line abutting a street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. On a through lot, the lot line abutting both streets. On all other lots including flag lots, and lots with access exclusively from private easements, either the lot line most parallel to the public street, or the lot line most parallel to the access portion of the flag lot, or easement which provides access to the lot from the public street.

     2.     “Interior lot line” means any lot line not abutting a street.

     3.     “Rear lot line” means the lot line generally opposite and most distant from the front lot line; or in the case of triangular or otherwise irregularly shaped lots, a line ten feet in length entirely within the lot, parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line.

     4.     “Side lot line” means any lot line which is not a front or rear lot line.

     5.     “Street lot line” means any lot line abutting a street.

     “Lot of record” means a single lot or parcel which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in compliance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and city or county ordinances enacted pursuant thereto applicable at the time such division occurred.

     “Lot width” means the horizontal distance between side lot lines, measured at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines.

     “Low and moderate income dwelling unit” means a dwelling unit which is made available to low and moderate income households and which is not leased at a rent exceeding the fair market rent for San Diego County nor sold at a value exceeding the maximum mortgage amount for San Diego County as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

     “Low and moderate income household” means a household whose income does not exceed one hundred twenty percent of the median income for San Diego County and which meets the current eligibility standards for such households as established by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.

     “Manufactured housing” means a dwelling unit that is constructed and assembled at a factory, transported to the building’s site and placed on a prebuilt foundation.

     “Manufacturing” means the mechanical or chemical transformation of materials or substances into new products, including the assembling of component parts, the construction of products, and the blending of materials such as plastics, resins, or oils.

     “Ministerial” means an administrative decision based upon definable legal standards applicable to the matter without regard to the exercise of any discretion by the official making the determination. The community development department staff may conduct ministerial review.

     “Mini-warehouse” or “self-storage facility” means a structure containing separate storage spaces of varying sizes leased or rented on an individual basis.

     “Minor use” means those enumerated uses that may be accommodated in specific zoning districts through the minor use permit process.

     “Miscellaneous building permits” mean, but are not limited to, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, and water heater permits.

     “Model home” means a dwelling unit temporarily used for display purposes as an example of dwelling units available for sale or rental in a particular residential development.

     “Motel” means the same as “hotel”; except that guest rooms are apt to have direct access to the outside. Auto courts, tourist courts and motor lodges are included.

     “Net area” means an area of land exclusive of all public streets or alleys or land dedicated or offered for streets or alleys.

     “Nightclub” means an establishment open at night that serves alcohol, and may serve food, that provides entertainment such as live music, dancing or something similar.

     “Nonconforming use, structure or lot” means a use or activity, a structure or building, or a lot, the size, dimensions or location of which was lawful prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of an ordinance, but which fails, by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the present requirements of the ordinance.

     “Nuisance” means an interference with the enjoyment and use of property.

     Nursery, Retail. “Retail nursery” means premises, whether or not enclosed, used for the retail sale of flowers, shrubs, plants and other nursery stock and materials, plus the accessory retail sale of gardening materials and supplies customarily used in the cultivation and maintenance of a home garden or landscape.

     “Open space” means an area of land set aside, dedicated, designated or reserved for public or private use or enjoyment including, but not limited to, uses such as community gardens, or for the use or enjoyment of owners and occupants of and adjoining or neighboring such land.

     “Overlay zone” means a district established by this title, which may be applied to a lot or portion thereof only in combination with a general zoning district, and which applies additional standards and regulations upon that land. More than one such overlay may be applied to the same property.

     Parcel. See “Lot.”

     “Parking areas” means an area other than a street, alley or other right-of-way, used for temporary parking of motor vehicles, including parking lot, garages and private driveways.

     “Parking space” means a position designated for the temporary parking of one motor vehicle, whether within a parking lot, garage, private driveway or right-of-way.

     “Pave, paved, or paving” means the act of surfacing public or private site improvements, such as parking areas, driveways, sidewalks, etc. Materials may be pervious or impervious.

     “Penthouse” means a structure located on the roof of a building; when used only for the shelter of accessory equipment it is not regarded as a story or counted toward building height.

     “Planned development” means an area to be planned and developed as a single entity, according to applicable standards and regulations, and containing one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. Planned developments may consist primarily of either commercial, industrial, or residential uses, perhaps with incidental accessory activities; or they might contain some combination of those primary uses.

     “Premises” means a lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, together with the buildings, structures and appurtenances thereon.

     “Principal, primary, or main building” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated. In any residential district, any dwelling shall be deemed to be a main building upon the lot upon which the same is situated.

     “Principal or primary use” means the primary or predominant use of any lot. Generally, that activity which occupies the greatest amount of floor and/or site area.

     “Project” means the planning, permitting, and/or construction of a development, including on- and off-site improvements, for a site.

     “Proposed action” means a future plan or activity whose uses, structures, and/or improvements of real property that must first obtain approvals and/or permits according to this title.

     “Public road or street” means any road or street or thoroughfare of whatever nature that is publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular travel.

     “Queue line” means an area for temporary parking and lining of motor vehicles while awaiting a service or other activity.

     “Recreation” means those activities, for amusement or entertainment purposes where the public or members are invited or allowed to attend or assemble, except city, county or state parks and recreation areas. Although not intended to be specifically limited thereby, examples of recreation are bowling alleys, community gardens, golf courses or private tennis centers, billiard or pool halls, stadiums and recreation areas.

     “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle towed or self-propelled on its own chassis or attached to the chassis of another vehicle and designed or used for temporary dwelling, recreational or sporting purposes. The term recreational vehicle includes, but is not limited to, travel trailers, pick-up campers, camping trailers, motor coach homes, converted trucks and buses, and boats and boat trailers.

     “Residential care facility” means an establishment where twenty-four-hour per day care or supervision is provided to related or unrelated persons residing there, which is licensed pursuant to the provisions of the California Community Care Facilities Act or other applicable state law; including, but not limited to, nursing or rest homes, group homes for the handicapped, foster homes, recovery homes and half-way houses.

     “Retail sales or service” means the sale of goods or articles, or the provision of a service, individually or in small quantities directly to the ultimate consumer.

     “Right-of-way” means a strip of land, whether public or private, which has been established by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription, condemnation or other means, which is occupied or intended to be occupied by a road, walkway, railroad, utility transmission facility or other similar use.

     “Room” means an undivided portion of the interior of a dwelling unit, excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways and service porches.

     “School” means any building or part thereof which is designed, constructed or used for education or instruction, whether public or private.

     School, Vocational, Business or Trade. “Vocational, business or trade school” means a facility primarily teaching usable skills that prepare students for jobs in a trade, and meeting state requirements as a vocational facility.

     “Screening” means a method of visually shielding or obscuring a structure or use from an abutting or nearby use, or from the general public, by a fence, wall, hedge, berm, or similar structure, architectural or landscape feature, or combination thereof.

     “Secondhand merchandise” means used common household items including clothing, personal effects, household furnishings, appliances, and office equipment and furnishings.

     “Senior housing” means a housing development consistent with the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (Government Code Section 12900 et seq., including Section 12955.9 in particular), which has been “designed to meet the physical and social needs of senior citizens,” which otherwise qualifies as “housing for older persons” as that phrase is used in the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (Public Law 100-430) and which is consistent with implementing regulations used in California Civil Code Sections 51.2 through 51.4 including that senior housing is residential development developed, substantially rehabilitated, or substantially renovated for senior citizens that has at least thirty-five dwelling units.

     “Setback line” means the inner edge of any required yard, which indicates the required minimum distance from the right-of-way line (private or public) or any lot line for any principal structures to be located.

     “Sight zone” means a triangular area formed by a line drawn between points twenty feet from the intersecting property lines of a corner lot’s street sides, within which no building may be built, nor may any fence, wall or other obstruction exceed three and one-half feet in height or in conformance with the current Highway Design Manual approved by the city council at the time of development approval.

     “Site” means a parcel of land, or a combination of contiguous lots or parcels of land, which upon development may be divided into individual building lots, roadways, parking areas, open space or other uses.

     “Smoking lounge” means businesses that include cigar lounges, electronic smoking lounges, or any combination of those uses. Smoking lounges may serve food.

     “State Density Bonus Law” means California Government Code Sections 65915 through 65918.

     “Story” means the portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling of the roof above.

     “Structural alterations” means any change in the supporting members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams, girders, floor or roof joists, or rafters, or any change in roof or exterior lines, or in foundations.

     “Structure” means anything constructed or erected on the ground, or which requires location on the ground, or is attached to something having a location on or in the ground.

     “Substantial activity” means tangible progress toward submitting a complete application. Tangible progress may include, but is not limited to, adequate response to previous city staff comments, adequate re-submittals, or evidence that technical reports are forthcoming to the city.

     “Swimming pool, hot tub or Jacuzzi” means any confined body of water exceeding two feet in depth and located either above or below the existing finished grade of the site, designed and intended for swimming, bathing or therapeutic purposes.

     “Temporary use” means a use established for a fixed period of time, with the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time period.

     “Theater” means a building or part of a building devoted to showing motion pictures, or for dramatic, musical or live performances.

     “Total land area” means all land within the proposed development, exclusive of any land within private streets and within the rights-of-way of dedicated streets.

     “Trailer” means a vehicle without motive power, designed to be drawn by a motor vehicle and to be used for short-term human habitation, for carrying persons and property, or as a temporary office.

     “Usable open space” means that portion of a development site not covered by main or accessory buildings, exclusive of permitted architectural feature encroachments, which is accessible for use and enjoyment of the occupants of main buildings and which provides requisite amenities such as community gardens and comfort for a proper residential environment; provided further, that access drives, off-street parking areas and utility yards shall not be considered as required usable open space, but recreation decks over accessory structures and roof gardens may be included.

     “Use” means the purpose for which land or a building or structure is arranged, designed, or intended to be used, or for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained.

     “Utility facilities” means those energy, transportation, and water facilities whose uses are subject to the California Public Utility Commission, with the exception of communications facilities.

     “Variance” means permission to depart from the literal requirements and strict application of an ordinance; an owner must demonstrate that the property is subject to unique circumstances, and that enforcement of the regulations would deprive the property of privileges commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zone; it must also be proven that the regulations can be relaxed without any adverse impact on the public good.

     “Vehicle dismantling” means the disassembly or wrecking of vehicles, or the storage, sale or dumping of dismantled vehicles or their parts. The presence of five or more inoperative vehicles on any lot for more than thirty days shall constitute a vehicle dismantling yard.

     “Vehicle repair—Major” means heavy mechanical repairs that typically require more than eight hours of active repair (labor) time to complete. Typical repairs would include rebuilding or reconditioning engines, transmissions, or other major vehicle components; collision repair including body repair, frame straightening, and painting; upholstery. Overnight vehicle storage of vehicles being actively repaired is permitted (see Outdoor storage, Section 17.24.060(E)(8)). Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     “Vehicle repair—Minor” means repair or replacement of lesser vehicle components, such as clutches, carburetors, or brakes, for vehicles not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity. Any operation listed under “Vehicle repair—Major” is not permitted. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     “Vehicle sales” means the indoor or outdoor display and sale of vehicles including those activities which are normally accessory to such display and sale, including, but not limited to, maintenance and minor repairs, washing of vehicles, sale and installation of parts and accessories.

     “Vehicle service/maintenance” means a business primarily intended for the retail sale of vehicle fuel, which may include incidental merchandise and supplies; and vehicular services such as automatic or manual washing and detailing services, tire repair, equipment adjustments, tune-ups and similar minor services.

     “Veterinary services” means an establishment that provides medical or surgical care for household pets and small farm animals, as defined in LGMC 18.16 and Business and Professions Code Section 4826. The use may also include grooming or other minor services including short-term, incidental boarding of animals while undergoing medical treatment.

     “Warehouse” means a building used primarily for the storage of goods and materials.

     “Wholesale sales” includes all sales of goods, wares, merchandise or services to a retailer.

     “Yard” means an area within a lot, adjoining a lot line, and measured horizontally and perpendicular to the lot line for a specified distance, open and unobstructed except for activities and facilities allowed therein by this title.

     1.     “Corner yard” means a side yard of a corner lot which faces a street.

     2.     “Front yard” means a yard measured into a lot from the front lot line, extending the full width of the lot between side lot lines intersecting the front lot line.

     3.     “Rear yard” means a yard measured into a lot from the rear lot line, as defined in this section; extending between the side yards; provided that, for lots having no defined rear lot line, the rear yard shall be measured into the lot from the rearmost point of the lot depth to a line parallel to the front lot line.

     4.     “Side yard” means a yard measured into a lot from a side lot line, extending between the front yard and rear lot line.

     “Zero lot line” means the location of a structure on a lot in such a manner that one or more of the structure’s sides rest directly on a lot line.

     “Zone” means a specifically delineated area or district within which certain regulations and requirements uniformly govern the use, placement, spacing and size of land and buildings. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 1, 2015; Ord. 430 § 4, 2015; Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

Chapter 17.12 ZONING DISTRICT PROVISIONS
17.12.020 Location and boundaries of zoning districts.
     The geographical boundaries of zoning districts are shown upon the zoning map of the city of Lemon Grove. The map, and all amendments, changes and extensions thereof, and all legends, symbols, notations, references and other matters shown thereon, shall be a part of this title and shall constitute Section 17.12.030.

 

17.12.030 Zoning map and zoning matrix.
     A.    Purpose. This section consists of the zoning map and zoning matrix of the city of Lemon Grove, the originals of which are on file with the community development department.

     B.     Zoning Map. The map is herein referred to as the zoning map, and is incorporated as if set forth fully in this title. The zoning map may be amended in whole or in part in accordance with the zoning ordinance amendment procedure set forth in Section 17.28.080.

     C.     Zoning Matrix. The matrix is herein referred to as the zoning matrix, and is incorporated as if set forth fully in this title. The zoning matrix may be amended in whole or in part in accordance with the zoning ordinance amendment procedure set forth in Section 17.28.080. (Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.12.040 Determination of boundaries.
     The following rules shall apply in determining the boundaries or classification of any district shown on the zoning map:

     A.    Where the indicted district boundaries are shown as approximately following street or alley lines, the center line of such streets or alleys shall be construed to be the boundary; otherwise such boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale appearing on the zoning map, unless specifically indicated by dimensions.

     B.     If a district boundary line divides or splits a lot of record, the lot shall be deemed to be included within the district which is the more restrictive. These provisions shall not apply to acreage.

     C.1.  Where a street, alley, or right-of-way is officially vacated, the property formerly in such street, alley or right-of-way shall be included within the district or zone or adjoining property on either side thereof.

     2.     In the event such street, alley, or right-of-way was a boundary between two or more different districts or zones, the new district or zone boundary shall be the property line which is created by such vacation.

     D.    A symbol indicating the classification of property on the zoning map shall apply in each instance to the whole of the area within the district boundaries.

     E.     Uncertainty of Boundaries. Where uncertainty still exists, the planning commission shall, by written resolution, recommend the location of any district or zone boundary or setback line to the council for action and final decision.

 

17.12.050 Boundaries adopted.
     The boundaries of such districts as shown upon the zoning map, or amendments thereto, are adopted and the specific regulations as hereinafter set forth for each district and the general regulations applicable therein as set forth in Chapter 17.04 are established and declared to be in effect upon all lands included within the boundaries of each and every district as shown upon the zoning map.

 

17.12.060 Compliance with regulations.
     Except as provided in this development code:

     A.    No building or structure shall be erected and no existing building shall be moved, altered, added to, or enlarged, nor shall any land, building, or premises be used, or be designated to be used, for any purpose or in any manner, nor shall any yard or other open space surrounding any building be encroached upon or reduced, except as permitted by and in conformity to the regulations specified in this chapter for the land use district as set forth in the zoning map, or any amendment thereto.

     B.     No yard or open spaces provided about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building or any other lot.

     C.     It is unlawful to divide any parcel of land so as to create a parcel of land not meeting all of the requirements of this chapter.

     D.    No building or structure shall be erected nor shall any use be made of any land within any setback areas as shown on the zoning map except landscaping or vehicular or pedestrian thoroughfares, such setbacks being in addition to front or street side yards otherwise required herein.

     E.     No use shall be made of land in the city, which use is a nuisance to the area in which such use is made or intended to be made.

 

17.12.070 Uncertainty of use classifications.
     A.    It is recognized that in the development of a comprehensive zoning ordinance, not all uses of land can be listed, nor can all future uses of lands be anticipated. The listings of uses permitted or permitted subject to a conditional use permit in each zone, or subject to a conditional use permit, are illustrative and meant to indicate the types and scales of development intended for each district. A use may have been omitted from the list of those specified as permissible in each of the various districts herein designated, or ambiguity may arise concerning the appropriate classification of a particular use within the meaning and intent of this chapter. Where such uncertainty exists, the development services director shall determine the appropriate classification for any such use.

     B.     If the development services director believes that the determination of the appropriateness of a particular use in a zone should be made by the city council, all pertinent facts shall be transmitted to the city council for consideration at its next regular meeting. Any decision of the development services director may be appealed pursuant to Section 17.28.020 of this title. (Ord. 444 § 3, 2017; Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 426 § 2, 2014; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.12.080 Pre-zoning of unincorporated areas not shown on map.
     Unincorporated territory adjoining the city may be pre-zoned for the purpose of determining the zoning that will apply to such property in the event of subsequent annexation. The method of accomplishing such pre-zoning shall be as provided for by this title for zoning within the city. Such zoning shall become effective at the same time that the annexation becomes effective.

 

17.12.090 General regulations for overlay districts.
     The regulations set forth for any overlay district shall modify the regulations for the principal district with which it may be combined. All uses and regulations of the principal district shall apply, except insofar as they are modified or augmented by the overlay district regulations.

Chapter 17.16 ZONING DISTRICTS
17.16.010 Residential low density (RL) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The residential low density zone is intended to encompass an area of larger residential lots providing for single-family development.

     B.     Uses Permitted. In the RL zone, the following uses are permitted, subject to the development standards in this section and elsewhere in this title as specified:

     1.     Single-family dwellings.

     2.     Residential care facilities for six or fewer persons.

     3.     Parks and playgrounds.

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right (permitted) or as verified by zoning clearance (ZC), by minor use permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by conditional use permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Small family day care (permitted).

     2.     Large family day care (MUP).

     3.     Accessory rental dwelling units (permitted).

     D.    Uses Requiring Use Permits.

     1.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.050:

     a.     Public service and utility structures and facilities.

     b.     Churches and schools.

     c.     Residential care facilities for seven or more persons.

     2.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a minor use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.052:

     a.     Expansion of nonconforming single-family dwellings used for residential purposes where lot coverage is increased by more than twenty percent.

     E.     Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RL zone. Furthermore, all developments must obtain planned development permits as prescribed in Section 17.28.030:

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Ten thousand square feet for residential uses; twenty thousand square feet for churches and other uses.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. Sixty feet for width; ninety feet for depth.

     3.     Minimum Yards.

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Ten feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty-five feet.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Usable Open Space (as prescribed in Section 17.24.070). Two thousand square feet per dwelling unit.

     6.     Off-Street Parking (as prescribed in Section 17.24.010). Two spaces per dwelling unit, both garaged.

 

     F.     Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Landscaping, Section 17.24.050.

     2.     Fencing, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Home occupations, Chapter 18.20.

     4.     Accessory uses, Section 17.24.060.

     5.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     6.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     7.     Animal keeping, Chapter 18.16.

     8.     Nonconforming use/lot, Section 17.24.090. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

17.16.020 Residential low/medium density (RLM) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The residential low/medium density zone is intended to provide for small lot single-family development.

     B.     Uses Permitted. In the RL/M zone, the following uses are permitted, subject to the development standards in this section and elsewhere in this title as specified.

     1.     Single-family dwellings.

     2.     Residential care facilities for six or fewer persons.

     3.     Parks and playgrounds.

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right (permitted) or as verified by zoning clearance (ZC), by minor use permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by conditional use permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Small family day care (permitted).

     2.     Large family day care (MUP).

     3.     Accessory rental dwelling units (permitted).

     D.    Uses Requiring Use Permits.

     1.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.050:

     a.     Public service and utility structures and facilities.

     b.     Churches and schools.

     c.     Residential care facilities for seven or more persons.

     d.     Senior citizen housing.

     2.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a minor use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.052:

     a.     Expansion of nonconforming single-family dwellings used for residential purposes where lot coverage is increased by more than twenty percent.

     E.     Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RL/M zone. Furthermore, all development must obtain a planned development permit as prescribed in Section 17.28.030:

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Six thousand square feet for residential uses; twenty thousand square feet for churches and other uses.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. Sixty feet for width; ninety feet for depth.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Five feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty feet.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Usable Open Space (as prescribed in Section 17.24.070). One thousand five hundred square feet.

     6.     Off-Street Parking (as prescribed in Section 17.24.010). Two spaces per dwelling unit, both garaged.

     F.     Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Landscaping, Section 17.24.050.

     2.     Fencing, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Home occupations, Chapter 18.20.

     4.     Accessory uses, Section 17.24.060.

     5.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     6.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     7.     Animal keeping, Chapter 18.16.

     8.     Nonconforming use/lot, Section 17.24.090. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

17.16.030 Residential medium density (RM) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The residential medium density zone is intended primarily to provide for moder-ate intensity housing development, such as duplexes or townhouses, mixed with smaller lot single-family homes.

     B.     Uses Permitted. In the RM zone, the following uses are permitted, subject to the development standards in this section and elsewhere in this title as specified.

     1.     Single-family dwelling.

     2.     Duplex dwellings.

     3.     Two single-family dwellings on a lot, subject to a lot depth of one hundred and twenty-five feet and a separation between dwellings of twenty feet or more.

     4.     Residential care facilities for six or fewer persons.

     5.     Parks and playgrounds.

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right (permitted) or as verified by zoning clearance (ZC), by minor use permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by conditional use permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Small family day care (permitted).

     2.     Large family day care (MUP).

     3.     Accessory rental dwelling units (permitted).

     D.    Uses Requiring Use Permits.

     1.     The following uses are permitted, subject to the approval of a conditional use permit, according to the provisions of Section 17.28.050:

     a.     Public service and utility structures and facilities.

     b.     Churches and schools.

     c.     Residential care facilities for seven or more persons.

     d.     Senior citizen housing.

     e.     Multifamily dwellings consistent with the following implementation program set forth in the general plan implementation manual: community development programs No. 14, 23, 34, and 35; safety program No. 23; noise programs No. 1, 2, and 4; conservation and recreation programs No. 15,18, 22, 28, 31, and 41.

     2.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a minor use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.052:

     a.     Expansion of nonconforming single-family dwellings used for residential purpose where lot coverage is increased by more than twenty percent.

     E.     Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RM zone. Furthermore, all development must obtain a planned development permit as prescribed in Section 17.28.030:

     1.     Minimum Site Area. Six thousand square feet, subject to a minimum three thousand square feet per dwelling unit, for residential purposes; twenty thousand square feet for churches and other uses.

     2.     Minimum Site Width and Depth. Sixty feet for width; ninety feet for depth.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030)

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Five feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty feet.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.070)

     a.     Main Buildings: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Minimum Usable Open Space (as prescribed in Section 17.24.070). One thousand five hundred square feet for the first unit and five-hundred square feet for each additional unit.

     6.     Off-Street Parking (as prescribed in Section 17.24.010).

     a.     Resident: Two spaces per dwelling unit.

     b.     Guest: One space per four dwelling units.

     F.     Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Landscaping, Section 17.24.050.

     2.     Fencing, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Home occupations, Chapter 18.20.

     4.     Accessory uses, Section 17.24.060.

     5.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     6.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     7.     Animal keeping, Chapter 18.16.

     8.     Nonconforming use/lot, Section 17.24.090. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

17.16.040 Residential medium/high density (RMH) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The residential medium/high density zone is intended to provide for more compact multifamily housing development, such as garden apartments.

     B.     Uses Permitted. In the RM/H zone, the following uses are permitted, subject to the development standards in this section and elsewhere in this title as specified:

     1.     Residential care facilities for six or fewer persons.

     2.     Parks and playgrounds.

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right (permitted) or as verified by zoning clearance (ZC), by minor use permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by conditional use permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Small family day care (permitted).

     2.     Accessory rental dwelling units (permitted).

     D.    Uses Requiring Use Permit.

     1.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a conditional use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.050:

     a.     Duplex dwellings.

     b.     Public service and utility structures and facilities.

     c.     Churches and schools.

     d.     Boarding or lodging houses.

     e.     Residential care facilities for seven or more persons.

     f.      Senior citizen housing.

     g.     Multifamily dwellings consistent with the following implementation program set forth in the general plan implementation manual: community development programs Nos. 14, 23, 34, and 35; safety program No. 23; noise programs Nos. 1, 2, and 4; conservation and recreation programs Nos. 15, 18, 22, 28, 31, and 41.

     2.     The following uses are permitted subject to the approval of a minor use permit according to the provisions of Section 17.28.052:

     a.     Expansion of nonconforming single-family dwellings used for residential purposes where lot coverage is increased by more than twenty percent.

     E.     Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RM/H zone. Furthermore, all development must obtain a planned development permit as prescribed in Section 17.28.030.

     1.     Minimum Site Area. Six thousand square feet, subject to a minimum one thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling unit, for residential purposes; ten thousand square feet for churches and other uses.

     2.     Minimum Density. No residential development shall be permitted which contains an overall density of less than one unit per three thousand square feet.

     3.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. Sixty feet for width; ninety feet for depth.

     4.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Five feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Forty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     6.     Minimum Usable Open Space (as prescribed in Section 17.24.070). Five hundred square feet for each dwelling unit.

     7.     Off-Street Parking (as prescribed in Section 17.24.010).

     a.     Resident: Two spaces per dwelling unit.

     b.     Guest: One space per four dwelling units.

     F.     Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Landscaping, Section 17.24.050.

     2.     Fencing, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Home occupations, Chapter 18.20.

     4.     Accessory uses, Section 17.24.060.

     5.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     6.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     7.     Animal keeping, Chapter 18.16.

     8.     Nonconforming use/lot, Section 17.24.090.

     F.     Properties located within special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove downtown village specific plan. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

17.16.050 Residential/professional (RP) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The residential/professional (RP) zone is available to business, professional, or health practice uses combined with multifamily residential uses. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be established in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Business and Professional. Uses related to the practice of a vocation requiring specialized training or education that can be performed in an office setting.

     2.     Educational and Training Facilities. Uses that provide classroom-style instruction for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     3.     Financial Institutions. Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing, and safe-keeping of money.

     4.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an office setting.

     5.     Medical, Dental, Clinics and Health Practitioners. Uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human illness and physical malfunction, including clinics, medical and dental laboratories that can be performed in an office setting.

     6.     Parking. Uses that provide for surface or structure parking for passenger vehicles. Parking areas may be public or privately-owned and managed.

     7.     Personal Services. Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming or adornment, health maintenance, or well-being.

     8.     Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services in an office setting.

     9.     Residential. Residential uses that provide dwelling units as a multifamily or senior housing development as condominiums or apartments.

     10.   Residential Care—Small. Uses that provide residential/inpatient care in a small facility (one to eight people).

     C.     Accessory Uses (Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use or are uses permissible in conjunction with the principal use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right and verified by zoning clearance (ZC), an accessory use allowed by minor use permit (MUP) or conditional use permit (CUP) and as noted in this section and defined in Section 17.24.060:

     1.     Communications (ZC, MUP, CUP).

     2.     Day care—Small (ZC).

     3.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     4.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     5.     Home occupations (ZC).

     6.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     7.     Outdoor dining on private property less than one thousand square feet (ZC).

     8.     Outdoor dining on public property or greater than or equal to one thousand square feet (MUP).

     9.     Parking (ZC).

     10.   Residential complex support (ZC).

     11.   Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

 

     1.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     2.     Funeral and Mortuary Services with Assembly Space. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria) that may include assembly space for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Assembly—Small. Uses that provide indoor gathering places for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC 18.27. This use does not include “adult entertainment” as defined by LGMC Section 18.28.020.

     2.     Broadcast and Production Studios without Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music. This use does not include outdoor equipment.

     3.     Visitor Accommodations—Small. Uses that provide lodging, or a combination of lodging and food, primarily to visitors and tourists. This use includes single room occupancy, hotels, and motels, with or without assembly space for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (see also Section 17.28.030).

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the RP zone. Furthermore, all development projects must obtain a planned development permit as prescribed in Section 17.28.030:

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Six thousand square feet subject to a minimum one thousand five hundred square feet per dwelling unit.

     2.     Residential Inclusion. No development project shall contain fewer than two dwelling units, or less than one unit per full three thousand square feet of lot area.

     3.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. Sixty feet for width; ninety feet for depth.

     4.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Five feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Forty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     6.     Minimum Usable Open Space (according to Section 17.24.070). Five hundred square feet for each dwelling unit.

     7.     Off-Street Parking (according to Section 17.24.010).

     8.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     I.      Special Treatment Area I (STA I). Properties located within special treatment area (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove Downtown Village Specific Plan. (Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.16.060 Central commercial (CC) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The central commercial zone is available to pedestrian-oriented, neighborhood-serving commercial and residential uses that offer a variety of goods, services, and activities. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be established in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Supplies. Uses that provide sales of pet supplies including feed and grain. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Business and Professional. Uses related to the practice of a vocation requiring specialized training or education that can be performed in an office setting.

     3.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     4.     Educational and Training Facilities. Uses that provide classroom-style instruction for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     5.     Financial Institutions. Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing, and safe-keeping of money.

     6.     Food and Beverage Establishments without Drive-Through. Uses that prepare, provide, or serve food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises without drive-through service. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27.

     7.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an office setting.

     8.     Maintenance and Repair of Consumer Goods. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods. This use does not include vehicle repair uses.

     9.     Medical, Dental, Clinics and Health Practitioners. Uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human illness and physical malfunction, including medical and dental laboratories that can be performed in an office setting.

     10.   Parking. Uses that provide for surface or structure parking for passenger vehicles. Parking areas may be public or privately-owned and managed.

     11.   Personal Services. Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming or adornment, health maintenance, or well-being.

     12.   Recreation—Small. Uses or facilities associated with indoor or outdoor, active or passive recreation for indoor occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official, and outdoor occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     13.   Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services in an office setting.

     14.   Residential Care—Small. Uses that provide residential/inpatient care in a small facility (one to eight people).

     15.   Retail. Uses that provide new consumer goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics; goods for personal grooming or day-to-day maintenance of personal health and well-being. This use includes, but is not limited to, furniture, appliances, sundries, pharmaceuticals, wearing apparel and accessories, small equipment sales and rentals. This use does not include vehicle uses.

     16.   Retail—Antiques. Uses that provide antique goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics.

 

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right, as verified by Zoning Clearance (ZC), by Minor Use Permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by Conditional Use Permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050):

     1.     Administrative offices (ZC).

     2.     Communications (ZC, MUP, CUP).

     3.     Day care—Small (ZC).

     4.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     5.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     6.     Home occupations (ZC).

     7.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     8.     Outdoor dining on private property less than one thousand square feet (ZC).

     9.     Outdoor dining on public property or greater than or equal to one thousand square feet (MUP).

     10.   Outdoor sales or displays (ZC).

     11.   Parking (ZC).

     12.   Real estate sales/leasing offices.

     13.   Residential complex support (MUP).

     14.   Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     15.   Retail manufacturing (MUP).

     16.   Retail—Secondhand merchandise (MUP).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

     1.     Assembly—Small. Uses that provide indoor gathering places, such as worship or entertainment, for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27. This use does not include “adult entertainment” as defined by LGMC Section 18.28.020.

     2.     Construction Supplies and Equipment. Uses that provide goods, including tools, to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises.

     3.     Food and Beverage Establishments with Drive-Through. Uses that prepare, provide, or serve food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises that may include drive-through service. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27.

     4.     Vehicle Equipment and Supplies without Installation. Uses related to the sale of new small parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles. This use does not include on-site installation.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Assembly—Indoor—Large. Uses that provide indoor gathering places, such as worship or entertainment, for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the building official. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27. This use does not include “adult entertainment” as defined by LGMC Section 18.28.020.

     2.     Broadcast and Production Studios without Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music. This use does not include outdoor equipment.

     3.     Day Care Center. Uses that provide part-time care, for less than twenty-four hours per day, located in a commercial zone.

     4.     Recreation—Outdoor—Large. Uses or facilities associated with outdoor, active or passive recreation for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     5.     Vehicle Service/Maintenance. Business uses primarily intended for the retail sale of vehicle fuel, which may include incidental merchandise and supplies; and/or vehicular services such as automatic or manual washing and detailing, tire repair, equipment adjustments, tune-ups and similar minor services.

     6.     Visitor Accommodations. Uses that provide lodging, or a combination of lodging and food, primarily to visitors and tourists. This use includes single room occupancy, hotels, and motels, with or without assembly space.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (see also Section 17.28.030).

     1.     Broadcast and Production Studios with Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music that includes outdoor equipment.

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the CC zone:

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. No minimum lot area requirement.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. No minimum width or depth requirements.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030). No minimum yard requirements; except ten feet adjacent to any residential district.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Building: Forty feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Coverage. No building coverage limitations.

     6.     Off-Street Parking (according to Section 17.24.010).

     a.     Common Facilities. Off-street parking may be provided, off-site, in common with other businesses in the district.

     b.     In-Lieu Fee. As part of the planned development process (Section 17.28.030), a developer of property within the CC zone may request, or the planning commission or city council may require, the payment of a fee as a substitute for the direct provision of all or part of required off-street parking.

     7.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory buildings and uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     I.      Special Treatment Area I (STA I). Properties located within special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove Downtown Village Specific Plan. (Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.16.070 General commercial (GC) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The general commercial (GC) zone is available to auto-oriented, generally large-scale businesses and activities offering retail goods and services meant to serve the needs of local and regional shoppers. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be located in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Supplies. Uses that provide sales of pet supplies including feed and grain. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Grooming. Uses that provide animal grooming, with or without the sale of supplies, for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Brewpubs and wine bars as defined by Chapter 18.27.

     4.     Business and Professional. Uses related to the practice of a vocation requiring specialized training or education that can be performed in an office setting.

     5.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     6.     Educational and Training Facilities. Uses that provide classroom-style instruction for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     7.     Emergency Homeless Shelter Overlay Zone (EHSOZ). Uses that provide temporary shelter for homeless individuals and/or families within the EHSOZ as provided for in Section 17.20.050.

     8.     Financial Institutions. Uses related to the exchange, lending, borrowing, and safe-keeping of money.

     9.     Food and Beverage Establishments with Drive-Through. Uses that prepare, provide, or serve food or beverages for consumption on or off the premises that may include drive-through service. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27.

     10.   Funeral and Mortuary Services—No Assembly Space. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria). This use does not include assembly space.

     11.   Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an office setting.

     12.   Light Manufacturing. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package finished parts or products, of a limited intensity that result in few outside impacts. This use requires a retail component along the entire street frontages.

     13.   Maintenance and Repair of Consumer Goods. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods. This use does not include vehicle repair uses.

     14.   Medical, Dental, Clinics and Health Practitioners. Uses related to diagnosis and treatment of human illness and physical malfunction, including medical and dental laboratories that can be performed in an office setting.

     15.   Parking. Uses that provide surface or structure parking for passenger vehicles. Parking areas may be public or privately-owned and managed.

     16.   Personal Services. Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming or adornment, health maintenance, or well-being.

     17.   Recreation—Small. Uses or facilities associated with indoor or outdoor, active or passive recreation for indoor occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official and outdoor occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     18.   Retail. Uses that provide new consumer goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics; goods for personal grooming or day-to-day maintenance of personal health and well-being. This use includes, but is not limited to, furniture, appliances, sundries, pharmaceuticals, wearing apparel and accessories, small equipment sales and rentals. This use does not include vehicle uses.

     19.   Retail—Antiques. Uses that provide antique goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics.

     20.   Vehicle Equipment and Supplies without Installation. Uses related to the sale of new or used parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles. This use does not include on-site installation.

     C.     Accessory Uses (LGMC Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right, as verified by zoning clearance (ZC), by minor use permit (MUP, LGMC Section 17.28.052), or by conditional use permit (CUP, LGMC Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Administrative offices (ZC).

     2.     Assembly (MUP).

     3.     Communications (ZC, MUP, CUP).

     4.     Construction staging and laydown—Off-site (ZC).

     5.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     6.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     7.     Home occupations (ZC).

     8.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     9.     Outdoor dining on private property less than one thousand square feet (ZC).

     10.   Outdoor dining on public property or greater than or equal to one thousand square feet (MUP).

     11.   Outdoor sales or displays (ZC).

     12.   Outdoor storage (ZC).

     13.   Parking (ZC).

     14.   Real estate sales/leasing offices (ZC).

     15.   Residential complex support (CUP).

     16.   Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     17.   Residential—Rental dwellings above commercial (CUP).

     18.   Retail manufacturing (MUP).

     19.   Retail—Secondhand merchandise (MUP).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Veterinary Services. Uses that provide medical or surgical care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Assembly—Small. Uses that provide indoor gathering places, such as worship or entertainment, for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27. This use does not include “adult entertainment” as defined by LGMC Section 18.28.020.

     3.     Building Services. Uses that provide construction, maintenance, and repair services for all structural and mechanical elements of structures and exterior spaces.

     4.     Construction Supplies and Equipment. Uses that provide goods, including tools, to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises.

     5.     Funeral and Mortuary Services with Assembly Space. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria) that may include assembly space for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     6.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an industrial setting.

     7.     Recreation—Indoor—Large. Uses or facilities associated with indoor, active or passive recreation for occupancies greater than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     8.     Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services in an office setting.

     9.     Residential Care. Uses that provide residential/inpatient care in a small facility (one to six people).

     10.   Vehicle Equipment and Supplies with Installation. Uses related to the sale of new or used parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles that may include on-site installation.

     11.   Vehicle Repair—Minor. Uses that primarily provide replacement of parts, tune-ups, and similar minor services. This use does not include any operation listed under “Vehicle Repair—Major” or any similar major vehicle repair. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     12.   Vehicle Sales and Rentals. Uses related to the sale, lease, or rental of new or used vehicles or associated equipment including service, maintenance, and minor repairs.

     13.   Vehicle Service/Maintenance. Uses that include businesses primarily intended for the retail sale of vehicle fuel, which may include incidental merchandise and supplies; and/or vehicular services such as automatic or manual washing and detailing services, tire repair, equipment adjustments, tune-ups and similar minor services.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Day Care. Uses that provide part-time boarding care, for less than twenty-four hours per day, for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Kennels. Uses that provide boarding care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Stores. Uses that provide for the sale of household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16, and supplies. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     4.     Assembly—Large. Uses that provide indoor gathering places, such as worship or entertainment, for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the building official. Alcoholic beverage sales shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.27. This use does not include “adult entertainment” as defined by LGMC Section 18.28.020.

     5.     Day Care Center. Uses that provide part-time care, for less than twenty-four hours per day, located in a commercial zone.

     6.     Funeral and Mortuary Services with Assembly Space. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria), that may include assembly space for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     7.     Recreation—Outdoor—Large. Uses or facilities associated with outdoor, active or passive recreation for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     8.     Recycling Collection Facilities—Large or Small. All collection facilities for recyclable materials shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.14.

     9.     Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services that require an industrial setting.

     10.   Residential Care—Large. Uses that provide residential/inpatient care in a large facility (nine or more people).

     11.   Residential—Senior Housing. Residential uses that provide dwelling units as a senior housing development.

     12.   Retail—Secondhand Merchandise. Indoor sales of used consumer products. This use does not permit outdoor sales or displays.

     13.   Visitor Accommodations. Uses that provide lodging, or a combination of lodging and food, primarily to visitors and tourists. This use includes single room occupancy, hotels, and motels, with or without assembly space.

     14.   Warehouse. Uses engaged in bulk storage as well as storage by individuals in separate storage compartments. This use includes outdoor sales.

     15.   Wholesale Distribution. Uses engaged in the bulk storage and distribution of goods, including wholesale showrooms and outdoor sales.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (LGMC Section  17.28.030).

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the GC zone:

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Ten thousand net square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. No minimum width or depth required.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: No minimum side yard required; except ten feet along a side street or adjacent to a residential district.

     c.     Rear: No minimum rear yard required; except fifteen feet adjacent to a residential district.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Thirty feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Coverage. Thirty-five percent.

     6.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory buildings and uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040.

     I.      Special Treatment Area I (STA I). Properties located within special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove Downtown Village Specific Plan. (Ord. 451 § 1, 2019; Ord. 446 § 2, 2017; Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.16.080 Heavy commercial (HC) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The heavy commercial (HC) zone is available to heavier, more obtrusive types of retail, semi-industrial, and service uses that do not require pedestrian traffic or high visibility, and are not compatible with consumer-oriented retail activities. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be located in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Grooming. Uses that provide animal grooming, with or without the sale of supplies, for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Supplies. Uses that provide sales of pet supplies including feed and grain. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Animal Sales and Services—Veterinary Services. Uses that provide medical or surgical care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16.

     4.     Broadcast and Production Studios without Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide production, recording, and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music. This use does not include outdoor equipment.

     5.     Building Services. Uses that provide construction, maintenance, and repair services for all structural and mechanical elements of structures and exterior spaces.

 

     6.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     7.     Construction Supplies and Equipment. Uses that provide goods, including tools, to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises.

     8.     Funeral and Mortuary Services—No Assembly Space. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria). This use does not include assembly space.

 

 

     9.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in a warehouse setting.

     10.   Heavy Manufacturing. Uses that process materials for the fabrication of large equipment and machinery or high technology products, including manufacturing uses that typically produce noise, dust, or other pollutants capable of harming or annoying adjacent uses.

     11.   Light Manufacturing. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package finished parts or products, of a limited intensity that result in few outside impacts. This use may include a retail component.

     12.   Maintenance and Repair of Consumer Goods. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods except motor vehicles.

     13.   Moving and Storage Facilities. Uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances, and equipment from one location to another, including the temporary indoor storage of those same items.

     14.   Parking. Uses that provide for surface or structure parking for passenger vehicles. Parking areas may be public or privately-owned and managed.

     15.   Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services that require an industrial setting.

     16.   Retail—Second Hand Merchandise. Indoor sales of used consumer products. This use does not permit outdoor sales or displays.

     17.   Trucking and Transportation Terminals. Uses engaged in the dispatching and storage of large vehicles that includes maintenance and minor repair of vehicles stored on the premises.

     18.   Vehicle Equipment and Supplies without Installation. Uses related to the sale of new or used parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles. This use does not include on-site installation.

     19.   Vehicle Repair—Major. Uses that provide repairs that typically require overnight vehicle storage, such as rebuilding or reconditioning engines, transmissions, and similar major vehicle components; collision service including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; upholstery. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     20.   Vehicle Repair—Minor. Uses that primarily provide replacement of parts, tune-ups, and similar minor services. This use does not include any operation listed under “Vehicle Repair—Major” or any similar major vehicle repair. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     21.   Vehicle Sales and Rentals. Uses related to the sale, lease, or rental of new or used vehicles or associated equipment including service, maintenance, and minor repairs.

     22.   Warehouse. Uses engaged in bulk storage as well as storage by individuals in separate storage compartments; may include outdoor sales.

     23.   Wholesale Distribution. Uses engaged in the bulk storage and distribution of goods, including wholesale showrooms and outdoor sales.

     C.     Accessory Uses (Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right and verified by zoning clearance (ZC), an accessory use allowed by minor use permit (MUP) or conditional use permit (CUP) and as noted in this section and defined in Section 17.24.060.

     1.     Administrative offices (MUP).

     2.     Communications (ZC or MUP).

     3.     Construction staging and laydown—Off-site (ZC).

     4.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     5.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     6.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     7.     Outdoor sales or display (MUP).

     8.     Outdoor storage (ZC).

     9.     Parking (ZC).

     10.   Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

     1.     Broadcast and Production Studios with Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music that may include outdoor equipment.

     2.     Recycling Collection Facilities—Small. All collection facilities for recyclable materials shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.14.

     3.     Vehicle Equipment and Supplies—With Installation. Uses related to the sale of new or used parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles that may include on-site installation.

     4.     Vehicle Service/Maintenance. Uses primarily intended for the retail sale of vehicle fuel, which may include incidental merchandise and supplies; and/or vehicular services such as automatic or manual washing and detailing, tire repair, equipment adjustments, tune-ups and similar minor services.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Kennels. Uses that provide boarding care for household pets and small farm animals, as defined in LGMC 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Recycling Collection Facilities—Large. All collection facilities for recyclable materials shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.14.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (LGMC Section 17.28.030).

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the HC zone.

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Ten thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. No minimum width or depth required.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty feet.

     b.     Side: Ten feet along a side street, or adjacent to a residential district.

     c.     Rear: No minimum rear yard required; except fifteen feet adjacent to any residential district.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Thirty feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Coverage. Forty percent of lot. However, an exception to this rule shall apply to any business which occupies any HC-zoned lot or combination of contiguous lots with a site area greater than twenty thousand square feet. When a business, which meets this criteria, expands to two or more properties which are neither contiguous with each other, nor with the primary business site, building coverage for any one noncontiguous lot may exceed forty percent as long as the following requirements are met:

     a.     Total building coverage for all noncontiguous portions of the business site shall not exceed forty percent of their combined areas.

     b.     All buildings constructed after January 1, 1993 must conform fully to all zoning requirements including, but not limited to, those relating to building setbacks, off-street parking and loading, landscaping and screening.

     c.     For purposes of this section, noncontiguous lots comprising a portion of a business site shall not be separated from other portions of the business site by a distance of more than five hundred feet.

     d.     The property owner shall execute a covenant, the form and content of which shall be approved by the city attorney, which guarantees that all portions of the business site shall remain in a single common ownership in perpetuity, except as provided in subsection (D)(5)(e). The city shall have the right, but not the obligation to enforce the provisions of the covenant.

     e.     If the owner of property, which is subject to the requirement for the execution of a covenant, desires to sell a portion of his or her property, he or she may sell such property and modify the existing covenant with the approval of the community development director as long as such sale and modification complies with the following:

     f.      Each and every property created by the proposed sale conforms fully to the requirements of this title.

     6.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory buildings and uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040. (Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.16.090 Limited commercial (LC ) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The limited commercial zone, a small group of sites with unique physical and situational characteristics that limit economic potential, is available to uses with low traffic generation, high noise tolerance, and minimal slope disturbance. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be located in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Grooming. Uses that provide animal grooming, with or without the sale of supplies, for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Supplies. Uses that provide sales of pet supplies including feed and grain. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Animal Sales and Services—Veterinary Services. Uses that provide medical or surgical care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16.

     4.     Broadcast and Production Studios without Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording, and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music. This use does not include outdoor equipment.

     5.     Building Services. Uses that provide construction, maintenance, and repair services for all structural and mechanical elements of structures and exterior spaces.

     6.     Business and Professional. Uses related to the practice of a vocation requiring specialized training or education that can be performed in an office setting.

     7.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     8.     Educational and Training Facilities. Uses that provide classroom-style instruction for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     9.     Funeral and Mortuary Services with Assembly. Uses that provide services related to the death of a human (without crematoria) that may include assembly space for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the building official.

     10.   Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an office setting.

     11.   Light Manufacturing. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package finished parts or products, of a limited intensity that result in few outside impacts. This use may include a retail component.

     12.   Maintenance and Repair of Consumer Goods. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods except motor vehicles.

     13.   Moving and Storage Facilities. Uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances, and equipment from one location to another, including the temporary indoor storage of those same items.

     14.   Personal Services. Uses that provide a variety of services associated with personal grooming or adornment, health maintenance, or well-being.

     15.   Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services that require an industrial setting.

     16.   Retail. Uses that provide new consumer goods, large and small, functional and decorative, for use, entertainment, comfort, or aesthetics; goods for personal grooming or day-to-day maintenance of personal health and well-being. This use includes, but is not limited to, furniture, appliances, sundries, pharmaceuticals, wearing apparel and accessories, small equipment sales and rentals. This use does not include vehicle uses.

     17.   Retail—Second Hand Merchandise. Indoor sales of used consumer products. This use does not permit outdoor sales or displays.

     18.   Warehouse. Uses engaged in bulk storage as well as storage by individuals in separate storage compartments; may include outdoor sales.

     19.   Wholesale Distribution. Uses engaged in the bulk storage and distribution of goods, including nurseries, wholesale showrooms and outdoor sales.

     C.     Accessory Uses (Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right and verified by zoning clearance (ZC), an accessory use allowed by minor use permit (MUP) or conditional use permit (CUP) and as noted in this section and defined in Section 17.24.060.

     1.     Administrative offices (ZC).

     2.     Communications (ZA, MUP, CUP).

     3.     Construction staging and laydown—Off-site (ZC).

     4.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     5.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     6.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     7.     Outdoor storage (ZC).

     8.     Parking (ZC).

     9.     Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Stores. Uses that provide for the sale of household pets and small farm animals as defined by LGMC Chapter 18.16, and supplies. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Construction Supplies and Equipment. Uses that provide goods, including tools, to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises.

     3.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in a warehouse setting.

     4.     Recreation—Outdoor—Small. Uses or facilities associated with outdoor, active or passive recreation for occupancies less than fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Recreation—Outdoor—Large. Uses or facilities associated with outdoor, active or passive recreation for occupancies greater than or equal to fifty persons as determined by the community development director.

     2.     Vehicle Repair—Minor. Uses that primarily provide replacement of parts, tune-ups, and similar minor services. This use does not include any operation listed under “Vehicle Repair—Major” or any similar major vehicle repair. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (see also Section 17.28.030).

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the LC zone.

     1.     Minimum Lot Area.

     a.     Existing lots of record as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

     b.     For purposes of subdivision, minimum area of newly created lots shall be ten thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. No minimum width or depth required.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Ten feet.

     c.     Rear: Twenty feet.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Accessory Buildings: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Maximum Building Coverage. Twenty-five percent of lot.

     6.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory buildings and uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040. (Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.16.100 Light industrial (LI) zone.
     A.    Purpose. The light industrial (LI) zone is available to light manufacturing, warehousing, distribution, or other related limited intensity activities. These regulations establish development standards and conditions through which uses may be located in this zone. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this title.

     B.     Permitted Uses. Uses that are consistent with the following categories, as determined by the development services director, are permitted by right, as verified by zoning clearance:

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Supplies. Uses that provide sales of pet supplies including feed and grain. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Veterinary Services. Uses that provide medical or surgical care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Broadcast and Production Studios without Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording, and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music. This use does not include outdoor equipment.

     4.     Building Services. Uses that provide construction, maintenance, and repair services for all structural and mechanical elements of structures and exterior spaces.

     5.     Business Support. Uses that provide printing, copying, photographic, computer, or technological services.

     6.     Construction Supplies and Equipment. Uses that provide goods, including tools and equipment, to repair, maintain, or visually enhance a structure or premises.

     7.     Government. Uses related to local, state, or federal government agencies in an industrial setting.

     8.     Light Manufacturing. Uses that process, fabricate, assemble, treat, or package finished parts or products, of a limited intensity that result in few outside impacts. This use may include a retail component.

     9.     Maintenance and Repair of Consumer Goods. Uses that provide maintenance, cleaning, and repair services for consumer goods except motor vehicles.

     10.   Moving and Storage Facilities. Uses engaged in the moving of household or office furniture, appliances, and equipment from one location to another, including the temporary indoor storage of those same items.

     11.   Parking. Uses that provide for surface or structure parking for passenger vehicles. Parking areas may be public or privately-owned and managed.

     12.   Research and Development. Uses engaged in research and testing activities associated with discovering new or improved products, methods, processes, or services that require an industrial setting.

     13.   Trucking and Transportation Terminals. Uses engaged in the dispatching and storage of large vehicles that includes maintenance and minor repair of vehicles stored on the premises.

     14.   Vehicle Equipment and Supplies with Installation. Uses related to the sale of new or used parts, tools or supplies for repairing or maintaining vehicles that may include on-site installation.

     15.   Vehicle Repair—Minor. Uses that primarily provide replacement of parts, tune-ups, and similar minor services. This use does not include any operation listed under “Vehicle Repair-Major” or any similar major vehicle repair. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     16.   Warehouse. Uses engaged in bulk storage as well as storage by individuals in separate storage compartments; may include outdoor sales.

     17.   Wholesale Distribution. Uses engaged in the bulk storage and distribution of goods, including wholesale showrooms and outdoor sales.

     C.     Accessory Uses (Section 17.24.060). Accessory uses are those uses that are supportive and incidental to the primary use. The accessory uses may be allowed by right and verified by zoning clearance (ZC), and accessory use allowed by minor use permit (MUP), or conditional use permit (CUP) as noted in this section and defined in Section 17.24.060.

     1.     Administrative offices (MUP).

     2.     Communications (ZC, MUP, CUP).

     3.     Construction staging and laydown—Off-site (ZC).

     4.     Employee convenience sales and services—Cafeteria, food service, or consumer goods (ZC).

     5.     Employee convenience sales and services—Recreational facilities (MUP).

     6.     Kiosk concession sales (ZC).

     7.     Outdoor storage (ZC).

     8.     Parking (ZC).

     9.     Residential—Caretaker dwelling (MUP).

     10.   Retail manufacturing (ZC).

     D.    Uses Requiring a Minor Use Permit (Section 17.28.052).

     1.     Animal Sales and Services—Day Care. Uses that provide day care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     2.     Animal Sales and Services—Grooming. Uses that provide animal grooming, with or without the sale of supplies, for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     3.     Animal Sales and Services—Kennels. Uses that provide boarding care for household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC 18.16. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     4.     Animal Sales and Services—Pet Stores. Uses that provide for the sale of household pets and small farm animals as defined by LGMC Chapter 18.16, and supplies. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     5.     Broadcast and Production Studios with Outdoor Equipment. Uses that provide for the production, recording and broadcasting of radio, television shows, motion pictures, and music that may include outdoor equipment.

     6.     Vehicle Repair—Major. Uses that provide repairs that typically require overnight vehicle storage, such as rebuilding or reconditioning engines, transmissions, and similar major vehicle components; collision service including body, frame, or fender straightening or repair; overall painting or paint shop; upholstery. Facilities and operations shall comply with all standards set forth in this title.

     7.     Vehicle Sales and Rentals. Uses related to the sale, lease, or rental of new or used vehicles or associated equipment including service, maintenance, and minor repairs.

     8.     Vehicle Service/Maintenance. Uses primarily intended for the retail sale of vehicle fuel, which may include incidental merchandise and supplies; and/or vehicular services such as automatic or manual washing and detailing, tire repair, equipment adjustments, tune-ups and similar minor services.

     E.     Uses Requiring a Conditional Use Permit (Section 17.28.050).

     1.     Recycling Collection Facilities—Large. All collection facilities for recyclable materials shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.14.

     2.     Recycling Processing Facilities. All processing facilities for recyclable materials shall be subject to LGMC Chapter 18.14.

     F.     Uses Requiring a Planned Development Permit (LGMC Section 17.28.030).

     G.    Development Standards. The following property development standards shall apply to all land and structures in the LI zone.

     1.     Minimum Lot Area. Twenty thousand square feet.

     2.     Minimum Lot Width and Depth. One hundred feet.

     3.     Minimum Yards (as prescribed in Section 17.24.030).

     a.     Front: Twenty-five feet.

     b.     Side: Ten feet; except twenty feet along a street side, or adjacent to a residential district.

     c.     Rear: Fifteen feet.

     4.     Maximum Building Height (as prescribed in Section 17.24.040).

     a.     Main Buildings: Forty feet.

     b.     Accessory Structures: Fifteen feet.

     5.     Enclosure. All permitted or conditionally permitted activities, including all accompanying accessory uses, shall be confined to enclosed structures, and shall not be conducted or occur upon any open or unenclosed area, whether private or public, unless expressly permitted in this section or authorized by a conditional use permit, temporary use permit or other official means.

     H.    Additional Zoning Provisions. All uses shall be subject to the applicable regulations of this development code, as specified in this section or prescribed elsewhere. Additional development standards relating to this zone are located in the following sections:

     1.     Accessory buildings and uses, Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Landscaping and screening, Section 17.24.050.

     3.     Loading, Section 17.24.020.

     4.     Nonconforming uses, structures, and lots, Section 17.24.090.

     5.     Parking, Section 17.24.010.

     6.     Performance and restricted use standards, Section 17.24.080.

     7.     Signs, Chapter 18.12.

     8.     Temporary uses, Section 17.28.040. (Ord. 434 § 2, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

Chapter 17.20 SPECIAL OVERLAY DISTRICTS
17.20.010 Special treatment area (STA) overlays.
     A.    Purpose. This section is intended to supplement the regulations of the underlying zone and establish overlay zoning regulations, which will ensure the optimal utilization of each of the eight special treatment areas designated in the Lemon Grove general plan, in terms of unity of development, open space preservation and enhancement, expanded housing opportunities, and support for community aesthetic and economic goals.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     All development occurring in the special treatment areas shall comply with the planned development permit procedure specified in Section 17.28.030.

     2.     All development occurring in the special treatment areas shall comply with the standards of the underlying zoning designation, the general regulations of this title, and the provisions of this section. Where conflict occurs between any regulations affecting development within the special treatment areas, the more restrictive of any such regulations shall apply, unless the planning staff or city council have exercised specific discretionary authority to establish special requirements to ensure that a development project or other land use complies with the vision, goals, policies and objectives of the general plan.

     3.     Direct vehicular access from private property in the special treatment areas on to arterial roadways shall be restricted, unless the planning commission or city council finds that such direct vehicular access can be accomplished in a manner, which does not adversely affect traffic flow or create a hazard to vehicular or pedestrian safety.

     4.     No development shall occur within any special treatment area unless adequate provision has been made for flood control.

     C.     Park Dedication. Within the residential special treatment areas, the following provisions shall apply:

     1.     A developer of property shall offer to dedicate to the city and improve land for public recreation, of a shape and location judged by the city to be suitable for public use, and of a size in accordance with the formula established in Chapter 18.36. If the city deems it desirable to enlarge the area to be used for public park land, the developer shall cooperate and negotiate with the city regarding matters of compensation and transfer of ownership.

     2.     If the city council determines that the purposes and intent of the general plan and the recreation needs of the neighborhood can be better satisfied by development or enhancement of recreational facilities elsewhere in the community, the developer shall be required to pay an in-lieu fee in accordance with the formula established in Chapter 18.36.

     3.     Where the city does require the developer to dedicate and improve public park land, then the city may allow the developer to reduce the amount of common open space otherwise required in accordance with Section 17.24.070, in the manner to be negotiated.

     D.    Special Treatment Area I, Downtown Village. The downtown village contains the traditional downtown commercial district located around the intersection of Broadway and Lemon Grove Avenue. Properties within special treatment area I (STA I) shall be governed by the regulations of the zoning categories currently in place until such time as the city prepares and adopts a specific plan for the area. The specific plan shall incorporate the elements set forth in the city’s general plan.

     1.     Minimum Area Required for Development. No subdivision of land shall be permitted which causes fragmentation of land ownership prior to development pursuant to the proposed specific plan. The smallest unit of land to be developed shall be an individual lot of record as of the effective date of this title. No parcel shall be subdivided for the purpose of developing portions of it independently, unless a development and phasing plan, consistent with the proposed specific plan, is prepared and approved for the entire STA.

     2.     Properties located within special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove downtown village specific plan.

     E.     Special Treatment Area II, Massachusetts Station. The Massachusetts Station STA encompasses the existing commercial site on the north side of Massachusetts Avenue across from the Massachusetts Avenue Trolley Station. Redevelopment of the site with a mix of residential and neighborhood commercial is planned to increase the number of residents that can walk to the trolley station and use the trolley to commute, and to establish neighborhood shopping opportunities to reduce driving and encourage walking and bicycling.

     1.     Minimum Area Required for Development. No subdivision of land shall be permitted which causes fragmentation of land ownership prior to development pursuant to a specific plan prepared and submitted by or for the owner or owners of land within the STA and approved and adopted by the city. The specific plan shall incorporate the elements set forth in the city’s general plan. The smallest unit of land to be developed shall be an individual lot of record as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. No parcel shall be subdivided for the purpose of developing portions of it independently, unless a development plan, consistent with the proposed specific plan, is prepared and approved for the entire parcel.

     F.     Special Treatment Area III, Regional Commercial. The regional commercial STA is planned for continued redevelopment with large retail stores. Uses within this STA shall serve both local residents and attract shoppers from adjacent communities. Until new land use regulations are developed to implement the regional commercial policies of the general plan, land use will be governed by the regulations of the zoning categories currently in place as well as requirements in subsections (F)(1) through (5) of this section.

     1.     Planned Development Permit Required. No development shall occur within the STA unless such development has been approved pursuant to the planned development provisions of Section 17.28.030. A planned development permit is required for all development regardless of the size of the property, the intensity of the proposed activity of the size of proposed structures.

     2.     Minimum Area for Development. No subdivision of land shall be permitted which causes fragmentation of land ownership, prior to development, pursuant to the adoption of the proposed regional commercial land use regulations. The smallest unit of land to be developed shall be an individual lot of record as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title. No parcel shall be subdivided for the purpose of developing portions of it independently, unless a development and phasing plan, determined by the city to be consistent with the proposed regional commercial land use, is prepared and approved for the entire parcel.

     3.     Incentives for Large Lot Development. It is the city’s intent that this area shall be developed with large lot retail uses on parcels of land comprising at least one city block or having a minimum area of three acres. In order to encourage such development, the city will cooperate with developers and will consider providing development incentives including, but not limited to, the following:

     a.     Expedited processing of land use and development permits;

     b.     The closing of public streets within proposed developments;

     c.     Flexible application of sign regulations.

     4.     Use of Existing Developed Properties.

     a.     The use, and change of use, of existing developed properties shall be governed by the regulations of the current underlying zoning. Except as otherwise stated in subsection (F)(4)(b) of this section, modifications to existing buildings, other improvements and overall site development shall be governed by the nonconforming use regulations set forth in Section 17.24.090 of this title.

     b.     Within the area bounded by Vista Avenue, North Avenue, the western boundary of the lots abutting West Street and the alley to the north of the properties that abut the north side of Broadway, the maintenance, establishment, and expansion of uses consistent with either the requirements of the general commercial (GC) zone or the heavy commercial (HC) will be permitted to occur, until large lot retail uses are established consistent with the goals of the general plan.

     5.     Use of Existing Undeveloped Properties. Undeveloped properties may be developed with uses requiring a minimum investment in permanent improvements, such as outdoor storage operations that are aesthetically compatible with other permitted land uses in the STA. As the city would consider such operations interim uses of land, unless deemed necessary for public health and safety or for the protection of the public or adjacent properties, the city may choose to waive or defer requirements for permanent improvements, such as curbs and sidewalk and the undergrounding of overhead utility lines. However, appropriate screening of storage, paving where appropriate, and landscaping will be required. This subsection (F)(5) shall not apply to those properties that have become vacant as a result of the relocation of a business or other land use with the assistance of the Lemon Grove development services department.

     G.    Special Treatment Area IV, Western Central Avenue Residential. Other than the construction of one single-family dwelling on a single legal lot of record and permitted accessory buildings, no development shall occur in STA IV until an owner or owners of property have prepared a master development plan encompassing the entire STA consistent with the policies for this area established in the general plan.

     1.     Planned Development Permit. No development shall occur within the STA unless such development has been approved pursuant to the planned development provisions of Section 17.28.030. A planned development permit is required for all development regardless of the size of the property, the intensity of the proposed activity or the size of proposed structures.

     2.     No subdivision of land shall be permitted which causes fragmentation of land ownership prior to development pursuant to a master development plan, approved and adopted by the city, encompassing the entire STA. The smallest unit of land to be developed shall be an individual lot of record as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title.

     H.    Special Treatment Area V, Federal Boulevard Automobile Sales District. The Federal Boulevard automobile sales district shall be developed exclusively with new car automobile dealerships that have, as their primary business, the sale of new automobiles and which may include accessory uses that are customarily attendant to new car sales. Such accessory uses may be approved by the city council upon a finding and determination that their inclusion as part of a new car dealership will contribute to the development and maintenance of a modern and productive automobile sales district. For purposes of this section, the terms “car” and “automobile” shall include within their meaning: truck and recreational vehicle, but shall not include motorcycle.

     1.     Planned Development Permit Required. No development shall occur within the STA unless such development has been approved pursuant to the planned development provisions of Section 17.28.030. A planned development permit is required for all development regardless of the size of the property, the intensity of the proposed activity of the size of proposed structures.

     2.     Minimum Area Required for Development. No subdivision of land shall be permitted which causes fragmentation of land ownership, unless such subdivision has been found to be necessary or desirable to establish a land use which is consistent with the intent, requirements and conditions of this section. The determination that a land use proposal is consistent with the intent, requirements and conditions of this section shall be made by the city council.

     I.      Special Treatment Area VI, Central Lemon Grove Avenue. Properties within STA VI shall be developed with commercial uses that generate low traffic volumes, have a high noise tolerance, and require minimal slope disturbance.

     1.     Planned Development Permit Required. No development shall occur within the STA unless such development has been approved pursuant to the planned development provisions of Section 17.28.030. A planned development permit is required for all development regardless of the size of the property, the intensity of the proposed activity of the size of proposed structures.

     2.     In order to protect new development and adjacent properties, before all renovation or remodeling of existing uses involving any grading, and before all new development, a geotechnical study shall be prepared and appropriate measures shall be incorporated to ensure stability of the steep embankment at the rear of lots along Lemon Grove Avenue.

     3.     For all new development, a traffic study shall be required to identify access points from Lemon Grove Avenue that minimize disruptions to traffic flow.

     4.     No property within this STA shall have vehicle access from Noble Street and any development occurring, adjacent to that street shall formally relinquish such access.

     5.     The height of new structures shall not exceed the lesser of three stories or thirty-five feet.

     6.     Developers of new structures within the STA shall provide written notice of their intentions regarding development to the owners of adjacent properties, within three hundred feet of the exterior boundaries of the subject property, prior to filing an application for a planned development approval from the city. The owners of adjacent properties will be advised that their comments regarding the developers’ proposal and their suggestions regarding the reduction of project impacts on surrounding properties may be filled in writing with the city’s development services department. Such notice shall be sent by registered mail with return receipt and the developer shall provide proof of receipt of the notice by the property owners when the planned development permit application is submitted.

     J.      Special Treatment Area VII, SR-125 Interchange Planning Area. At the time of construction of the SR-125 freeway, no on- or off-ramps will be constructed. Acknowledging that the city’s traffic circulation need can change over a period of time, the city will work with Caltrans, area property owners, and other interested groups and agencies to monitor the relationship between SR-125 and the city’s system of streets. The purpose of this STA is to alert property owners to the fact that future conditions could justify the constructions of on- and off-ramps at Troy Street and SR-125. Development of properties in the STA shall conform to the requirements of the underlying zoning regulations.

     K.    Special Treatment Area VIII, Eastern Central Avenue Residential. The land within this STA has been determined to be suitable for the construction of apartments and condominiums due to its proximity to the downtown village and civic center concept area.

     1.     Planned Development Permit Required. No development shall occur within the STA VIII unless such development has been approved pursuant to the planned development provisions of Section 17.28.030. A planned development permit is required for all development regardless of the size of the property, the intensity of the proposed activity or the size of proposed structures.

     2.     Single lots within the STA may be developed at a density of fourteen dwelling units per acre.

     3.     Parcels of land with a minimum of one hundred feet of frontage on a public street and with a minimum area of fifteen thousand square feet, may be developed at a density of twenty-nine unit per acre.

     4.     All buildings within the STA shall be limited to a maximum of two stories in height or a maximum height of twenty-five feet, whichever is the more restrictive. (Ord. 434 § 3, 2015; Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

17.20.020 Entryway overlay.
     (Reserved)

 

17.20.030 Noise impact overlay.
     (Reserved)

 

17.20.040 Special sign districts.
     A.    Purpose. This section is intended to provide regulations which reinforce the identity of specific areas of the city to promote business and strengthen the city’s tax base and to implement the general plan. Special sign districts shall be considered overlay zones which modify the underlying zoning with regard to sign regulations.

     B.     General Provisions. All signs displayed in special sign districts shall comply with the provisions of the city sign ordinance except as set forth in this chapter.

     C.     Central Business Special Sign District.

     1.     Areas Affected by Regulations. The regulations of the central business special sign district shall be applied to all properties within former redevelopment area No. 1, downtown revitalization area as adopted by the former city of Lemon Grove redevelopment agency.

     2.     Criteria for Approval of Signs. The criteria for approval of signs within the central business special sign district shall be as established in subsection (G) of this section.

     D.    (Reserved)

     E.     (Reserved)

     F.     (Reserved)

     G.    Central Business Special Sign District.

     1.     Area Affected by Regulations. The regulations of the central business special sign district shall be applied to all properties within the former redevelopment project area No. 1, downtown revitalization area as adopted by the former city of Lemon Grove redevelopment agency.

     2.     Criteria for Approval of Signs. Subject to approval by the development services director, businesses within the central business special sign district may display signs which may or may not conform to explicit standards regarding sign type or location when the following requirements are met:

     a.     The total sign area, number of signs and height of signs for any business establishment shall not exceed the general limitations established by the city sign ordinance.

     b.     Two or more contiguous properties, for which a unified sign plan has been filed with the city, may be treated as single business establishment for purposes of the application of these special sign district regulations.

     c.     Each sign shall be designed so as to relate to the architectural style of the building or buildings on the site by means of compatible materials, colors and other design elements.

     d.     All signs placed upon a building shall be dimensionally and are proportional to the building facings upon which they are displayed.

     e.     Each sign for a business establishment shall be related to other signs on the premises by utilization of one or more compatible design elements, such as materials, lettering, style, color, configuration and placement.

     f.      Signs shall not obscure or adversely affect signs or improvements on adjacent properties.

     g.     Roof signs as described in Section 18.12.070(J) shall not be permitted.

     3.     Application. Applications for sign permits for properties within the central business special sign district shall consist of the following:

     a.     A plot plan, drawn to a scale and denoting dimensions; indicating the location of all property lines, buildings and other structures, fences and walls, landscaped areas and all existing and proposed signs.

     b.     Detailed elevations of building faces where signs are to be installed, showing location and design of proposed signs and existing signs which are to remain.

     c.     Description of proposed sign materials, textures and colors and type and intensity of proposed sign lighting.

     d.     The applicant may be required to provide actual samples of colors or materials if deemed necessary by the development services director. (Ord. 434 § 3, 2015; Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

17.20.050 Emergency homeless shelter overlay zone (EHSOZ).
     A.    Purpose. This section is intended to designate an area within the general commercial (GC) zone where an emergency homeless shelter necessary to meet the needs of the city’s homeless population can be located by-right in the city, without a conditional use permit or any other discretionary permit, as required by state law.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     The emergency shelter overlay zone is identified on the zoning map of the city. All emergency shelters shall be located within the physical boundaries of this overlay zone.

     2.     Emergency shelters shall be subject to those development and management standards that apply to residential or commercial development within the GC zone.

     3.     In addition, all emergency shelters shall comply with the written, objective standards as specified in Government Code Section 65583, subd. (a) (4) (A), as specified in subsection C of this section.

     C.     Development Standards Specific to an Emergency Homeless Shelter Located Within Overlay Zone.

     1.     Each emergency shelter shall be located within an entirely enclosed, permanent structure.

     2.     Each emergency shelter may have a maximum of sixty beds to serve a maximum of sixty clients.

     3.     The maximum length of stay at any one time for any person shall be six months in any twelve month period.

     4.     One parking space shall be provided for each employee, volunteer, service provider, and non-client who will be on site during peak periods plus one space per three beds.

     5.     There shall be no camping/sleeping in vehicles permitted on the site of the shelter.

     6.     An emergency shelter shall be located at least three hundred feet from another emergency shelter, as measured from property boundaries.

     7.     Each emergency shelter shall provide on-site supervision at all times when the shelter is open.

     8.     Each shelter shall conform to the city’s outdoor lighting requirements.

     9.     The emergency shelter operator/provider shall submit a written management plan, to the satisfaction of the city, with the plot plan application for approval. The intent of the management plan is to establish operating procedures that promote compatibility with the surrounding area and businesses. The operator shall agree to maintain the standards in the management plan. (Ord. 451 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 17.24 DISTRICT REGULATIONS
17.24.010 Off-street parking.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations provide standards for off-street parking and requirements for vehicle parking accommodations within public rights-of-way in order to ensure adequate accessibility and well-maintained parking facilities so as to provide a balance between multi-modal transportation, reduced traffic congestion and efficient utilization of the street right-of-way.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     When any principal building is constructed, enlarged, or increased in capacity, or when a change in use triggers an increase in off-street parking, the applicant shall provide for additional off-street parking spaces, alternative services, or in-lieu fees shall be required, in conformity with this section.

     2.     Outdoor dining associated with an approved principal restaurant use, temporary use permits, outdoor displays, outdoor sales, and outdoor storage lots do not generate additional parking requirements provided that these elements do not displace required parking spaces or public rights-of-way.

     C.     Parking Space Requirements.

     1.     Parking requirements shall be established by the primary use.

     2.     Fractional space requirements shall be rounded down to the nearest whole space.

     3.     When two or more uses are located in the same building and/or are common developments, the parking requirements shall be the sum of the separate requirements for each use, except as specifically provided in this section.

     4.     Off-street parking facilities for one commercial use may be considered as providing required parking facilities for another commercial use only if it can be shown that the business peak hours of the two uses are adequately offset. Such arrangement shall be subject to the approval of the community development director through the applicable discretionary permit process. Absent any applicable discretionary permit requirement, the community development director may approve the arrangement through a zoning clearance.

     5.     Where two or more commercial uses in a commercial development are combining parking facilities, the minimum space requirement may be reduced by up to one-quarter of the sum of the requirements of the various uses.

     6.     The city council may reduce the total number of parking spaces required for any multifamily residential development by up to fifty percent, based upon findings that the proposed development is located within close proximity (one-quarter mile) to a shopping center containing a store that provides basic necessities or public transit.

     7.     The city council may modify parking space requirements for any project provided the application is consistent with Section 17.28.060.

     8.     Parking requirements for uses not described in this section shall be one parking space per five hundred square feet of floor area.

     9.     Required off-street parking spaces shall be provided in the quantities defined in the following schedule:


Residential

a.   Single-family

Two spaces per unit, both of which must be garaged.

b.  Duplex and multifamily

One space per studio apartment; two spaces for all other units, one of which must be covered. Guest parking shall be provided at a rate of one space per four dwelling units.

c.   Senior housing complexes, boardinghouses, and other sleeping accommodations

Applicant shall submit a parking study. Deed restrictions may be implemented as a part of the development approval process.

d.  Accessory rental dwelling units

One space per unit.

Retail/Business and Professional/Research and Development in an Office Setting/Recreation (Fitness Clubs)

Primary Use

One space per five hundred square feet of floor area.

Visitor Accommodations

Primary

One space per two units.

Assembly use

One space per four persons permitted occupancy (CBC).

Assembly (Religious Worship, Entertainment)/Educational and Training

Primary assembly space(s)

One space per four fixed seats or per thirty-five square feet of floor area where seats are not fixed.

Vehicle Service/Maintenance

Station enclosed structure

One space per five hundred square feet of floor area.

 

Manufacturing/Research and Development in a Warehouse Setting

 

One space per five hundred square feet of floor area.

Recycling Facility

 

Section 18.14.040

Institutional (K—12th grades)

 

Two spaces per classroom

 

     D.    Parking Standards.

     1.     Off-street parking spaces to serve single-family residential lots shall be located on the same lot as the dwelling served (including accessory rental dwelling units (ARDUs)). Such spaces shall not be located within a required front or side yard setback.

     2.     Off-street parking spaces for duplex and multi-family dwellings shall be located on the same lot as, or not more than one hundred feet from, the dwelling served except as approved by conditional use permit or planned development permit. One parking space per dwelling unit shall be within a garage, carport or other suitable covered structure, and the other may be uncovered. Such spaces shall not be located within a required front or side yard setback.

     3.     In commercial and industrial zones, at least fifty percent of off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same lot as, or on a lot contiguous to, the building or use being served. The remaining parking may be located off-site.

     4.     Except for single-family dwelling developments, groups of more than two parking spaces shall be so located and served by an access drive that the use of the spaces and the access drive will require no backing movements or other maneuvering within a street right-of-way. Alleys may be used for maneuvering.

     5.     Entrances from and exits to streets and alleys shall be provided at locations approved by the city engineer or other appropriate city officer.

     E.     Site Improvement Requirements.

     1.     Access drives to required parking spaces serving the site shall be finished with a surface material that complies with subsection (E)(3).

     2.     Accessible Parking Spaces and Path of Travel. Required accessible parking spaces and path of travel shall be designed consistent with Title 24 of the California Building Code. Ramps shall be provided where necessary for access.

     3.     Surface. Parking areas shall be finished with a surface material as follows:

     a.     Parking areas composed of an aggregate or other loose surface material shall show public right-of-way improvements (driveway extension, driveway apron, curb, gutter and landscape) along the project frontage and consistent with regional standard drawings and approved by the city engineer to prevent migration of the aggregate material into the public right-of-way.

     b.     Dust control management shall be required at all times when the aggregate or other loose surface material is being used in the parking areas.

     c.     Additional fire department requirements may be established for the construction of the access drive if emergency access is required.

     4.     Parking areas shall include adequate drainage facilities and water quality elements in conformance to the current Regional Water Quality Control Board Order and this code.

     5.     Lighting provided to illuminate any parking facility or paved area shall be designed to contain the direct illumination on-site and minimize glare on any adjoining residential development.

     6.     Bumpers, posts, wheel stops, or other acceptable devices designed to protect structures, utilities and landscape shall be installed at parking spaces located along the perimeter of a parking lot in order to prevent vehicles from overhanging walkways, planted areas or property lines, or from striking walls, trees or any other object.

     7.     Parking lots shall be completely striped or marked, indicating individual parking spaces, accessible parking, path of travel, and traffic lanes. Alternative stall designations (wheel stops with numbers, posts at the head of stalls, etc.) shall be installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer and the community development director for parking surfaces finished with loose aggregate.

     8.     The parking area shall be designed and constructed to conform to Section 17.24.050, Landscaping and screening.

     F.     Space and Access Dimensions. Minimum parking space and parking aisle dimensions shall be as defined in the following table:

 

Parking Angle

Space Type

Space Dimensions

00 (Parallel)

300

450

900

Regular

Width

10′

9′

9′

9′

 

Length

23′

19′

19′

19′

 

Depth

10′

17′3″

19′10″

19′

Compact

Width

10′

8′6″

8′6″

8′6″

 

Length

19′

15′

15′

15′

 

Depth

10′

14′10″

16′7″

15′

Motorcycle

Width

n/a

n/a

n/a

3′6″

 

Length

n/a

n/a

n/a

7′

Aisle

Car one-way

15′

13′

14′

24′

 

Car two-way

20′

20′

20′

24′

Proposed parking areas, space dimensions, quantity of accessible spaces and path of travel shall conform to accessibility standards established by Title 24 of the California Building Code.

 

 

     1.     Compact Parking Spaces. Up to seventy-five percent of the total spaces may be designed for compact cars in projects with ten or more required parking spaces.

     2.     Adequate quantities and secured parking accommodations for motorcycles, scooters and alternative transportation devices are encouraged. Requests to offset standard parking requirements with alternative parking spaces may be approved through a discretionary permit process.

     G.    Bicycle Parking Facilities. In projects with ten or more required parking spaces, a rack or other secure device for storing and protecting bicycles from theft shall be installed. Such devices shall be provided for at least one bicycle per ten required parking spaces. Such devices shall be located so as not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     H.    Public Right-of-Way Improvements. Installation consistent with current city standards shall be required as a part of any discretionary permit application in order to provide adequate on-street parking along the frontage of the property and contain potential pollutants and loose materials on site.

     I.      Parking Districts. The city council may implement parking districts where parking meters or other control devices or systems are needed to adequately manage public parking in a manner consistent with the California Vehicle Code. A survey shall be conducted to analyze the efficiency, safety, and regulation of the traffic upon the public streets. The city manager shall recommend areas in which new parking meter zones shall be established; recommend changes in old parking meter zones, the parking meter rate, and times of operation. The city manager’s recommendation shall be based upon the following considerations:

     1.     Character of the neighborhood;

     2.     Density of metering;

     3.     Amount and type of on- and off-street parking;

     4.     Relative vehicle turnover;

     5.     Other such information as the city council may require or the city manager may deem appropriate.

     The regulation of traffic by parking meters and the deposit of coins in such parking meters shall become effective upon the installation of appropriate parking meters and signs thereon, giving notice of such parking meter regulation and rate.

     Funds received by any parking control system shall be allocated to the parking district in which it is located to offset the cost of the parking district program and to provide improvements to that district. A parking district shall be implemented consistent with Sections 17.28.080 and 17.28.090.

     J.      Special Treatment Area I (STA I). Properties located within the special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the City of Lemon Grove Downtown Village Specific Plan. (Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.24.020 Off-street loading.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to ensure that sufficient off-street loading facilities are provided so as to prevent traffic congestion and to aid in the efficient conduct of business.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     When any main building is constructed, enlarged, or increased in capacity, or when a change in use creates an increase in the amount of off-street loading space required, additional off-street loading space shall be required.

     2.     No portion of any front yard, or any side yard on the street side of a corner lot, shall be used for off-street loading purposes.

     3.     Fractional space requirements shall be counted as a whole space.

     4.     Loading spaces shall be so located and designed that trucks shall not back into a public street or alley.

     5.     No part of an alley or street shall be used for loading excepting areas designated by the city for loading.

     6.     No area may be utilized and counted both as a required parking space and a required loading berth space.

     7.     In the case of mixed uses, the total number of required loading spaces shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Loading space facilities for one use shall not be considered as providing required loading space facilities for any other use.

     8.     Requirements for uses not specifically listed herein shall be based upon the requirements for comparable uses listed and upon the particular characteristics of the use as determined by the planning director.

     C.     Loading Space Requirements. Off-street loading facilities shall be provided according to the following schedule:

 

 

 

Use

Floor Area (square feet)

Berths Required

Professional, service and business offices, health related uses, hotels, motels and auditoriums

15,000 – 100,000

1 space

100,000 – 350,000

2 spaces

each additional 300,000

1 space

Undertaking services

Less than 5,000

1 space

each additional 5,000

1 space

Other commercial and industrial uses

3,000 – 30,000

1 space

30,001 – 90,000

2 spaces

90,001 – 150,000

3 spaces

each additional 90,000

1 space

 

 

     D.    Dimensional Requirements. All off-street loading facilities shall comply with the following minimum dimensions:

 

Use

Berth Width

Berth Length

Berth Height

Heavy commercial and industrial use

12′

50′

14′

Undertaking services

10′

25′

8′

Other uses

11′

35′

13′

 

     E.     Design Requirements. Requirements for off-street loading areas shall include:

     1.     Lighting. If the loading area is illuminated, lighting shall be deflected away from residential uses so as to cause no annoying glare.

     2.     Access Drives. Entrances from and exits to streets and alleys shall be provided at locations approved by the director of public works. In no case shall access drives be less than one hundred feet apart, measured center to center.

     3.     Landscaping and Screening. As prescribed in Section 17.24.050.

     F.     Properties located within the special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove downtown specific plan. (Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

17.24.030 Yards and setbacks.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to ensure that required yard areas as specified in each zoning district remain open and unobstructed while accommodating necessary accessory structures.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     All required yards on the street frontage of lots shall be measured from the road public right-of-way line.

     2.     In any residential district, when more than fifty percent of the lots along a block face, or such other distance as is determined by the community development director to be appropriate, are developed, then the required front yard set-

back for a given lot shall be the lesser of either the yard standard for that district or the average of setbacks of those developed lots on both sides of the street provided a driveway length is not less than nineteen feet deep from the garage door to the property line or right-of-way.

     3.     In any commercial district, the front yard setback for a given interior lot shall be determined by the lesser of either the yard standard for that district or the average of setbacks of the two adjacent lots, if both such lots are developed.

     4.     Notwithstanding other limitations, all required yards may be used for landscaping, walkways and driveways.

     5.     On the street side of a corner lot, no building shall be placed within a triangular area formed by a line drawn between points twenty feet from the intersecting property lines of a corner lot, nor shall any fence or other structure within said area exceed three and one-half feet in height.

     6.     In the case of a triangular corner lot with two street frontages, either frontage may be selected as the front yard. The remaining frontage shall be considered a street side yard and the yard abutting the lot line without street frontage shall be considered a side yard.

     7.     Notwithstanding the specific standards of each zoning district, the street side yard of a corner lot shall be no less than ten feet.

     8.     A side yard, which abuts an alley or a private easement road, with a width of forty feet or less, shall not be considered a street side yard.

     9.     Residential lots which have greater than fifty percent of their street frontage on the enlarged portion of a cul-de-sac street shall observe a front yard setback of either fifteen feet or the average of the setbacks of the two abutting lots, whichever results in the lesser setback.

     10.   For new commercial buildings, sidewalk arcades and similar architectural features may be established and maintained in a required front yard upon approval of any encroachment permit. Such architectural features may be added to existing commercial buildings by conditional use permit (Section 17.28.050).

     11.   The minimum distance between a principal building and any other building on the same lot shall be ten feet; provided that any of the above distances shall be increased by one foot for each two feet that any building involves exceeds twenty-five feet, unless a more strict height regulation prevails.

     12.   No detached accessory building shall be closer than ten feet to any other building or closer than five feet to any property line.

     13.   Where a rear yard abuts an alley, one-half of the width of such alley may apply to the depth of the rear yard to the extent of not more than fifty percent of the depth of the required rear yard.

     14.   Unless otherwise specified, within commercial and industrial developments off-street parking may be permitted within that part of the required front or street side yard, except the outer five feet of such yards must be kept free of off-street parking when they abut any residential district.

     15.   Notwithstanding the specific standards of each zone, within the RL/M, RM, and RM/H zones interior side and rear yard requirements may be waived, to provide for zero lot line residential development, upon the approval of the city council. Approval shall be a part of the planned development permit process (Section 17.28.030).

     C.     Projections.

     1.     No projection shall extend into a public utility easement, nor shall any projection reduce access ways or walks at ground level to less than three feet in obstructed width.

     2.     Certain structures and equipment may extend into the minimum required yards according to the following schedule:


Structure

Front Yard

Side Yard on Street Side of Corner Lot

Interior Side Yard

Rear Yard

Balconies

Not allowed

Platforms, decks, or landings at or below the first floor of the building

6′

3′

3′

3′

Roofed open-sided patio covers or carports as defined in the California Building Code, and roofed porches

Not allowed

15′

Fire escapes and open stairways

Not allowed

3′

3′

3′

Eaves, awnings, sills, cornices, buttresses, chimneys, cantilevered bay windows, and similar architectural features

2′

2′

2′

2′

Clothes lines, and radio/TV receiving antennas (where a permitted use)

Not allowed

Allowed anywhere in the yard

Detached accessory buildings (e.g., garages, sheds, and similar nonresidential structures)

Not allowed

No closer than 5′ to any lot line and 10′ to any other enclosed building

Swimming pools, hot tubs, Jacuzzi

Not allowed

No closer than 5′ to any lot line

Accessory mechanical equipment (e.g., air condition/ heating equipment, pool filters)

Not allowed

No closer than 5′ to any lot line

No closer than 5′ to any lot line

 

 

(Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.24.040 Building heights.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to ensure the accurate and desirable determination of maximum structural heights within the city’s several districts.

     B.     Height Measurement.

     1.     Building or Other Facility. In the case of a building or other structure, except those listed in subsection (B)(2) of this section, height shall be measured as the vertical distance by which such building or other structure, or portion thereof, extends above the average elevation of the adjoining finished grade(s) within five feet of the structure.

     2.     Fence, Wall, Screening, or Dense Landscaping. In the case of a fence, wall, screening, or dense landscaping, height shall be measured as the vertical distance by which such structure, or portion thereof, extends above the highest elevation of the adjoining finished grade.

     C.     Accessory Projections Above Maximum Height.

     1.     Structures on Top of Buildings. Projections above any building, including, but not limited to, parapet walls, solar water heating and photovoltaic systems, nonresidential penthouses, chimneys, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may extend not more than eight feet above the roof of the building.

     2.     Antennas on Top of Buildings.

     a.     Rooftop Antennas Permitted on All Buildings. With the exception of antennas utilizing tower supporting structures and dish-type antennas exceeding twenty-four inches in diameter, the following roof-mounted antennas may project above the maximum height of any building.

     i.      Radio and television receiving antennas;

     ii.     Transmitting and receiving antennas for citizen’s band and amateur radio;

     iii.    Transmitting and receiving antennas for radio-telephone and short-distance dispatch equipment.

     b.     Rooftop Antennas Subject to Conditional Use Permit. In the commercial and industrial zones, all rooftop antennas other than those specifically permitted in subsection (C)(2)(a) of this section which are to be placed on top of buildings may be installed subject to the approval of a conditional use permit.

     3.     Freestanding Flagpoles. Freestanding flagpoles may project not more than thirty feet above finished grade.

     4.     Freestanding Antennas.

     a.     Permitted Freestanding Antennas. Freestanding antennas, including tower-supported antennas, may extend to a maximum height of one hundred feet provided they are not in the required front yard or street side yard of a corner lot.

     b.     Conditionally Permitted Freestanding Antennas. Freestanding antennas which exceed the maximum height may be to the approval of a conditional use permit.

     D.    Height Extension. Extension beyond maximum allowable heights may be approved by the planning director, subject to review of the development plan and the following conditions:

     1.     Residential.

     a.     Residential structures may exceed their maximum heights only if every yard is increased by one foot in depth for every two feet in height.

     b.     In no case shall a single-family dwelling exceed thirty-five feet in height.

     c.     In no case shall any residential structure exceed sixty feet in height.

     2.     Commercial. Commercial structures may exceed their maximum heights only if every yard is increased by one foot in depth for every one foot in height.

     3.     Industrial. Industrial structures may exceed their maximum heights only if every yard is increased by one foot in height.

     4.     Accessory Buildings.

     a.     Accessory structures may exceed their maximum heights only if all their setbacks and separations are increased by one foot in depth for every two feet in height.

     b.     In no case shall any accessory structure exceed twenty-five feet in height, provided that no such structure shall exceed the height of the tallest main building on the same lot.

     E.     Properties located within the special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove downtown specific plan. (Ord. 394 § 4, 2010; Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

17.24.050 Landscaping and screening.
     A.    Purpose. These landscaping and screening regulations are intended to protect individual properties from undesirable impacts generated by surrounding land uses and general urban activity, and to improve the appearance of neighborhoods in the city by providing adequate landscaping and screening.

     B.     Landscaping.

     1.     In any property development, an area shall be devoted to landscaping which amounts to a minimum of fifteen percent of total lot area in residential developments, and ten percent of the total lot area in nonresidential developments.

     2.     All landscaping required by this section shall be installed and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan as approved by the planning community development director. This plan shall indicate the precise location, size and species of all landscaping materials. The use of drought resistant planting materials is required.

     3.     All planting areas shall be served by a permanent, water conserving irrigation system with an automatic rain sensor.

     4.     Ground cover may consist of low-growing plant materials, bark mulch or crushed rock.

     5.     Shrubbery which is intended to provide a dense screen to meet specific requirements of this section and plants installed as groundcover shall be of such size and growth characteristics as to be capable of reaching their specified height or extent of horizontal coverage within one year of planting.

     6.     Except in RL and RL/M districts, all planting areas shall be bounded by a curb having a minimum height of six inches.

     7.     Landscaping areas shall be kept free from weeds and debris. Whenever necessary, plantings shall be replaced with other plant materials to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements.

     8.     For all off-street parking areas of five or more spaces, an area equivalent to a minimum of ten percent of the area provided for parking shall be landscaped. Such landscaping shall be considered as a portion of the landscaping required for the entire lot. As part of this landscaping, one tree for every six parking spaces, or fraction thereof, shall be provided and located so as to visually disrupt long rows of parked automobiles. These trees shall be at least fifteen gallons in size, may be clustered and shall be provided with a means of irrigation and properly maintained.

     C.     Screening and Fencing.

     D.    Purpose of Fence Regulations. To maintain adequate visibility on private property and in public rights-of-way, to provide vehicular sight distance for safety purposes and to maintain the openness of front and side yards, to protect the light and air to abutting properties, to provide adequate screening and to encourage creative and attractive designs by regulating the height, location and design of fences and walls.

     E.     General Provisions, Fence Material, Construction and Maintenance Requirements.

     1.     All fences and walls shall be constructed of durable, low-maintenance materials including, but not limited to, decorative masonry block, stone, wood, rigid vinyl fence material, chainlink, metal and wrought iron. Walls constructed of concrete block shall be painted or covered with neutral-colored stucco that is consistent with the colors of the structures on the subject property.

     2.     Open fence material is any fence material with a given dimension either vertical or horizontal elements with a minimum of ninety percent of open area between either vertical or horizontal support or structural elements.

     3.     All fences and walls shall be constructed in a professional manner and in accordance with the city of Lemon Grove Wood and Masonry Fence detail.

     4.     The property owner is responsible for the removal of graffiti on fences and walls within forty-eight hours of discovery. Said graffiti shall be removed or painted over with a color that closely matches the surface color.

     5.     All fences, walls and other screening devices shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

     6.     Where fences, walls or other screening devices are erected within any required front or street side yard, the area between such structures and the property line shall be landscaped with low growing, drought-tolerant plant materials.

     7.     Walls and fences more than six feet in height shall be subject to the approval of the community development director. The approval of said fences and walls by the community development director shall be based on unique conditions or unusual circumstances relating to the topography, lot design subject property, location of easements, driveway location, vehicular sight distance or public right-of-way circumstances to achieve parity with other properties in the same vicinity and zone and shall be subject to the variance findings of fact set forth in Section 17.28.060 of the Municipal Code.

     8.     Prescribed fences, walls, or dense landscaping need not be provided along a lot line if a fence, wall, or dense landscaping of at least equivalent height, density, and maintenance exists immediately abutting and on the opposite side of such lot line.

     9.     A landscaped earthen berm may count toward required heights of landscaping and screening.

     10.   Rooftop mechanical equipment, including but not limited to heating, air conditioning and ventilating equipment on all commercial and industrial buildings and all multifamily dwellings shall be screened so that it may not be seen from the level of adjacent streets and sidewalks.

     11.   Properties located within the special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the city of Lemon Grove downtown specific plan.

     12.   A minimum clearance of three feet shall be provided between fences, walls or other screening devices and fire hydrants or other fire protection water supplies sources. (California Fire Code Section 508.5.5)

     F.     Allowable fence and wall materials include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Solid natural wood or durable simulated wood products having the appearance of natural wood;

     2.     T-111 or similar exterior siding material when painted, stained and protected from weathering;

     3.     Decorative masonry or concrete block (CMU) painted or coated with neutral-colored stucco surface on both sides and consistent with the color of the structures on the subject property;

     4.     Stone, natural or artificial;

     5.     Neutral colored rigid vinyl fence material;

     6.     Open chainlink or chainlink with wood, neutral colored metal or flexible neutral colored vinyl slats. Fences constructed of said materials shall be located only on the interior side, street side lot lines behind the front yard setback and the rear lot line or on the secondary frontage (nonentrance frontage) of a through-lot;

     7.     Other similar durable, low maintenance materials approved by the community development director.

     G.    Prohibited fence and wall materials include, but are not limited to:

     1.     Plywood, oriented strand board (OSB) or similar material;

     2.     Bamboo mat or similar material;

     3.     Corrugated sheet metal or fiberglass;

     4.     Plastic or fabric tarp material;

     5.     Patio shade cloth or similar flexible fabric or material;

     6.     Barbed wire and/or razor ribbon, except as allowed by this section;

     7.     Other materials as determined by the community development director.

     H.    Fences in Commercial and Industrial Zones.

     1.     The use of barbed wire or razor ribbon is permitted on properties in commercial or industrial zones upon approval of the community development director and where there is a demonstrated need for this type of fence material. The use of barbed wire and/or razor ribbon on fences located in the front yard or side street set back or in front of the principal building on the lot, whichever is greater, is prohibited.

     2.     Fences in commercial and industrial zones may be up to a maximum of seven feet including the height of barbed wire and/or razor ribbon, unless there is a demonstrated need for a greater height and subject to approval by the community development director.

     3.     No fence wall or other screening device in commercial and industrial zones and within any required front or street side yard shall exceed three and one-half feet in height except as follows:

     a.     Such devices in the HC and LI zoning districts may extend up to six feet in height, except for that area in the sight zone as defined in Section 17.08.030.

     b.     In the GC zoning district, fences, walls or other screening devices within a required street side yard may be built to the following heights:

     i.      At two feet behind property line: four feet in height.

     ii.     At four feet behind the property line: four and one-half feet in height.

     iii.    At six feet behind the property line: five feet in height.

     iv.    At eight feet behind property line: five and one-half feet in height.

 

 

 



 

Fence Heights and Locations in Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

     I.      General Provisions for Fences in Residential and the Residential Professional Zones.

     1.     In any residential zone, for corner lots located on Four-Lane Major, and Class I, II and III Collector arterial streets, fences, walls, or other screening devices erected along the side lot line of a corner lot may be built to a height of six feet, and such devices may be built to a height of forty-two inches within the required front yard setback according to the following conditions and exceptions:

     a.     The side lot line abuts the right-of-way of a street designated as arterial” or “major” Four-Lane Major, and Class I, II and III Collector streets on the circulation element of the city’s general plan; and

     b.     Such fences, walls, or other screening devices may be limited to a lesser height if deemed necessary by the city engineer in order to provide adequate vehicular sight distance at the intersection of the arterial street and any other street;

     c.     The community development director has determined that the erection of such fence, walls, or other screening devices will not adversely affect the use or enjoyment of adjacent residential properties; and

     d.     If deemed necessary by the city engineer, no fence, wall, or other screening device, may be installed until the owner of the affected property has submitted a study, conducted by a qualified traffic engineer, which determines that such screening device will not cause a dangerous obstruction of vehicular sight distance or create a hazardous condition at the intersection of the streets that abut the subject property; and

     e.     Paving, signage, or other devices, which the city engineer has determined are necessary to mitigate public or private impacts associated with the installation of such fences, walls, or other screening devices, have been installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

     2.     In any residential zone, for corner lots located on streets other than arterial streets, fences, walls, or other screening devices erected along the side street lot line of a corner lot may be built to a height of six feet provided:

     a.     Fences, walls or other screening devices located on the side street property line of a corner lot may be located on the side street property line.

     b.     Fences, walls or other screening devices with a maximum height of six feet located on the side street property line of a corner lot may be constructed of a solid or opaque material from the corner of the building closest to the side street property line to the rear lot line in order to provide rear yard privacy.

     3.     A screening device consisting of dense landscaping a minimum of three and one-half feet in width or a solid fence or wall, or a minimum height of six feet shall be provided:

     a.     Along the interior lot lines of any non-residential use, including off-street parking areas of five or more spaces, which abuts any residential property;

     b.     To screen any open area used for the loading or storage of goods, materials or wastes.

     4.     Where an off-street parking area of five or more spaces, or an off-street loading area, adjoins a street or a required front or corner yard, then a solid wall or fence, or compact evergreen hedge shall be provided along either the street lot line or the street side of the parking or loading area, standing no less than three and one-half feet in height.

     5.     All openings for access ways in required screenings shall be provided with gates or other devices constructed of view-obscuring materials, except for off-street parking or loading areas.

 



 

Residential Fences/Walls on Corners Lots on Circulation and Non-Circulation Streets

 

 

     J.      Fences in the (RL, RL/M, RM and RM/H) Residential Zones and the Residential Professional (RP) Zone.

     1.     Fences and walls that comply with the following requirements and do not exceed six feet in height may be constructed without a building permit when located on private property in all residential zones and in the residential professional (RP) zone when the subject property is developed with a residential land use. The development services director may require the issuance of a building permit for entryway elements exceeding six feet in height when constructed of masonry, wood, metal, other heavy material or when required by the building code.

     2.     Fences located in the required front yard and side street setback may be a maximum of six feet in height provided:

     3.     Solid wood, masonry or other forms of solid fences, walls or screening devices located in the required front yard, and side street setback shall not exceed forty-two inches in height unless approved by the variance procedures of Section 17.28.060 of the Municipal Code except as follows:

     4.     Chain link fences, solid wood fences, solid masonry walls or hedges located in the front yard setback; interior side yard and the portion of the side street setback located in front of the principal structure(s) on the subject property shall not exceed forty-two inches.

     5.     No portion of a solid fence or wall located in the front yard or side street setback in front of the structure may exceed forty-two inches in height except for posts, pilasters, or columns. The portion of a fence or wall in excess of forty-two inches in height shall consist of open fence material as defined by subsection (E)(2) such as open metal trellis, wrought iron or other open durable and rigid material or a durable, rigid transparent material that provides adequate visibility of the front of the property from the public right-of-way. Fences with vertically curved metal, wrought iron or similar design elements located between posts, pilasters or columns may exceed the six-foot maximum height by six inches at the highest point of the curved element. The use of wood or plastic lattice or other similar materials that do not provide adequate visibility of the front portion of the property or that require other than minimal maintenance is prohibited.

     6.     Fences and walls with posts, columns or pilaster features may be constructed provided these features are located a minimum of eight feet on center, unless a lesser distance is necessary to accommodate a wall with a horizontal curve, topography or other design constraint. Masonry pilasters, columns or similar features shall not exceed sixteen inches in width.

     7.     Landscaping that forms a solid barrier or hedge located adjacent to fences and walls in the front yard and side street setbacks are permitted provided the landscaping does not exceed forty-two inches in height.

     8.     Fences exceeding six feet in height, measured from finished grade within the property, unless allowed pursuant to subsection (E)(7) in residential zones are prohibited. This provision does not prevent the placement of a fence or wall on top of a retaining wall that retains earth or soil to the full height of the retaining wall.

     9.     The use of barbed wire and/or razor ribbon is prohibited in all residential zones. Barbed wire or razor ribbon may be permitted on the rear lot lines of properties in residential zones where the rear lot line of a property located in a residential zone abuts a commercial or industrial zone upon approval of the community development director and where there is a demonstrated need for this type of fence material.

 



Residential Fences and Walls

 

 

     K.    Fences located on Through-lots in Residential Zones as defined by Section 17.08.030 of the Municipal Code.

     1.     Fences located on through-lots in all residential zones may be a maximum of six feet in height and constructed of solid wood, masonry or other opaque material on the secondary frontage (non-entrance frontage) property line of the through lot.

 

 



Fences on Through-Lots

 

 

     L.     Prohibited Fences and Walls. The following fences, walls, hedges or screening devices are prohibited:

     1.     Fences or walls that create or cause a hazard;

     2.     Fences that obstruct or limit emergency access to properties;

     3.     Chain link fences in excess of forty-two inches in height in the front yard and side street setback in front of the residence on the property;

     4.     Fences, walls or dense vegetation located adjacent to driveways or on corner lots that obstruct vehicular sight distance as determined by the city engineer are prohibited;

     5.     Fences within easements or other property right reservation areas.

     M.    Refuse Enclosure Requirements.

     1.     All refuse containers shall be screened by an enclosure consisting of masonry and opaque, durable gates, which shall be a minimum height of six feet. Upon the determination of the community development director, an opaque covering may be required on top of the enclosure. Refuse enclosures shall be subject to the following:

     a.     Masonry refuse enclosures are required on all residential, multiple residential developments consisting of five or more dwelling units and all commercial and industrial developments in excess of five thousand square feet of commercial or industrial floor area. Refuse enclosures are also required for commercial or industrial land uses of five thousand square feet of floor area or wherever commercial refuse container(s) (dumpsters) are used.

     b.     Wherever possible all refuse enclosures shall be located so as to provide convenient access and to minimize backing maneuvers of refuse removal vehicles in the public right-of-way.

     c.     Wherever possible a minimum two-foot wide landscape planter shall be located adjacent to refuse enclosures, planted with shrubs and groundcover and equipped with a permanent automatic water conserving irrigation system to provide screening of the enclosure(s).

     d.     All new refuse enclosures constructed after the adoption of this requirement shall include a ten-foot by thirty-foot reinforced Portland cement concrete (PCC) pad located in front of said trash enclosure(s) sufficient to support the imposed load of refuse removal equipment. The location of said PCC apron shall be to the satisfaction of the community development director.

     e.     Whenever practical refuse enclosures shall be located a minimum of twenty feet from any public right-of-way.

     f.      All refuse enclosures shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

     g.     Refuse enclosures shall comply with the EDCO Disposal Company refuse enclosure design standards. All refuse enclosures shall be of adequate capacity to accommodate the number of refuse receptacles required by the specific land use on the subject property and shall accommodate all required recycling containers. Refuse enclosures shall be painted or covered with neutral-colored stucco that is consistent with the color of the structures on the subject property.

     h.     The installation of refuse enclosure(s) shall be required when the development of the subject property requires the installation of public street improvements as required by Section 12.10.060 of the Municipal Code.

     i.      Refuse enclosures shall not be constructed within five feet of combustible construction. (California Fire Code Section 304.3.3)

 



 

Refuse Enclosure Design with Concrete
Apron and Landscaping

 

(Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010; Ord. 378 § 3, 2008; Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

 

 

17.24.060 Accessory buildings and uses.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations ensure that required yard setback areas and access ways remain open and unobstructed while accommodating accessory buildings and facilities. This section also lists accessory uses which are permitted in combination with principal uses.

     B.     Accessory Buildings and Facilities. All accessory buildings, structures, and facilities shall be designed in conformance with all applicable uniform codes and applicable regulatory requirements, including, but not limited to, Building and Fire Codes and shall obtain building permits, if required, prior to construction.

     1.     Attached Accessory Buildings. In cases where an accessory building is attached to the main building, it shall be made structurally a part thereof and shall comply in all respects with the requirements of this title applicable to main buildings.

     2.     Communications Facilities. The physical components that compose new wireless communications systems. Any type of building-mounted or freestanding communications structures may be allowed, subject to the following:

     a.     Structures shall be processed according to Section 17.24.080(F)(3), (Communications facilities).

     b.     Structures shall be located and constructed according to Sections 17.24.040(C) and (D), (Building heights).

     3.     Detached Accessory Buildings. All buildings shall be compatible in siding and roof materials, roof overhang, and window treatments, with on-site structures; shall conform to Section 17.24.080, Performance standards; and shall not create any hazardous conditions as determined by the public works director and the building official.

     a.     In Commercial or Industrial Zones.

     i.      No building shall be located in a required front yard setback, no closer than ten feet to other buildings or closer than five feet to the rear or side property lines.

     ii.     The building shall not exceed two hundred square feet in area or fifteen feet in height, notwithstanding the provisions of Section 17.24.040, (Building heights).

     b.     In Residential Zones.

     i.      No building shall be located in a required front yard setback, no closer than ten feet to other buildings and no closer than five feet to the rear or side property lines.

     ii.     An accessory building not used for residential habitation but accessory to a residential use (shed, garage, workshop, etc). It shall not occupy more than thirty percent of the required rear yard setback.

     iii.    Accessory buildings shall be residential in visual character.

     4.     Kiosks, Stands, and Carts. City pre-approved models of these facilities are allowed on private property in commercial or industrial zones and on public property in any zone, subject to the following standards:

     a.     The facility shall only be used to operate accessory uses consistent with subsection (D)(6).

     b.     The facility shall be located in a stationary location and shall not expand without amendment to the original approval.

     c.     The location does not eliminate more than five percent of any required landscaped area or parking spaces.

     d.     The location of the facility shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

     C.     Accessory Uses in All Zones.

     1.     Communications. Uses that provide exchanges of information through wireless communications facilities components consistent with Section 17.24.080.

     2.     Construction Staging and Laydown—Off-Site. Construction materials and equipment may be located on sites separate from, but in close proximity to, the approved construction site. The area shall include:

     a.     Screening fencing, storage areas, security measures.

     b.     Traffic plan.

     c.     Lighting for security purposes that is consistent with Section 17.24.080.

     d.     Water quality best management practices.

     e.     Operations shall limit noise, dust, and nuisance to surrounding neighborhoods consistent with construction standards (Title 15).

     3.     Parking. Off-street parking that serves residents, employees, or patrons of a principal use, whether located on the same lot or on a different lot, is allowed in all zones, except:

     a.     Oversize vehicles and/or trailers, having a combined gross vehicle weight rating equal to or greater than twelve thousand five hundred pounds, may only park in residential zones for incidental short-term loading or unloading. This prohibition shall not apply to recreational vehicles, city-owned vehicles, school buses parked on public school properties, or vehicles parked on properties with facilities approved by conditional use permits (Section 17.28.050) or planned development permits (Section 17.28.030).

     4.     Community gardens consistent with provisions in Section 17.24.080, Performance and restricted use standards.

     D.    Accessory Uses in Residential Zones. Accessory uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal use, and shall not generate additional parking, landscape, or street improvement requirements, unless otherwise specified in this title. Permitted residential accessory uses include:

     1.     Accessory Rental Dwelling Units (ARDUs). ARDUs are allowed on a lot with one single-family dwelling in the RL, RL/M, RM or RM/H zone; it may be located within the primary dwelling or otherwise consistent with subsection (B)(1) and (2). An ARDU shall be deemed to be a residential use that is consistent with the existing general plan, zoning designations, and allowable density for the lot. No local ordinance, policy, or program to limit growth shall be applied to an ARDU. ARDUs are subject to the following requirements:

     a.     The ARDUs area shall not exceed six hundred forty square feet or thirty percent of the primary dwelling.

     b.     Separate sale or ownership of the ARDU is prohibited.

     c.     The ARDU shall comply with all yard and setback requirements which apply to single-family dwellings and the underlying zone.

     d.     Off-street parking for the single-family dwelling shall meet current city standards regarding setbacks, size, and number of spaces.

     e.     One additional off-street parking space shall be provided for the ARDU that meets the Section 17.24.010 standards.

     f.      Conversion of a garage into an ARDU is not permitted until compliance with Section 17.24.010 has been achieved, including replacement of the garage.

     g.     An ARDU shall not be permitted on a lot having a guesthouse or guest living quarters. Conversion of a guesthouse or guest living quarters into an ARDU is permitted provided the unit is consistent with the regulations set forth in this section.

     h.     The city council may modify or waive requirements in this subsection according to the variance requirements of Section 17.28.060.

     i.      Appeals shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020, except that the appeal shall not include a noticed public hearing and shall only consider the project’s compliance with the standards in this subsection.

     2.     Assembly Space. Assembly space that is supportive of and incidental to a principal use and utilized by employees or clients of the principal use.

     3.     Day Care. A facility licensed and equipped as required by law, which provides nonmedical care or supervision for periods of less than twenty-four hours, is allowed as follows:

     a.     Small family day care is permitted in single-family dwellings in all residential zones according to the following standards:

     i.      Day care is provided in a single-family dwelling for one to eight people, depending on ages, including children under the age of ten residing in the home.

     ii.     The day care provider shall reside in the home.

     b.     Large family day care is permitted in single-family dwellings in the RL, RL/M and RM zones according to the following standards:

     i.      Day care is provided in a single-family dwelling for up to fourteen people, depending on ages, including children under the age of ten residing in the home.

     ii.     The day care provider shall reside in the home.

     iii.    Obtain a minor use permit according to Section 17.28.050.

     iv.    Play areas shall be situated in such a manner as to minimize the impact of noise on surrounding properties. The development services director may require the installation of six-foot high masonry walls, landscaping, and/or other noise attenuating devices.

     v.     Adequate street capacity and an area sufficient for dropping off and picking up persons shall be provided to the satisfaction of the development services director and the public works director in a manner consistent with traffic safety requirements.

     vi.    A facility shall not be established within one thousand feet of another such facility. The distance between any two large family day cares shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening properties or structures, from the closest exterior wall of each dwelling.

     vii.   Additional conditions shall be limited to reasonable traffic, parking, and noise control and compliance with the development standards of the zoning district.

     4.     Garage, Yard or Estate Sales. The activity shall not be an ongoing commercial activity and shall be subject to the following standards:

     a.     The event shall not exceed three consecutive days.

     b.     The number of events per property or unit shall not exceed four in a twelve-month period.

     c.     Sale items shall not be stored outdoors during any period in which items are not being actively sold.

     5.     Home Occupations. See Chapter 18.20 for applicable requirements.

     6.     Real estate sales/leasing offices may be located on the site of subdivisions of five or more lots.

     7.     Residential Complex Support. Manager’s office, maintenance equipment yard, recreation facilities, laundry, vending machines, storage, or similar facilities.

     8.     Home-sharing in accordance with Chapter 18.48 (Home-Sharing). Home-sharing is allowed on a lot with one single-family dwelling; one duplex; or a multifamily development. See Chapter 18.48 for applicable requirements.

     E.     Accessory Uses in Commercial or Industrial Zones. The following accessory uses are allowed in commercial or industrial zones. Businesses operated by a different entity than the one licensed to operate the principal use, shall obtain a separate business license.

     1.     Administrative Offices. An administrative office in conjunction with a principal use, if such office does not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the total floor area, unless approved by a discretionary permit.

     2.     Employee Convenience Sales and Services. These uses are intended primarily for the convenience of on-site employees.

     a.     Cafeteria, Food Service, or Consumer Goods. This use is allowed within existing buildings, not exceeding twenty-five percent of the total floor area, or in a separate building according to subsection (B)(3), subject to obtaining a zoning clearance according to Section 17.28.070 and a building permit, as applicable, for any tenant improvements. Alcoholic beverage sales are not permitted.

     b.     Recreational Facilities. This use is allowed within existing buildings or outdoors on the same lot, not exceeding twenty-five percent of the total lot area or twenty-five percent of the floor area, subject to obtaining a zoning clearance according to Section 17.28.070 and a building permit, as applicable, for any tenant improvements.

     3.     Kiosk Concession Sales. Retail sales of consumer goods, food, or beverages are allowed when operated from kiosk, cart, or stand models pre-approved by the city, subject to the following:

     i.      Obtain a zoning clearance for each specific site, for an on-going or seasonal period, according to Section 17.28.070.

     ii.     Retail sales shall be consistent with regulations of the underlying zone.

     iii.    The number and location of concession sites and types of materials sold is at the sole discretion of the city.

     iv.    The operator shall sign a lease agreement with the city; maintain a minimum one million dollars aggregate general liability insurance policy that names the city as additional insured; and post a security deposit, the value to be determined by the city, to cover costs for removal and disposal of the kiosk, cart, or stand and repairs of public property.

     v.     Sales of alcoholic beverages and consumer goods subject to Chapter 18.28, Adult Entertainment are prohibited.

     4.     Outdoor Dining on Private Property. Outdoor dining facilities are allowed on private property, in conjunction with and contiguous to a permitted restaurant or eating and drinking establishment, subject to the following:

     a.     The facility may be delineated by a permanent feature. Permanent features may be a special surface treatment or vertical barriers with a maximum height of three feet, such as railings, fences, or other material approved by the community development director. Wind screens, if provided, shall consist of rigid transparent material, such as Plexiglas, that does not exceed sixty inches in height. The use of solid walls and planter boxes, and temporary devices such as draperies or plant materials is prohibited.

     b.     The facility shall conform to all applicable requirements of the State Disabled Access Regulations (California Code of Regulations Title 24).

     c.     The facility does not displace or obstruct existing required parking spaces, service areas, service access, existing landscaping or egress/ingress to buildings.

     d.     All applicable building permits are obtained.

     e.     Heating appliances shall be approved by the fire department.

     f.      Sound amplification shall comply with the requirements of this code.

     g.     Sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages shall conform to this Code and the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as amended.

     h.     The facility shall be maintained at all times (removal of litter, trash, graffiti, damaged materials, furnishings, or equipment, etc.).

     i.      Facilities exceeding one thousand square feet in area shall obtain a minor use permit according to Section 17.28.052.

     5.     Outdoor Dining on Public Property. Outdoor dining facilities are allowed within the public right-of-way, in conjunction with and contiguous to a permitted street-level restaurant or eating and drinking establishment, according to subsection (B)(4), requirements and the following:

     a.     Obtain an encroachment maintenance and removal agreement from the city engineer and a zoning clearance from the community development department.

     b.     A minimum five-foot wide by eight-foot high clear path, free of all obstructions to the flow of pedestrian traffic, shall be provided within the public right-of-way and shall be maintained at all times. Obstructions shall include, but are not limited to, traffic signals or signs, light fixtures, parking meters, bus stops, trash receptacles, benches, trees, and similar objects.

     c.     The facility shall be delineated by a permanent feature. Permanent features may be a special surface treatment or vertical barriers with a maximum height of three feet, such as railings, fences, or other material approved by the community development director. Wind screens, if provided, shall consist of rigid transparent material, such as Plexiglas, that does not exceed sixty inches in height. The use of solid walls and planter boxes, and temporary devices such as draperies or plant materials is prohibited.

     d.     The facility shall be designed so that gates or other objects shall not swing or project beyond the delineated perimeter or within any required clear path.

     e.     A change in the pattern and texture may be required to alert pedestrians of a change in sidewalk use.

     f.      Trash or storage areas shall not be located on or adjacent to the public right-of-way next to the outdoor eating area.

     g.     If the facility exceeds six hundred square feet in area, installation of street improvements consisting of curb, gutter, sidewalk, street trees, and street lighting shall be required.

     6.     Outdoor Sales or Displays. Operators of established principal uses may extend merchandise sales and display areas into outdoor on-site areas. The merchandise shall not displace or obstruct existing required parking spaces, service areas, service access, existing landscaping, or accessibility to/from and around buildings. Operators shall obtain a zoning clearance according to Section 17.28.070.

     7.     Outdoor Storage Areas and Equipment Yards. On-site outdoor storage of equipment (supplies, vehicles including fleet vehicles, equipment, products, etc.) in conjunction with a principal use is allowed, subject to the following:

     a.     Obtain a zoning clearance according to Section 17.28.070.

     b.     The area shall be visually screened from public rights-of-way with a minimum six-foot high screening fence, located so as not to create any hazardous vehicular maneuvering conditions.

     c.     Vehicle circulation shall not require back-up maneuvers into public right-of-way.

     d.     Landscaping shall be provided between the public right-of-way and the screening fence.

     e.     The surface material shall be appropriate for the equipment or materials being stored and complies with the stormwater regulations.

     f.      Business operations shall not be conducted in the area.

     g.     The area may not be counted towards parking requirements.

     h.     One sea container may be utilized provided the container conforms to the setbacks established for the zone; is painted to match existing structures; and is not visible from the public right-of-way.

     i.      Facilities for trash and recyclable materials shall be provided to the satisfaction of the community development director.

     8.     Residential. The following accessory residential uses may be located in commercial or industrial zones:

     a.     Caretaker Dwellings. A dwelling may be located on the same lot with a nonresidential principal use, if the residents are required to remain on the premises for protection, maintenance, or comparable technical purpose.

     b.     Rental Dwellings. At a density not exceeding twenty-nine dwelling units per acre, rental dwellings may be located on floors above street level commercial establishments in the central commercial (CC) and general commercial (GC) zones, subject to the following:

     i.      Approval of a minor use permit (Section 17.28.052).

     ii.     On-site parking shall comply in all respects with current standards for all uses.

     iii.    Separate sale or ownership of the dwellings may be accomplished only as permitted by the State Subdivision Map Act and city subdivision regulations.

     9.     Retail Manufacturing. Production and sale of goods that complement the on-site principal use, subject to the following standards:

     a.     The manufacturing area shall be in support of a primary retail use.

     b.     All processes shall meet performance standards according to Section 17.24.080.

     10.   Temporary Uses. See Section 17.28.040.

     F.     Special Treatment Area I (STA I). Properties located within STA I are subject to the requirements of the Downtown Village Specific Plan. (Ord. 452 § 2, 2019; Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

 

17.24.070 Usable open space.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to set forth standards for the development of usable open space necessary to fulfill needs for outdoor leisure and recreation, to preserve valuable natural resources, and to improve the amenity of residential living.

     B.     General Provisions.

     1.     Usable open space includes land which is accessible and available to all residents for whose use the space is intended. No more than fifty percent of required open space shall exceed a slope of five percent, and none shall exceed ten percent slope.

     2.     Usable open space does not include proposed street rights-of-way or school sites, public and private surface easements, accessory buildings, open parking areas, driveways and access ways for the dwellings, land area utilized for garbage and refuse disposal or other servicing maintenance or required front and street side yards.

     C.     Common Usable Open Space.

     1.     Common usable open space is that open space either:

     a.     Controlled and maintained by the owner of the property, or by an incorporated nonprofit homeowner’s association, and devoted exclusively to the recreation, scenic, and leisure use of all the occupants of the property; or

     b.     Dedicated in fee to, and maintained by, a public agency or recreation district, and devoted to the recreation, scenic, and leisure use of the general public.

     2.     Any area to be credited toward common usable open space, except for landscaped areas, shall be of such size and shape that a rectangle inscribed within it shall have no dimension less than fifteen feet, and, insofar as is possible, shall be contiguous with other common usable open space on or adjacent to the site.

     3.     All required common usable open space shall be permanently maintained and fully usable. There shall be no obstructions over ground level space except for devices which do not detract from its usability. Common usable open space shall not be fenced or otherwise screened so as to restrict the continuity of, or visual access to, the open space.

     4.     Well designed decks on roof spaces, garages, carports, or accessory buildings may be credited to the total required common usable open space requirements. To be well designed, a deck must be functional and aesthetic in the judgment of the planning director, and must be structurally safe and adequately surfaced and protected, and usable for the purpose for which it is designed.

     5.     The planning director shall, as a condition of planned development permit approval, require the applicant to employ any appropriate methods to ensure the permanent status and maintenance of common usable open space.

     6.     Common usable open space shall account for at least fifty percent of the total required open space in a multifamily development.

     D.    Private Usable Open Space.

     1.     Private usable open space is that open space devoted exclusively to the recreation and leisure use of one dwelling unit and which abuts one unit of the development.

     2.     Any area credited toward private usable open space shall not be less than fifty square feet in area, and shall be of such size and shape that a rectangle inscribed within it shall have no dimension less than five feet.

     3.     Not more than sixty percent of any area devoted to private usable open space may be covered by a private balcony projecting from a higher story. A screening device not greater than six feet in height and constructed of dense landscaping, or of a fence, wall, grill, or other screening device, may be required to abut private usable open space if, in the judgment of the planning director, the needs for establishing a pleasant outdoor leisure and recreation environment would thereby be met.

     4.     A minimum of fifty percent of all units in a multifamily development shall be provided with private usable open space.

     5.     Private usable open space shall not account for more than fifty percent of the total required open space in a multifamily development.

     E.     Properties located within the special treatment area I (STA I) are subject to the requirements of the downtown specific plan. (Ord. 349 § 2, 2005)

17.24.080 Performance and restricted use standards.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations establish performance standards designed to appropriately locate operations which may have a significant impact on the community; to protect properties and persons from nuisances and hazards; to restrict dangerous or objectionable effects of any activity; and to prevent incompatible uses from having undesirable impacts on nearby residential neighborhoods. The regulations also establish standards for restricted uses that are permitted by right provided the use includes specific physical improvements and specified operational standards.

     B.     Effect of Other Regulations. Any use or process subject to these regulations shall comply with all other authorized governmental standards or regulations which are in effect in Lemon Grove. More restrictive performance standards or regulations enacted by an authorized governmental agency having jurisdiction in Lemon Grove on such matters shall take precedence over the provisions of these regulations.

     C.     Exceptions. Exceptions to these regulations may be made during temporary periods for reasonable cause, such as equipment shakedown, breakdown, modification or cleaning, when it is evident that such cause was not reasonably preventable. These regulations shall not apply to the operation of motor vehicles or other transportation equipment unless otherwise specified.

     D.    Point of Measurement. For purposes of determining the existence of dangerous or objectionable effects of any activity, the location shall be, unless otherwise specified, at the lot, parcel, or ownership line of the use.

     E.     Performance Standards.

     1.     Noise. All noises shall be limited so that they do not exceed the ambient noise level by more than five dBA or exceed seventy dBA during daytime operations. All noises shall comply with the Noise Abatement and Control Ordinance, LGMC Chapter 9.24.

     2.     Glare. Bright or flashing lights or reflections shall not be visible off the premises and shall be shielded and positioned to contain light to the site. All lighted signs shall be subject to citywide sign regulations, LGMC Chapter 18.12.

     3.     Traffic Circulation. New development must demonstrate that it will not substantially increase traffic.

     4.     Vibrations. No detectable vibrations shall be permitted off the development site.

     5.     Fire, Explosion, and Hazardous Materials. Burning waste materials in open fires is prohibited. Operations that involve storage, use, or transport of flammable or explosive materials or gases, or other hazardous materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion, and adequate fire fighting and spill containment equipment and supplies standard in industry, as approved by the Fire Department. Such operations must be conducted in a manner which meets with the approval of the Fire Chief and complies with LGMC Chapter 18.44 (Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance) and the regulations of any other government agency with jurisdiction.

     6.     Airborne Emissions. No use shall exceed the maximum permissible emissions standards established by the San Diego County Air Pollution Control District.

     7.     Liquid and Solid Wastes. No discharge shall be permitted of any materials of such nature as can contaminate any water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in sewage treatment, or otherwise cause the emission of dangerous or offensive elements into any public sewer, private sewage disposal system, stream, or ground.

     8.     Electrical Disturbance. No activities shall be permitted that emit electrical disturbance affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the creator of such disturbance, according to the standards of the Federal Communications Commission, as amended.

     9.     Radioactivity. No activities shall be permitted which utilize fissionable or radioactive material if their use results at any time in the release or emission of any fissionable or radioactive material into the atmosphere, the ground, or sewage systems, according to the standards of the Federal Nuclear Regulatory Commission, as amended.

     F.     Restricted Use Standards. The restricted uses are uses that may be permitted subject to the identified process and subject to the supplemental regulations in this section.

     1.     Animal Sales and Services. Uses that provide veterinary treatment, grooming and care of household pets and small farm animals as defined in LGMC Chapter 18.16, pet sales, and supplies. The following standards shall apply:

     a.     Outdoor storage and sales are prohibited.

     b.     Proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times.

     c.     All animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof containers.

     d.     All live animals (if allowed) shall be properly caged or housed. Properly caged includes adequate space, ventilation, temperature, and access to food and water. Mechanical ventilation may be required in locations with high commercial intensities or residential densities.

     e.     Business operations shall conform to LGMC Section 17.24.080, Performance standards.

     f.      A trash and recycled materials enclosure shall be designed and constructed to serve the site to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     g.     Where a combination of animal sales and services types are located on one site, the most restrictive process and regulations shall apply.

     2.     Senior Housing. Housing as defined in 42 United States Code, Section 3607(c) of the Fair Housing Act Amendments of 1988 and 24 Code of Federal Regulations, paragraph 100.304; or as defined in Section 51.3 of California Civil

Code, as amended. The following standards shall apply:

     a.     Developments may be allowed by planned development permit (PDP) in all residential zones and residential professional, central commercial and general commercial zones.

     b.     Developments shall conform to applicable requirements of the Fair Housing Act and the State of California Unruh Civil Rights Act.

     c.     Developments shall be located within one thousand feet of shopping facilities or mass transit stops unless it can be shown that there are adequate methods of transportation available to the development.

     d.     Developments shall provide on-site recreational or therapeutic facilities.

     e.     Common open space requirements may be reduced by up to eighty percent provided private useable open space conforms to Section 17.24.070.

     f.      A parking study specific to the proposed complex shall be submitted with the PDP application packet. The parking study shall include a plan showing potential future conversion to a non-senior housing project and conformance to applicable parking standards.

     3.     Communications Facilities. Uses consisting of a variety of physical components that compose new wireless communications. The following standards shall apply:

     a.     Concealed facilities are those facilities that are completely concealed from public view.

     b.     All co-located facilities shall comply with previously established conditions within the resolution of approval(s) for the original facility.

     c.     All conduits and cables shall be placed underground.

     d.     The facility shall substantially conform to landscape, parking, and performance provisions in the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     e.     The project shall conform to the applicable requirements of the current CBC, UMC, UPC; NEC and Title 24 Energy and Disabled Access Regulations and Fire Codes.

     f.      The project shall comply with FCC requirements including Section 332(c)(7) and shall be processed in compliance to Government Code Section 65850.6.

     g.     Screening devices shall be required to adequately screen and secure equipment where equipment cannot be housed inside an existing building. Any screening device shall be made architecturally compatible with existing structures on-site.

     h.     One generator per site may be permitted by building permit subject to conformance to subsection E, standards listed above and the following standards:

     i.      The proposed installation shall conform to Lemon Grove Municipal Code noise restrictions and air pollution control district (APCD) requirements. Evidence shall be submitted as a part of the building permit application to show conformance to these requirements.

     i.      Prior to obtaining a building permit, the applicant shall submit a hazardous materials questionnaire to the county of San Diego and provide a copy of the signed questionnaire to the city.

     ii.     Provide complete documentation showing the fuel tank size and secondary containment if required on the building plans.

     iii.    The generator shall comply with the current UL compliance standards.

     j.      Installation of communications facilities shall not result in the elimination of required parking spaces.

     k.     Communications facilities that terminate operations shall be removed by the operator within ninety calendar days of termination.

     4.     Vehicle Services. Uses related to vehicle service, maintenance, and repair to ensure continued operations of a motorized vehicle. The following standards shall apply:

     a.     All vehicle repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed building.

     b.     All repair activities shall conform to subsection E, Performance standards.

     c.     Outdoor storage shall conform to LGMC Section 17.24.060, Accessory buildings and uses and shall only include storage of vehicles to be actively repaired. Outdoor storage of dismantled vehicles or vehicle components is not permitted.

     d.     The site shall be capable of handling all vehicular circulation on-site. Loading or unloading of vehicles or equipment or any vehicle maneuvering in the public right-of-way is not permitted.

     e.     A trash and recycled materials enclosure shall be designed and constructed to serve the site to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     f.      Vehicle painting (if use is allowed) shall be conducted in approved spray booths.

     g.     The property owner shall remove any underground tanks if the use is discontinued.

     h.     Where a combination of vehicle sales and service types is located on one site, the most restrictive process and regulations shall apply.

     5.     Community Gardens. Uses that are collectively maintained gardens with rental plots of various sizes available to the public (members) for the cultivation of edible plants. The following standards shall apply:

     a.     Community gardens on developed sites must clearly be accessory and complementary to the principal use of the site.

     b.     Community gardens may be approved on vacant sites as accessory use provided the property is adjacent or contiguous to a property whose owner(s) manage or are active users of the community garden. The property owner of the vacant site shall provide authorization on a zoning clearance submittal.

     c.     On-site produce sales on residential properties are subject to garage, yard or estate sale provisions in Section 17.24.060(D)(4). On-site produce sales on commercial and industrial zoned properties are subject to Section 17.24.060, Accessory buildings and uses.

     d.     Community gardens on single-family residential lots (RLM and RL zones) shall not exceed five separate plots maximum.

     e.     Accessory structures supporting the community garden are subject to Section 17.24.060, Accessory buildings and uses.

     f.      Community garden hours of operation shall be limited to the hours between sunrise and sunset.

     g.     Community gardens shall not displace required vehicle parking spaces for the primary use, but may replace required landscape area.

     h.     Loading areas shall be identified on-site for community garden users in all zones. Parking for users must be identified on-site for properties in commercial and industrial zones (GC, HC, LI zones). Properties located in residential zones (RLM, RL, RM, RMH zones) may use available on-street parking for users.

     i.      Composting may occur on-site provided composting activities and facilities are located no closer than five feet to a property line.

     j.      Community gardens shall not generate odors or pests beyond what is normally found at a well-maintained residence.

     k.     Trash/recycling receptacles shall be provided and screened from view as seen from public rights-of-way.

     l.      Refuse shall be removed regularly from the site and the site shall be kept free from litter.

     m.    Planting illegal or invasive plants is prohibited.

     n.     The community garden shall be secured with appropriate physical barriers or other devices consistent with Section 17.24.050.

     o.     On-going management must be formally established in an operation manual and the operation manual shall be a part of a zoning clearance application submitted to the city.

     p.     Management is required to keep the community garden orderly, in good repair and well-maintained.

     q.     All applicable codes and ordinances for the physical development of a community garden facility shall apply (grading, water quality and drainage, accessory structures, water conservation ordinance, etc.).

     G.    Enforcement. An objective determination will be made in a reasonable amount of time where a use subject to this section is believed to be in violation of such regulations.

     1.     Required Data. Following the initiation of an investigation, the community development director may request such data and evidences as are needed to make an objective determination.

     2.     Compliance. Violations of these standards shall be investigated and processed consistent with Section 17.28.020(N).

     3.     Appeals. Decisions may be appealed according to Section 17.28.020(I). (Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 422, 2014; Ord. 394 § 4, 2010)

17.24.081 Special considerations for relocated businesses.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to provide a means whereby special land use approvals, including waivers and/or deferrals of normally applied standards, may be granted to businesses and other activities which have been compelled to move from one location to another, because the city has acquired property for a public purpose through condemnation, or the threat of condemnation. In addition, these regulations are intended to:

     1.     Treat established businesses and activities in a fair and equitable manner;

     2.     Ensure the continued provision of commercial and public services currently available to the citizens of the community;

     3.     Help maintain the diversity and viability of the city’s commercial base;

     4.     Preserve and protect existing employment opportunities.

     B.     Response to Emergency or Urgency Situation.

     1.     Even if a relocated business or activity fails to conform to one or more of the land use regulations governing development of its new site, the community development director may issue a temporary relocation permit when the city manager or executive director of the redevelopment agency formally declares that, as a result of the acquisition of land by the city or redevelopment agency through condemnation or threat of condemnation, the immediate relocation of a business, or activity is necessary for one or more of the following reasons:

     a.     To prevent substantial damage to the affected business or activity;

     b.     To honor a contractual obligation;

     c.     To avoid a serious public liability;

     d.     To preserve and protect the health, safety and welfare of the neighborhood or community.

     2.     The permit shall specify the requirements or conditions which the development services director determines to be necessary for such temporary relocation and may waive standard land use or development regulations which would render such temporary relocation impractical or impossible.

     3.     The permit shall be valid for the shortest period of time determined, by the development services director, to be necessary to prevent the immediate potentially adverse consequences identified by the officer who formally declared the need for the temporary relocation of the business or activity.

     4.     At the earliest possible opportunity following the issuance of a temporary relocation permit, and no later than ninety days following such action, the city council, at a regular or special meeting, will review the temporary relocation approval. The city council may affirm the approval of the temporary relocation permit and specify its date of expiration, it may revoke the temporary relocation permit, it may require the owner or operator of the use or activity to apply for ministerial or discretionary approvals required by the city’s zoning ordinance, or it may waive or defer specific development standards and requirements as set forth in subsection C of this section.

     C.     Waivers and Deferrals of Requirements for Relocated Business Activities. When a business or activity has been relocated to another site as the result of its acquisition by the city through condemnation by condemnation or threat of condemnation, the city council may permanently waive or defer for a specific period of time, normal development standards and requirements for discretionary approvals where their strict application would be inconsistent with the purposes of this section as set forth in subsection A of this section and where such waiver or deferral would not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 434 § 4, 2015)

 

17.24.090 Nonconforming uses, structures and lots.
     A.    Purpose. This section is intended to provide reasonable standards governing the future operations of uses, and the future utilization of structures and land existing at the effective date of the ordinance codified in this title and not in conformance with the provisions hereof.

     B.     Signs. Nonconforming signs shall be subject to the requirements of the city’s adopted sign ordinance.

     C.     Continuation. Except as otherwise provided in this section, legally established uses of land, buildings or structures existing at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title may be continued, although the particular use, or the building or structure do not conform to the regulations specified by this title for the district in which the particular building or structure is located or use is made.

     D.    Abandonment. If any nonconforming use is wholly discontinued or abandoned for a continuous period of twelve months, any subsequent use of such land or building shall conform to the regulations specified for the district in which such land or building is located.

     E.     Substantial Destruction. A nonconforming building destroyed to the extent of more than fifty percent of its value as established by the building official at the time of its destruction by a catastrophic event such as earthquake, fire, explosion or other casualty or act of God shall be deemed “substantially destroyed.” Except as otherwise provided in this section, a nonconforming building or building, the use of which is nonconforming, that is substantially destroyed may be restored and used only in compliance with the regulations existing in the district wherein it is located.

     F.     Reconstruction Permit.

     1.     Reconstruction Permits—Class I. The community development department shall grant a reconstruction permit for the restoration of the following substantially destroyed structures, the use of which is nonconforming, subject to the requirements set forth in subsections (H)(1) through (4) of this section.

     a.     A nonconforming residential project originally authorized by the city of Lemon Grove discretionary planned development permit or other city discretionary approval subject to the same approval conditions.

     b.     Single-family dwelling, where reconstruction will result in no more than two such dwellings on a single lot zoned for single-family development and use.

     c.     Duplex dwellings, where reconstruction will result in no more than two attached single-family dwelling units, a single duplex, on a single lot zoned for single-family development and use.

     2.     Reconstruction Permit—Class II. After a public hearing, the city council, or, on appeal, the city council, may grant a reconstruction permit for the restoration of the following substantially destroyed structures, the use of which is nonconforming, if the findings required by subsections (H)(1) through (4) of this section have been made and the permit application has been found to be consistent with the spirit and intent of subsections (H)(5) through (7):

     a.     Multifamily dwellings, other than those whose reconstruction authority is governed by subsection (F)(1)(a) of this section, when such dwellings exist on a property currently zoned for lower density residential use.

     b.     Nonconforming commercial uses in commercial zones.

     G.    Application for Reconstruction Permit.

     1.     Class I Reconstruction Permit. Application for a Class I reconstruction permit as described in subsection (F)(1) of this section, shall be filed in the office of the community development department on such forms and accompanied by such plans and details as are required to obtain building permits for the construction of new buildings.

     2.     Class II Reconstruction Permit. Application for a Class II reconstruction permit shall be filed in the office of the community development department upon forms provided, accompanied by a filing fee as established by resolution of the city council, and by such data and information as may be prescribed for that purpose by the community development director so as to assure the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record.

     H.    Findings/Standards for Reconstruction Permits. The community development department shall grant a reconstruction permit for the restoration of substantially destroyed Class I nonconforming uses or structures subject to the requirements set forth in subsections (H)(1) through (4) of this section. The city council, or, on appeal, the city council, may grant a reconstruction permit for those nonconforming uses or structures listed in subsection (F)(2) of this section if it makes the following findings: findings 1, 2, 3 and 4 are mandatory. Findings 5, 6, and 7 will be applied by the approval authority in a discretionary manner so as to protect the general public health, safety and welfare of the community without arbitrarily and unnecessarily impeding lawful reconstruction pursuant to this section:

     1.     The proposed reconstruction will not increase the nonconformity existing prior to the date of the substantial destruction.

     2.     The proposed reconstruction complies with all current building and fire codes.

     3.     The substantial destruction was involuntary and occurred as a result of a catastrophic event such as earthquake, fire, explosion, or other casualty or act of God.

     4.     The proposed reconstruction can be carried out in a manner that will not be injurious to the public health, safety and welfare or cause injury to the residents of adjacent properties or the neighborhood in conformance with the performance standards set forth in Section 17.24.080(B)(1), (2) and (4) through (11) of this title.

     5.     The proposed reconstruction is designed to minimize the appearance of nonconformity as viewed from the public street and from adjoining properties.

     6.     The proposed reconstruction maximizes, to the extent feasible, compliance with current city requirements regarding building and site design, building setbacks, off-street parking, landscaping and screening, and useable open space.

     7.     The application has been submitted within one year of the date of the substantial destruction.

     I.      Time Limits for Reconstruction of Nonconforming Dwellings and Uses.

     1.     For Class I nonconforming uses, a city building permit shall serve as the reconstruction permit. For such uses the building permit must be obtained and work thereunder shall be commenced within six months of issuance of the permit and shall be completed within twelve months of the commencement of construction. For Class II nonconforming uses, any reconstruction permit issued by the city council shall require that a building permit be obtained and work thereunder shall be commenced within six months of issuance of the permit and shall be completed within twelve months of the commencement of construction.

     2.     The development services director may approve a single one year extension of the period for restoration or reconstruction specified above if substantial and diligent progress toward completion has been made or, if not, the delay in, or inability to complete, the restoration is attributable to factors not reasonably within the applicant’s control including, but not limited to, insurance settlement delays, the weather and the unavailability of necessary building materials. Any person dissatisfied with the decision of the development services director concerning the extension of time may appeal according to the procedure set forth in Section 17.28.020 of this title.

     J.      Establishment of Building Value. Value of substantially destroyed buildings to be reconstructed pursuant to this section shall be determined by the building official according to the same formulas as applied to the determination of value of new construction.

     K.    Alteration and Expansion. Except as otherwise provided in this section, any building or structure existing at the date of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this title, which is nonconforming either in use, design, or arrangement, shall not be enlarged, extended, reconstructed or structurally altered. No nonconforming use of land may be expanded or extended in any manner.

     1.     Residential. Alterations, enlargements, extensions, or additions may be made to a residential structure which occupies a lot containing a nonconforming use, or to a nonconforming residential structure, which is used for residential purposes in a residential zone, as long as lot coverage is not increased by more than twenty percent. Except as otherwise stated in this section, a minor use permit shall be required for any such changes which will result in an increase in lot coverage of more than twenty percent. A minor use permit shall not be required for alterations, enlargements, extensions or additions to single-family dwellings which are nonconforming only with regard to building setbacks which fail to conform to current standards. All alterations, enlargements, extensions, or additions shall conform to the requirements in subsections (K)(1)(a) through (c) of this section and all additional requirements established by city ordinance or by resolution of the city council.

     a.     No lot, yard setback, open space, parking area or other space shall be reduced in area or dimension so as to make such area or dimension less than the minimum required by this title, and if already less than the minimum required by this title, such area or dimension shall not be further reduced or create additional nonconformity to this title.

     b.     If sufficient space or area is available to meet zoning ordinance setback requirements, covered parking spaces shall be encouraged to be provided in accordance with this title.

     c.     The proposed addition will not reduce existing, available required off-street or covered parking spaces.

     2.     Nonresidential. Within nonresidential zones, and for structures in residential zones not in residential use, a nonconforming building on structure shall not be enlarged or extended; except that the planning director may permit up to five percent enlargement of the floor area of a nonconforming building, and the city council may permit up to fifteen percent enlargement of the floor area of a nonconforming building, provided that:

     a.     The enlargement is of an incidental character and does not constitute a complete remodeling or relocation of machinery, equipment or apparatus used in operating the establishment in question, and can be carried out without injury to the residents of adjacent property and of the neighborhood; and

     b.     The development requirements of this title and all applicable city building and housing codes are fully complied with.

     L.     Maintenance. Any nonconforming building or structure may be maintained, repaired or portions thereof replaced so long as such maintenance, repairs or replacements do not exceed twenty-five percent of the building’s appraised valuation. Except as otherwise provided by law, nothing in this title shall prevent the restoration to a safe condition of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority.

     M.    Conflict. Nothing in this section shall be construed as repealing, abrogating or modifying any provision of any city ordinance or other regulation, or any other provision of this title, or of law relating to the requirements for construction, maintenance, repair, demolition or removal of buildings.

     N.    Nonconforming Lots. Any permitted use or building may be established on a nonconforming lot in any district, provided that the regulations of the district in which it is located, the development requirements of this title, and all applicable city building and housing codes are fully complied with.

     O.    Change from a Nonconforming Use to a Conforming Use. Any use which is nonconforming wholly or partly because it is not itself a permitted use in the district within which it is located may be changed to a permitted use, or conditionally permitted use subject to the conditional use permit procedures, and provided that all of the regulations of the district in which it is located, the development requirements of this title, and all applicable city building and housing codes are fully complied with.

     P.     Change from a Nonconforming Use to Another Nonconforming Use. The city council may, by a majority vote of its membership, authorize a nonconforming use to be changed to another nonconforming use, upon a determination that the new nonconforming use can be carried without injury to the residents of adjacent properties and of the neighborhood, or that the benefit to the public health, safety or welfare exceeds any detriment inherent in such change.

     Q.    Conditional Expansion of Nonconforming Commercial Uses. Nonconforming commercial uses existing prior to August 1, 1983, in the general commercial and heavy commercial zones, may be expanded subject to the approval of a conditional use permit according to the procedure set forth in Section 17.28.050. The city council may presume that the expansion of such nonconforming use may be found to be consistent with the general plan, even though it may not fully conform with the adopted land use element map, if such expansion can be accomplished according to the following criteria:

     1.     The expansion is generally consistent with the purpose and intent of the general plan.

     2.     The expansion as proposed and as conditioned by the city council will result in substantial benefit to the public.

     3.     The subject property and all existing and proposed improvements shall conform, as closely as possible, to all current regulations, standards and policies of the city, including, but not limited to, those which affect:

     a.     Building and site design including building materials, colors, signage, paving, curbs and sidewalks;

     b.     Building, housing and fire codes;

     c.     Traffic circulation and off-street parking;

     d.     Landscaping and screening;

     e.     Control of noise, glare, fire and explosion hazards, dust and other airborne emissions including odors and smoke, liquid and solid wastes, and all other potential nuisances and hazards.

     R.     Conditional Expansion of Nonconforming Nonresidential Land Uses in the Residential Zones. Nonconforming nonresidential land uses, existing prior to August 1, 1983, in the residential zones, may be expanded subject to the approval of a conditional use permit according to the procedure set forth in Section 17.28.050. The city council may presume that the expansion of such nonconforming use may be found to be consistent with the general plan, even though it may not fully conform with the adopted land use element map, if such expansion can be accomplished according to the following criteria:

     1.     The expansion is generally consistent with the purpose and intent of the general plan.

     2.     The expansion as proposed and as conditioned by the city council will result in a substantial benefit to the public.

     3.     The subject property and all existing and proposed improvements shall conform, as closely as possible, to all current regulations, standards and policies of the city, including, but not limited to, those which affect:

     a.     Building and site design including building materials, colors, signage, paving, curbs, gutters and sidewalks;

     b.     Building, housing and fire codes;

     c.     Traffic circulation and off-street parking;

     d.     Landscaping and screening;

     e.     Control of noise, glare, fire and explosion hazards, dust and other airborne emissions including odors and smoke, liquid and solid wastes, and all other potential nuisances and hazards.

     S.     New Dwelling Units. The number of dwelling units in a nonconforming building may be increased to the maximum density allowed in the district, provided that:

     1.     The nonconforming building is located in a residential district;

     2.     The units are added solely as a result of the division of the interior of the existing building, and the exterior dimensions of the buildings are not changed; and

     3.     The regulations of the district in which it is located, the development requirements of this title, and all applicable city building and housing codes are fully complied with.

     T.     Abatement.

     1.     Nonconforming Uses. Any nonconforming use, except residential uses, located in any residential district, shall be discontinued within a period of time to be determined by the city council after public hearings.

     2.     Nonconforming Structures.

     a.     Any nonconforming structure located in any residential district, other than dwelling, churches and schools, which structure is designed or used for a use permitted in a business district, shall be removed or altered to be structurally conforming within a time specified by the city council. In no event shall such time limit be less than ten nor more than forty years from the date such a structure became nonconforming.

     b.     The planning director shall cause notice to be given to the owners of any such structure at least five years prior to the time removal or alteration is required to be completed, and yearly thereafter until such five-year period has lapsed.

     c.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to structures, which are nonconforming only with respect to the yard requirements and parking requirements of this title. (Ord. 434 § 4, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.24.100 Housing density bonuses.
     A.    Purpose. These regulations are intended to aid in the achievement of goals specified in the Lemon Grove General Plan pertaining to the availability of housing and the encouragement of provisions of affordable housing for low and moderate income households.

     B.     Applicability. The provisions of this section shall apply to all developments of five or more dwelling units in which the developer desires a density bonus above the allowable units on the site or as specified in State Density Bonus Law.

     C.     Density Bonuses. If such projects are as described in subsection B of this section where the density bonus is used, then the developer shall:

     1.     Agree to, and the City shall ensure, continued affordability of units in accordance with State Density Bonus Law as applicable. The agreement shall be subject to review by the development services director and the city attorney. Following execution of the agreement, the completed agreement shall be recorded. The conditions contained in the agreement shall be filed and recorded as a deed restriction on the parcel or parcels designated for the construction of density bonus units at the time of parcel map or final map recordation, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for such units. The agreement shall be binding upon all future owners and successors in interest for such property. Owners subject to the agreement shall submit an annual report to the city, which includes the name, address, and income of each person occupying the units subject to the agreement and shall identify the bedroom size and monthly rent and costs to the occupant.

     2.     Submit to the city a proposal for specific concession(s) or incentive(s) in exchange for the provision of affordable housing units in accordance with State Density Bonus Law. One concession(s) or incentive(s) shall be any one of the following:

     a.     Modifications to any and all setbacks (yards).

     b.     Modifications to the minimum lot width and/or depth.

     c.     A modification of the minimum site area.

     d.     Modifications to the building height standards.

     e.     Modifications to landscape requirements.

     f.      Modifications to usable open space requirements.

     g.     Modifications to the parking requirements in excess of the minimum required by the State Density Bonus Law. This could include number of parking spaces, number of carports or garages, and stall dimensions required. A parking study may be required with any modification as appropriate.

     h.     An allowance for retail or office land uses if not permitted.

     i.      Other incentives approved by the city council or required by the State Density Bonus Law.

     D.    General Provisions.

     1.     All units with affordability restrictions shall be reasonably dispersed throughout the development and shall contain on an average the same or higher number of bedrooms as market rate units in the development.

     2.     In addition to applicable regulations of State Density Bonus Law, the developer may meet requirements for the provision of affordable housing units off-site. For the purpose of calculating a density bonus, the residential units are not required to be on the same or contiguous sites, but shall be within the city, in compliance with zoning district regulations except as provided in this section, and subject to one comprehensive development application for entitlement purposes.

     The off-site land restricted to affordability can be transferred to an affordable housing developer approved by the development services director. The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units which shall be recorded on the property at the time of the transfer consistent with State Density Bonus Law. To the extent allowed by law, projects utilizing this provision shall meet the minimum development standards of subsection E.

     3.     All density bonus calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     4.     The granting of a density bonus and/or incentives and concessions as defined by State Density Bonus Law shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan or specific plan amendment, zoning change or amendment, variance, or other discretionary approval.

     5.     A maximum combined density bonus increase of forty percent is permissible.

     6.     Density bonus projects within one-quarter mile of a public transit stop and meeting the minimum development standards in subsection E shall receive an additional five percent density bonus.

     7.     Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to require the city to waive or reduce development standards if the waiver or reduction would have a specific adverse impact upon health, safety, or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

     8.     An applicant requesting incentive(s) not in compliance with the minimum development standards in subsection E shall show that the requested incentive(s) is necessary to make the housing units economically feasible. This can be accomplished by submitting appropriate appraisal reports or by submitting a development pro forma with the capital costs, operating expenses, return on investment, profit/loss, loan-to-value ratio and the debt coverage ratio including the contribution(s) provided by any applicable subsidy program(s), and the economic effect created by the price, rent, and income restrictions on the affordable housing units. The applicant is required to submit any additional documentation, as requested, to ascertain the basis for assumptions.

 

     E.     Minimum Development Standards. An additional five percent density bonus shall be provided to density bonus projects that meet all of the following development standards to the satisfaction of the approving body:

     1.     Minimum building height standards.

     2.     Minimum common and private open space. Shade trees shall be provided in common usable open spaces.

     3.     Minimum landscape and water efficient landscape requirements.

     4.     Minimum bicycle parking. Bicycle lockers and personal storage areas shall be provided where feasible.

     5.     The site shall have continuous internal walking paths and connections to public pedestrian and bicycle pathways.

     F.     Compliance. All final subdivision tract approvals or building permits in the case of apartment projects shall have conditions attached which will assure compliance with the above provisions. Such conditions may specify the number of units at appropriate price levels, the certification of incomes of renters of inclusionary units, a requirement for dispersal of affordable units, and the amount of density bonus granted. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

17.24.110 Severability.
     If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other chapter provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end, the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 17.28 PROCEDURE AND ADMINISTRATION
17.28.010 Administration.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes the roles and responsibilities of those empowered and directed to provide application and permit review, render decisions, issue permits, and hear appeals for matters subject to this title. Any application made in conflict with the provisions of the LGMC, state law, or federal law shall be denied.

     B.     Employees. All departments, officials, and public employees of the city empowered with the duty or authority to issue permits shall conform to the provisions of this title and shall not issue a permit for uses, structures, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this title, state law, or federal law.

     C.     Development Services Director. The development services director shall hear and decide applications for the various reviews and permits according to the procedures set forth in this title, and shall also perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance, resolution, or direction of the city council.

     D.    City Council. The city council shall hear and decide applications for the various reviews and permits according to the procedures set forth in this title. The city council shall also act as an appellate body, hearing any appeals from the decisions of the development services director.

     E.     City Council. The city council shall establish rules and regulations for the administration of this title. The city council shall hear and decide applications for the various reviews and permits according to the procedures set forth in this title. The city council shall also act as an appellate body, hearing any appeals from the decisions of the development services director. The decisions of the city council shall be final in all actions or appeals concerning this title.

     F.     As the body that establishes the rules and regulations under this title, the city council may, on its own motion, interpret the scope and meaning of any provision under this title, including the applicability of any provision to a particular person or property. The city council may request the advice on any interpretation from the development services director or any other advisory body it has formed, or chooses to form, for this purpose. (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 426 § 1, 2014; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.020 Application procedures.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes procedures for submitting and processing applications for proposed uses, structures, and/or improvements of real property, and related matters subject to this title; authorize the city to establish, modify, and collect fees, and set time limits for processing.

     1.     Definitions. Italicized words and terms found in this chapter are defined in Chapter 17.08.

     2.     Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this title, uses, structures, and/or improvements shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare.

     3.     Conflicts. Except as specifically provided, this title is not intended to impair or interfere with any previously issued permits or approvals relating to matters subject to this title. This title is not intended to interfere with, abro-gate, or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement between parties, provided that in cases in which this title imposes a greater restriction than is imposed or required by existing provisions of law or ordinance or by such easements, covenants, or agreements, the provisions of this title shall control.

     B.     Initiation. A proposed action may be initiated by application of the property owner, owner’s agent, or another interested party, by the city council.

     C.     Pre-Application Conference. Prior to submission of an application package for a complicated or multi-faceted project, an applicant may request an unofficial conference with city staff to review the proposed project. Staff will evaluate the project in light of applicable city regulations, indicate possible concerns, identify required information, and note probable environmental impacts and possible mitigation requirements. Nothing in this conference shall be construed as actual or implied approval of any aspect of the proposed project.

     D.    Application Submittal. Prior to submitting application packages for permits or other approvals, the applicant shall obtain a zoning clearance according to Section 17.28.070. Thereafter, application packages shall be submitted to the development services department upon a prescribed form, accompanied by applicable fees according to subsection (D)(1), and related materials necessary to show that the proposed use, structures, and/or improvements of the property comply with applicable provisions of this code, state law, federal law and the requirements and conditions of any associated permit. Each application filed by, or on behalf of, one or more property owners shall be verified by at least one such owner or the owner’s authorized agent attesting to the truth and correctness of all facts, statements, and information presented.

     1.     Fees. The city council shall establish and modify, by resolution, a schedule of fees and deposits for matters subject to this title. All applicable fees and deposits shall be paid in full prior to processing any application, appeal, or other matter for which a fee is required.

     Applicable fees and/or deposits may be waived for charitable, youth or nonprofit organization activities upon approval by the city manager.

     No fee shall be refundable except in any case where the development services director determines and certifies any such fee or portion thereof has been received in error, in which case the amount of money received in error shall be refunded to the proper party. Refunds will be processed in the same manner as other demands against the city.

     2.     Concurrent Processing. Applicants with more than one application related to the same project may have all applications processed simultaneously.

     E.     Time Limits.

     1.     Staff Review. Upon initial submittal, application packages shall be distributed to applicable departments for review. No more than thirty days following the date of initial submittal, application packages shall be deemed complete or incomplete with a request for more information. Once the requested information is received, the thirty day staff review cycle restarts. No action shall be taken on applications not yet deemed complete.

     2.     Deemed Complete Applications. Once deemed complete, applications then progress, in accordance with specific permit regulations in this title, to notices according to subsection F, to public hearing according to subsection G, then to decisions according to subsection H.

     F.     Notices. The notice shall state the purpose of the notice, a project description, and an explanation of the permit process, and be given by a date certain to affected parties according to subsections (F)(1), (2) and (3), as appropriate.

     1.     Public Hearings. Notices for public hearings shall also state the time, place, and purpose of the public hearing and shall be given by publication at least ten days prior to the public hearing. Notices to affected property owners shall be given at least ten days prior to the public hearing according to subsection (F)(2).

     2.     Affected Property Owners. The notice shall be mailed to all real property owners within five hundred feet or the maximum distance separation requirement for a regulated use where applicable, whichever is greater, of all exterior boundaries of the subject property at least ten days prior to the decision. Notices shall be mailed using the names and addresses of the owners as shown on the latest equalized assessment roll in the office of the county assessor. Where the address of such owner is not shown on such assessment roll, failure to send notice by mail to such property owner shall not invalidate any proceedings in connection with such action. In the event that the number of owners to whom notice would be sent according to this subsection is greater than one thousand, then notices may, instead, be given by placing a display advertisement of at least one-eighth page in a newspaper having general circulation within the affected area.

     In addition, temporary on-site sign(s) along the properties’ street frontage(s) and legible from across the street on pedestrian pathways shall be posted on the property at least ten days prior to the public hearing and until certificate of occupancy is granted for the proposed land use, but not to exceed a period of one year. The signs shall be a minimum of six feet high, six feet wide, and not to exceed seventy-two square feet total for two sides or thirty-six square feet for one side. Such sign shall include the permit numbers, property location and APN number, a site plan and description of the project, project name, and the applicant’s name, address and telephone number to the satisfaction of the development services director. Signs shall be maintained in good condition at all times.

     3.     California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and State Law. Notices shall be made according to Government Code Sections 65090 through 65091, as amended. Processing time frames will apply unless extended environmental review is required by state law or this code.

     G.    Public Hearings. A public hearing is the opportunity for the advisory body, the hearing body, or the appellate body to obtain public testimony or comments prior to making a decision. The public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with this chapter and Section 2.14.090 of this code. Public hearings may be continued to another time without requiring further public notice, so long as the future time and place are announced before adjournment of the hearing.

     1.     Scheduling. Public hearings of the city council shall be subject to the rules regarding the placing of matters on its agenda, respectively. Subject to state planning and environmental laws, public hearings shall not be held earlier than ten or later than sixty days following submission of an appeal application or a deemed complete application according to subsection (E)(2). The time limit specified in this subsection may be extended by mutual consent of the applicant and the development services director; however, in no case shall this time period exceed one hundred eighty days.

     2.     Notice. Notices of public hearings shall be given according to subsection (F)(1).

     3.     Outcome. At the close of the public hearing, the advisory body may recommend approval, conditions, limitations, or denial; while the hearing body or the appellate body may make a decision. The hearing body may impose such conditions or limitations as it deems necessary to serve the general purpose and intent of this title. The matter may also be referred back to the lower body for further consideration or action. The appellate body may sustain, modify, deny or reverse, wholly or in part, any decision by a lower body. The decision may also be referred back to the lower body for further consideration or action.

     H.    Decisions and Effective Date of Decisions. Development services director decisions are made within thirty days of applications being deemed complete. City council and city council decisions are made within twenty days of the close of the public hearing. Decisions shall become effective ten days following the decision date, unless an appeal has been filed according to subsection K.

     Unless otherwise stated in the approval or permit, or in the conditions of approval, approvals and permits shall run with the land and shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the site or structure.

     1.     Conditions of Approval. The development services director, the city council may attach such conditions as deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this code.

     2.     Response to Referral. Where an application, appeal or other matter is referred to a lower body for further consideration, a response to that referral shall be submitted to the applicant and the referring body within forty days following said referral.

     I.      Appeals. Any applicant or other interested person who is dissatisfied with the denial, approval, conditional approval, or other application decision made in the administration of this title may appeal the decision. Decisions made by the development services director are appealed to the city council. Decisions made by the city council are final.

     Appeal applications, accompanied by the filing fee, shall be filed within ten days following the date a decision is made, on forms provided by the development services department. Appeals of development services director decisions shall be submitted to the city clerk. Appeals will be heard at a public hearing that has been noticed according to subsection F and conducted according to subsection G. Failure of the appellate body to make a decision according to subsection H shall be deemed in agreement with the previous decision.

     All rights of appeal are exhausted when the proceedings set forth herein have been completed. An applicant shall not apply for the same or similar use affecting all or part of the property within twelve months of the effective date of the decision of denial, or as otherwise specified at the time of the decision of denial.

     J.      Expirations. Applications, approvals and permits issued according to this title will expire in accordance with the following:

     1.     Application Expiration. Unless there has been substantial activity toward submitting a deemed complete application package according to subsection D, such application package shall expire after a continuous twelve-month period of inactivity. Thereafter, the applicant may submit a new application package according to subsection D.

     2.     Approval and Permit Expiration.

     a.     Any temporary use permit expires at the conclusion of the permitted use.

     b.     Other approvals or permits subject to this title shall expire:

     i.      Twelve months from the effective date of the decision, unless construction and/or use in reliance has commenced or as otherwise stated in the conditions of approval; or

     ii.     If the use for which it was issued is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve months.

     K.    Time Extensions. At any time prior to the expiration of approvals or permits subject to this title, the permittee for such approval or permit may file a written request for an extension of time. The development services director may grant an initial extension of the term of the permit. The city council shall consider all subsequent requests for time extensions, according to subsection (F)(2), and if:

     1.     The form and intensity of the project for which the approval or permit was issued have not been significantly altered, and

     2.     The conditions or circumstances which supported the findings of fact required for the original approval or permit have not changed and appear unlikely to change within the period of the proposed extension of time.

     L.     Substantial Conformance Review. Any project submittal made subsequent to obtaining a use permit authorized by this title shall be in substantial conformance with that use permit. At the request of the owner, or in the event that submit-

tals or field conditions are found to not be in conformance, a substantial conformance review application, accompanied by the filing fee, shall be filed and processed according to subsection D. If the project is found to not be in substantial conformance, the applicant may request a modification of the use permit according to subsection M.

     M.    Permit Modifications. Permit modification applications, accompanied by the filing fee, may be filed at any time prior to the initial expiration date of the project’s use permit. Applications shall be processed according to subsection D.

     N.    Revocation of Approvals and Permits. Any structures and/or improvements constructed, erected, altered, moved, or maintained contrary to a use permit and/or other provisions of this title, and any use of any land or structure established, conducted, or maintained contrary to an approval, permit and/or other provisions of this title, shall be declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance.

     1.     Procedure. The development services director shall immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement of a violation of this title, according to Chapter 1.24. If the owner, operator or other responsible entity fails or refuses to abate any public nuisance according to subsection N, the development services director may schedule a public hearing, according to subsection G, to consider the following actions:

     a.     Requiring whatever assurance deemed appropriate to guarantee that such violation will be corrected in a timely manner and will not occur again;

     b.     Imposing additional conditions or limitations affecting the physical design of the property or its use;

     c.     Revoking any approvals or permits subject to this title, according to the appeals provisions of subsection K.

     In the event the development services director refers an enforcement matter to the city council, the city attorney shall, upon order of the city council, immediately apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate and remove such building or structure and restrain and enjoin any person from erecting, maintaining, or using any property contrary to the provisions of this title.

     O.    Early Separation Findings. Separation findings required as a part of any permit described in this chapter may be made early, prior to application materials being submitted and prior to a decision by the development services director, planning commission and/or city council with a minor use permit application for the sole purpose of finding that the application meets or does not meet the required separation requirements. Land uses or land use applications initiated after the filing of an early separation finding application would not be grounds for denial of the permit. Should land use changes or land use applications which would conflict with an early separation finding determination be established or filed in advance of an application for an early separation finding, the land use would be considered as grounds for denial of the early separation finding permit.

     No other approval may be granted as a part of this permit. Applications made pursuant to this subsection must give additional notice by way of advertisement in a newspaper having general circulation within the affected area at least ten days prior to the decision. This finding that the application meets separation requirements shall be valid for up to one year before the early finding expires.

     P.     The remedies provided for in this title shall be cumulative and not exclusive. Nothing herein is intended to conflict with applicable state laws or federal laws. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2018; Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.030 Planned development permits.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes conditions under which certain residential, commercial, or industrial development may be developed as integrated parts on a single site through economical and efficient design techniques. The goal is to produce lasting, desirable development in accordance with general plan objectives for the surrounding area; and development that meets standards of environmental quality, public health and safety, and efficient use of the city’s resources. This section also establishes procedures for processing planned development permit applications.

     B.     Development Subject to this Section.

     1.     Development that includes five or more principal dwelling units, a major subdivision and/or a condominium map;

     2.     Development that includes three or more principal buildings on one site;

     3.     Development of principal uses on commercial, industrial, and/or mixed use sites of one acre or more;

     4.     Development in the Downtown Village specific plan area;

     5.     Uses outlined in specific zoning districts.

     C.     Findings. The planning commission or the city council may approve a planned development permit according to subsection E if the following findings are made:

     1.     The development is not detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, or general welfare;

     2.     The development complies with applicable provisions of this title and/or deviations that comply with applicable provisions in subsection D;

     3.     The development is consistent with general plan policies and standards and other applicable plans or policies adopted by the city council;

     4.     The development density or intensity does not exceed general plan limitations;

     5.     Existing infrastructure such as utilities, transportation systems, and communication networks adequately serve the development or will be upgraded to efficiently accommodate the additional burdens imposed.

     D.    Deviations. Development may deviate from development standards as described in Chapter 17.16, Zoning Districts, and Chapter 17.24, District Regulations, where it can be found that the project provides equivalent benefits and/or achieves efficiencies in use, structures, transportation and/or utility systems. Where deviations are recommended by the community development director, the hearing body may approve a planned development permit if the deviation is offset by one or more of the following design elements or features:

     1.     The development exceeds minimum resource conservation requirements, such as water, energy, materials, adaptive reuse;

     2.     The development exceeds the open space area requirements by at least fifteen percent;

     3.     The development provides recreational amenities, such as a swimming pool, volleyball court, fitness equipment, activity room, etc.;

     4.     The development provides outdoor amenities, such as site furnishings or informal dining/gathering spaces;

     5.     The development provides enhanced pedestrian, bicycle, and/or vehicular connectivity elements;

     6.     The development installs and maintains art available and accessible to the public;

     7.     The development provides outdoor commercial space associated with a principal commercial use, such as flower stands, newspaper stands, coffee/food carts, and kiosks;

     8.     The development implements an ongoing transit program(s);

     9.     The development enhances, improves, manages, and/or programs activities for outdoor spaces through a supplemental service district;

     10.   Deed restricted affordable housing is provided.

     E.     Application Procedures. Application packages for planned development permits shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. The advisory body and the hearing body for planned development permit applications shall be as follows:

     1.     The planning commission shall hear and decide applications for projects other than major subdivisions or condominium maps during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G).

     2.     The planning commission shall be the advisory body for major subdivision and condo-

minium map applications during the course of at least one public hearing, according to Section 17.28.020(G). The city council shall hear and decide applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G). (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.040 Temporary use permits.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes the conditions under which limited duration outdoor commercial and community activities, otherwise prohibited in this code, may be conducted, and establishes procedures for processing temporary use permit applications.

     B.     Permit Categories. The following temporary uses may be authorized, consistent with temporary uses identified in the applicable zoning district:

     1.     Small Event. Events are categorized as “small” if the event is comprised of a subordinate extension of the established principal use on-site (e.g., sidewalk sales, flower sales) and of short duration (e.g., one-time annual event of one to three consecutive days).

     2.     Large Event. Events are categorized as “large” if the event is a singular annual event with unique characteristics which may promote the on-site principal use as well as philanthropic or charitable causes and community activities (e.g., carnivals, fairs, concerts, shows, tent sales, parking lot sales, special event lot sales including pumpkins and Christmas trees, auctions) or of a duration from four to thirty days (e.g., one-time annual events up to forty-five consecutive days).

     3.     Recurrent Events. Events are categorized as “recurrent” if the event, no matter the size or duration, is held more than two times in a twelve-month period. The development services director may require recurrent events with impacts to be processed as a minor use according to Section 17.28.052.

     C.     General Conditions. Temporary use permits shall be subject to the following general conditions:

 

 

     1.     All uses shall conform to performance standards according to Section 17.24.080 and Title 9.

     2.     All parking areas and main walk areas located on undeveloped land shall be kept damp or shall be covered to prevent the raising of dust.

     3.     All signs and structures shall conform to the requirements of this code.

     4.     All sites shall be completely cleaned of debris and temporary structures, and returned to their pre-activity condition, within three days of activity termination.

     5.     A cash clean-up deposit, according to Section 17.28.020(D), shall be deposited with the city to assure clean-up.

     6.     No area of public right-of-way may be used without first obtaining an encroachment permit from the engineering department.

     7.     Sanitary sewer facilities, either portable or permanent, shall be made available to employees and patrons of the temporary use permit holder during event hours, as approved by the city engineer.

     D.    Exemptions. Public school district activities and events that are held on district-owned property shall be exempt from this section.

     E.     Application Procedures. Application packages for temporary use permits shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. Development services department staff shall process and decide temporary use permit applications ministerially. (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.050 Conditional use permits.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes procedures for accommodating proposed uses with special site or design requirements, operating characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surroundings that are otherwise prohibited in this code. This section assures that any area will assume or retain the characteristics intended by zoning. This section also establishes procedures for processing conditional use permit applications.

     B.     Uses Subject to These Provisions.

     1.     Uses outlined in specific zoning districts.

     C.     Findings. A conditional use permit may be approved if all of the following findings are made:

     1.     The use is compatible with the neighborhood or the community;

     2.     The use is not detrimental to the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity;

     3.     The use complies with performance standards according to Section 17.24.080;

     4.     The use is consistent with applicable provisions of the particular zoning district and with policies and standards of the general plan.

     D.    Application. Application packages for conditional use permits shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. The city council shall hear and decide all conditional use permit applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G). (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.052 Minor use permits.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes the conditions under which accommodations may be made for uses with special site or design requirements, operating characteristics, or potential adverse effects on surroundings that are otherwise prohibited in this code, and establishes procedures for processing minor use permit applications.

     Minor uses are those uses enumerated in subsection B, that are of such nature and intensity as to not require the level of review required for uses subject to the conditional use permit or planned development permit process as set forth in Sections 17.28.050 and 17.28.030.

     B.     Uses Subject to These Provisions.

     1.     Large family day care homes in accordance with Section 17.24.060.

     2.     Facilities involved in the sale of alcoholic beverages that do not require discretionary approval by the city council.

     3.     Expansion of nonconforming single-family dwellings used for residential purposes in the R/L, RL/M, and RM zones where lot coverage is increased by more than twenty percent, subject to the criteria set forth in Sections 17.24.090(F)(1)(a) through (c).

     4.     Establishment of office uses in the general commercial zone.

     5.     Outdoor dining areas in excess of one thousand square feet associated with the principal permitted restaurant, eating or drinking establishment, or similar use on the subject property or adjacent public right-of-way, subject to the criteria set forth in Sections 17.24.060(C)(17)(a) through (j) and (C)(18)(a) through (p).

     6.     Uses outlined in specific zoning districts.

     C.     Findings. The development services director shall approve a minor use permit if all of the following findings are made:

     1.     The use is compatible with the neighborhood or the community;

     2.     The use is not detrimental to the health, safety, convenience or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity;

     3.     The use complies with performance standards according to Section 17.24.080;

     4.     The use is consistent with the applicable provisions of the particular zoning district and with the policies and standards of the general plan.

     D.    Application Procedures. Application packages shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. Affected property owners shall be noticed according to subsection 17.28.020(F)(2). (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.060 Variances and minor modifications.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes procedures for processing variance and minor modification applications. Variances and minor modifications are limited exceptions to the usual requirements of this title.

     B.     Findings. A variance may be approved if all of the following findings are made:

     1.     There are special property circumstances, (size, shape, topography, location or surroundings) that would cause the strict application of this title to deprive the property of rights enjoyed by other properties in the same vicinity and zoning district;

     2.     Granting the variance is necessary to preserve a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same vicinity and zoning district;

     3.     Granting the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements;

     4.     Granting the variance does not constitute a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the same vicinity and zoning district.

     C.     Parking Variance. A variance from the requirements of a commercial or industrial zoning district in order that some or all of the required parking spaces be located offsite, including locations in other local jurisdictions, or that in-lieu fees be provided, may be approved if both of the following conditions are met:

     1.     The parking variance will be an incentive to, and a benefit for, the nonresidential development;

     2.     The parking variance will facilitate access to the nonresidential development by patrons of public transit facilities.

     For offsite parking spaces, the following additional condition must also be met:

     3.     Parking arrangements will be controlled by an agreement recorded and running with the land that:

     a.     Recognizes the parking obligation for the benefited property,

     b.     Does not result in a violation of parking standards on the property supplying the parking, and

     c.     Cannot be modified without authorization of the city of Lemon Grove.

     D.    Minor Modifications. A minor modification may be approved when the proposed change constitutes a reasonable use of an individual property and meets the following standards:

     1.     No more than a twenty percent reduction of required front, side, or rear setbacks;

     2.     No more than a twenty percent reduction of open space requirements;

     3.     No more than a ten percent increase of lot coverage;

     4.     No more than a ten percent reduction of automobile parking space requirements;

     5.     Walls, hedges, or fences located within setback areas that exceed the height limits of the zoning district are consistent with safety standards;

     6.     Accessibility improvements for persons with disabilities.

     E.     Application Procedures. Application packages shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. The city council shall hear and decide variance applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G). The development services director shall hear and decide minor modification applications subsequent to having been noticed according to Section 17.28.020(F)(2). (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016; Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.070 Zoning clearances.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes procedures for conducting a zoning clearance review to ensure that all proposed uses, structures, and/or improvements comply with the applicable requirements of this code. The zoning clearance serves as a record of compliance. Prior to, or concurrent with, submitting an application for any business license, building permit, improvement, subdivision, or other change in use, the applicant shall obtain a zoning clearance. A zoning clearance also serves as a record of decisions for proposed uses, structures, and/or improvements, which may not require additional approvals or permits in this code.

     B.     Exemptions. To the extent allowed by law, applications for miscellaneous building permits, at the determination of the development services director, shall be exempt from this chapter.

     C.     Application Procedures. Application packages for zoning clearances shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. Development services department staff shall process and decide zoning clearance applications ministerially. (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

17.28.080 Zoning ordinance amendments.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes the conditions under which Zoning Ordinance amendments may be made, and establishes procedures for processing Zoning Ordinance amendment applications. The city council may amend, supplement, or change the regulations, land use district boundaries, or classifications of property.

     B.     Findings. An amendment to this section may be granted if the following findings are made:

     1.     That the proposed amendment is consistent with the general plan, in accordance with California Government Code, Section 65860, as amended; and

     2.     That the public health, safety, and general welfare benefit from the adoption of the proposed amendment.

     C.     Application Procedures. Application packages shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. The city council shall be the advisory body for all Zoning Ordinance amendment applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G), and make a recommendation in a manner consistent with Government Code Sections 65853 through 65857, as amended, to the city council. The city council shall hear and decide all Zoning Ordinance amendment applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G).

     1.     If the city council approves the proposed amendment, it shall adopt an ordinance amending the Zoning Ordinance, in accordance with California Government Code, Sections 36931 through 36937, as amended. (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

17.28.090 Specific plans and amendments.
     A.    Purpose. This section establishes the conditions under which specific plans and specific plan amendments may be prepared, adopted, or amended, and establishes procedures for process-ing specific plan and specific plan amendment applications.

     B.     Findings. A specific plan or specific plan amendment may be adopted if the proposed plan or amendment is consistent with the general plan, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65450, as amended.

     C.     Application Procedures. Application packages shall be processed according to Section 17.28.020. The city council shall hear and decide all specific plan and specific plan amendment applications during the course of at least one public hearing, conducted according to Section 17.28.020(G). The city council shall act in a manner consistent with Government Code Sections 65853 through 65857, as amended. A specific plan or specific plan amendment may be adopted by resolution or by ordinance, in accordance with California Government Code, Section 65453, as amended. (Ord. 434 § 5, 2015; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 17.32 MEDICAL MARIJUANA REGULATIONS
17.32.010 Purpose.
     This chapter establishes the regulations for the use of medical marijuana, to the extent allowed by state law, in a way that will minimize the impacts on the community and help pay for costs associated with the usage of a controlled substance. This chapter does not authorize or permit any conduct not allowed by state law. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.020 Applicability.
     A.    The intent of this chapter is to regulate the cultivation, processing and dispensing of medical marijuana in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community. This section is not intended to interfere with a qualified patient or primary caregiver’s right to medical marijuana, as provided for in California Health and Safety Code Section 11362, nor criminalize the same.

     B.     Medical marijuana for personal use shall be in conformance with the standards set forth in this title. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.030 Release of liability and hold harmless.
     The owner and permittee of a medical marijuana dispensary or cultivation facility shall release the city of Lemon Grove, and its agents, officers, elected officials, and employees from any injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that result from any arrest or prosecution of cooperative or collective or cultivation owners, operators, employees, primary caregiver or qualified patients for violation of state or federal laws in a form satisfactory to the director of development services. In addition, the business owner and permittee of each medical marijuana cooperative, collective or cultivation facility shall indemnify and hold harmless the city of Lemon Grove and its agents, officers, elected officials, and employees for any claims, damages, or injuries brought by adjacent or nearby property owners or other third parties due to the operations at the cooperative, collective or cultivation facility, and for any claims brought by any of their qualified patients for problems, injuries, damages, or liabilities of any kind that may arise from the distribution, cultivation and/or on- or off-site use of medical marijuana provided at the cooperative, collective or cultivation facility in a form satisfactory to the director of development services. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.040 Application.
     Medical marijuana dispensary which dispense, process and cultivate medicinal marijuana shall be required to obtain a conditional use permit consistent with Section 17.28.050 prior to operation. The fact that an applicant possesses other types of state or city permits or licenses does not exempt the applicant from the requirement of obtaining a conditional use permit to operate a medical marijuana dispensary. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.050 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases are italicized throughout this title and shall have the meanings found in this section.

     “Director” means a corporate officer, corporate board member, or employee with supervisory responsibilities of an authorized dispensary business that dispenses medical marijuana.

     “Licensed physician” means a person educated, clinically experienced, and licensed by the Medical Board of California, or the Osteopathic Medical Board of California to practice medicine.

     “Medical marijuana” means marijuana product used for the treatment of pain and suffering caused by diseases and ailments. Medical marijuana does not include recreational use.

     “Medical marijuana dispensary (dispensary)” means a facility where medical cannabis, medical cannabis products, or devices for the use of medical cannabis or medical cannabis products are offered, either individually or in any combination, for retail sale, as defined by Section 19300.5 of the California Business and Professions Code.

     “Medical marijuana identification card (MMIC)” A document provided by the San Diego County medical marijuana identification card (MMIC) program pursuant to the State Department of Health Services that identifies a qualified patient authorized to engage in the medical use of marijuana and the person’s designated primary caregiver, if any as per California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, and as may be amended.

     “Operations manual” a manual that each dispensary shall develop, implement and maintain on the premises which contains requirements outlined in Section 17.32.090(C)(6).

     “Person with an identification card” means an individual who is a qualified patient who has applied for and received a valid identification card pursuant to this chapter and the California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, and as may be amended.

     “Premises” means a lot, parcel, tract or plot of land, together with the buildings, structures and appurtenances thereon.

     “Primary caregiver” means the individual or individuals designated by a qualified patient who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health or safety of that qualified patient. As used herein, a primary caregiver may only grow, administer, transport, or engage in the activities regulated hereunder on behalf of the qualified patient for whom they have consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health or safety of that qualified patient. A primary caregiver may engage in other activities as specifically enumerated herein.

     “Protected uses” are for purposes of computing distance separations from any public or private preschools and schools, licensed daycare facilities, any park or playground, alcohol and substance abuse treatment centers.

     “Qualified patient” means a person who has obtained a written recommendation or approval from a licensed physician to use marijuana for personal medical purposes.

     “Regulated uses” are for purposes of computing distance separations for medical marijuana cooperative or collective businesses (with or without accessory cultivation uses) but excluding individual residential cultivation sites operated by qualified patients or primary caregiver and located solely in single-family residential zones. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.060 General provisions.
     The following information must be submitted with an application to request medical marijuana use in conformance to this section and the city of Lemon Grove. All documents which relate to the general provisions and the requirements listed in the submittal requirements must be included in the operations manual.

     A.    Physician/Patient Confidentiality. All processes and reviews conducted pursuant to this chapter shall preserve to the maximum extent possible all legal protection and privileges. Disclosure of any member information shall not be deemed a waiver of confidentiality of those records under any provision of state law.

     B.     Medical Marijuana Cultivation Permitted by Compassionate Use Act. All cultivation of marijuana for medical purposes shall not be declared unlawful by the city of Lemon Grove when said cultivation is conducted solely for the personal medical purposes of qualified patients, in accordance with the Compassionate Use Act of 1996. Such cultivation may include the cultivation and possession of both male and female plants in all stages of growth, clones, seedlings and seeds and related cultivation equipment and supplies. Qualified patients and/or their primary caregivers may cultivate individually and/or collectively as permitted by the state of California and as outlined in the following sections. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.080 Findings.
     In addition to the findings required for the granting of a conditional use permit by Section 17.28.050 of this title, the decision making authority shall consider the following:

     A.    Whether the approval of the proposed use will violate the minimum requirements set forth in this chapter for distance separations between establishments which dispense, process or cultivate medical marijuana; and separations between establishments which dispense, process or cultivate medical marijuana and other specific regulated or protected land uses as set forth in this chapter.

     B.     Whether the proposed use complies with Title 17 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.090 Medical marijuana dispensary regulations.
     A.    Zones. Dispensaries may be established by conditional use permit in the heavy commercial (HC), limited commercial (LC), general commercial (GC) and light industrial (LI) zones and subject to the distance requirements. Dispensaries are prohibited in mixed-use zones (Downtown Village Specific Plan and Central Commercial) and all residential zones (RLM, RL, RM, RMH).

     B.     Distance Requirements. An application may be submitted provided the proposed facility meets the required distance measurements. For purposes of measurements, all dispensaries are considered regulated uses and public parks as defined at Section 12.20.030 of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, playgrounds as defined at Section 18.28.020, subdivision (v), of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, licensed day care facilities as defined at Section 17.08.030 of Lemon Grove Municipal Code, schools as defined at California Health and Safety Code Section 11362.768, subdivision (h), and alcohol and substance abuse treatment centers are considered protected uses. Measurement is made between the closest property lines of the premises in which the regulated uses and protected uses are located. A regulated use must not be:

     1.     Within one thousand feet of any other regulated use which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the city,

     2.     Within one thousand feet from any protected use which is located either inside or outside the jurisdiction of the city.

     The measurement of distance between uses will take into account natural topographical barriers and constructed barriers such as freeways or flood control channels that would impede direct physical access between the uses. In such cases, the separation distance shall be measured as the most direct route around the barrier in a manner that establishes direct access.

     C.     Standards.

     1.     Background Check Required for Directors and Employees. The director and employees of a dispensary must obtain a LiveScan background check through the California Department of Justice or the San Diego County sheriff’s department prior to employment. Directors convicted of a serious felony, as defined in California Penal Code Section 1192.7, subdivision (c), and Health and Safety Code Section 11359 (Possession for sale) within the previous ten years shall not be eligible for a license. Other potential collective employees and volunteers convicted of the crimes identified in this section in the previous five years are ineligible for employment or participation. If during employment with the dispensary, a director or employee is convicted of a crime identified in this section shall be immediately dismissed from employment or required to resign as a corporate board member or officer. For purposes of this section, a conviction in another state that would have been a conviction equivalent under California law to those convictions specified in this section will disqualify the person from employment or volunteering at the dispensary.

     2.     Security Personnel Required. Dispensaries shall have at least one uniformed security guard on duty during operating hours that possess a valid Department of Consumer Affairs “Security Guard Card.”

     3.     Community Relations Liaison Required. Dispensaries shall designate a community relations liaison (liaison) who shall be at least eighteen years of age. The liaison may also be the director of the dispensary. To address community complaints or operational problems with the dispensaries, the individual designated as the community relations liaison shall provide his or her name, phone number and email address to the following:

     a.     Lemon Grove city manager;

     b.     San Diego County sheriff’s department personnel supervising law enforcement activity in Lemon Grove;

     c.     All neighbors within one hundred feet of the dispensary.

     4.     Inspection of Premises. City code enforcement officers, San Diego sheriff’s department staff, and any other employee of the city requesting admission for the purpose of determining compliance with the standards set forth in this section shall be given access to the premises. City and sheriff staff shall not retain information pertaining to individual patient records viewed during an inspection, and information related to individual patients shall not be made public. Inspectors will give reasonable notice of a scheduled inspection. Unannounced inspections of a dispensary may occur if city or sheriff’s department staff have probable cause that the collective is violating the law.

     5.     Inspection Requirements. In order to facilitate verification that a dispensary operates pursuant to state and local laws, the following records must be maintained at the premises at all times and available for inspection by city code enforcement officers, San Diego sheriff’s department staff, and any other employee of the city:

     a.     Client Records. The dispensary shall keep a record of its clients. The record shall include the following and shall be maintained for a two-year period:

     i.      Qualified patient member’s name, name of primary caregiver when appropriate, and name of licensed physician recommending use of medical marijuana for the member.

     b.     Medical marijuana Records. Dispensary shall keep a record of its medical marijuana transactions. The following records shall be maintained for a two-year period and labeling shall occur as specified:

     i.      A record identifying the source or sources of all medical marijuana currently on the premises or that has been on the premises during the two-year period preceding the current date. The record shall include the name of the cultivator or manufacturer and the address of the cultivation or manufacturing location.

     ii.     All medical marijuana at the premises must at all times be physically labeled with information that will allow for identification of the source of the medical marijuana.

     iii.    All medical marijuana at the premises shall be physically labeled with the monetary amount to be charged.

     c.     Financial Records. Dispensary shall maintain records of all transactions involving money and/or medical marijuana occurring at the premises. Records shall be maintained for a two-year period preceding the current date.

     d.     Employee Records. Dispensary shall maintain a record of each employee/volunteer and director. The record shall include name and background check verification. Records shall be maintained for a two-year period following the end of an employee’s employment or director’s relationship with the dispensary.

     6.     Operations manual. The application for a conditional use permit shall include a detailed operations manual including, but not necessarily limited to, the following information:

     a.     Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek verification of the information contained within the application;

     b.     A description of the staff screening process including appropriate background checks;

     c.     The hours and days of the week the dispensary will be open;

     d.     Text and graphic materials showing the site, floor plan and facilities of the dispensary. The material shall also show adjacent structures and land use;

     e.     A description of the security measures located on the premises, including, but not limited to, lighting, alarms, and automatic law enforcement notification;

     f.      A description of the screening, registration and validation process for qualified patients;

     g.     A description of qualified patient records acquisition and retention procedures;

     h.     The process for tracking medical marijuana quantities and inventory controls employed, including the source of medical marijuana (on-site cultivation, processing, or plant material, or processed products, received from outside sources);

     i.      Procedures to ensure accurate record keeping, including protocols to ensure that quantities purchased do not suggest re-distribution;

     j.      Other information required by the development services director.

     7.     Operating Standards. Dispensaries shall comply with all of the following operating standards. In addition to these standards, the dispensaries shall comply at all times with conditions outlined in the approved conditional use permit and the operational manual.

     a.     Dispensing medical marijuana to an individual qualified patient or primary caregiver more than once a day is prohibited;

     b.     Dispensaries shall only dispense medical marijuana to an individual qualified patient or primary caregiver who has a valid, verified licensed physician’s recommendation, and if appropriate, a valid primary caregiver designation. The dispensary shall verify that the licensed physician’s recommendation is current and valid;

     c.     On-site evaluation by a licensed physician for the purposes of obtaining a qualified status is prohibited;

     d.     Dispensaries shall display the client rules and/or regulations in a conspicuous place that is readily seen by all persons entering the dispensary. The client rules and/or regulations shall include, but are not limited to:

     i.      Each building entrance to a dispensary shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that smoking, ingesting or consuming medical marijuana on the premises or in the vicinity of the dispensary is prohibited unless specifically authorized within the governing conditional use permit.

     ii.     The building entrance to a dispensary shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under the age of eighteen are precluded from entering the premises.

     iii.    The hours of operation for an authorized dispensary shall be limited to between eight a.m. to eight p.m. or as specified within the conditional use permit.

     iv.    Dispensaries shall not permit the use or consumption of medical marijuana on-site unless specifically authorized under the conditional use permit.

     v.     Dispensaries shall not permit the on-site display of unprocessed marijuana plants or representations of marijuana plants in any areas visible to the public;

     vi.    All signage for dispensaries shall require a sign permit from the city prior to installation. Signage shall not include any terminology (including slang) or symbols for marijuana.

     vii.   Dispensaries shall only permit the distribution of medical marijuana plant material and medical marijuana manufactured products from licensed sources as allowed by the approved conditional use permit. Such distribution shall be limited to qualified patients or primary caregiver;

     e.     Dispensaries shall maintain on the premises an on-site training curriculum capable of meeting employee, agents and volunteer training needs. The minimum training curriculum shall include professional conduct, ethics, and state and federal laws regarding patient confidentiality; specific procedural instructions for responding to an emergency, including robbery or violent incident.

     f.      Dispensaries shall maintain all necessary permits, and pay all appropriate taxes. Dispensaries shall also provide invoices to cultivators and manufacturers to ensure tax liability responsibility;

     g.     Dispensaries shall implement procedures as outlined in their approved operations manual;

     h.     Dispensaries shall submit an “annual performance review report” for review and approval by the development services director. The “annual performance review report” is intended to identify effectiveness of the approved conditional use permit, operations manual, and conditions of approval, as well as any proposed modification to procedures as deemed necessary. The development services director may review and approve amendments to the approved “operations manual”; and the frequency of the “annual performance review report.” Medical marijuana cultivation and dispensing monitoring review fees pursuant to the current Master Fee Schedule shall accompany the “annual performance review report” for costs associated with the review and approval of the report.

     i.      Dispensaries shall maintain twenty-four-hour recorded video surveillance of the premises. Recordings shall be retained for thirty days for inspection by city staff. City staff must provide valid cause for viewing video surveillance. City staff must ensure that patient privacy is safeguarded. Video surveillance will not be shared with law enforcement except when formally requested as part of a law enforcement investigation directly involving the dispensary.

     j.      Sales of alcoholic beverages are prohibited.

     k.     Sales of tobacco and tobacco products are prohibited.

     l.      Sales of drug paraphernalia are prohibited.

     m.    The location of the dispensary shall include the installation of a centrally monitored alarm system.

     n.     Lighting shall be installed to adequately light the exterior and interior of the dispensary premises while in conformance with Section 17.28.080.

     8.     Source of Medical marijuana. A dispensary shall only dispense marijuana from the following sources and this information shall be included in the operations manual:

     a.     On-Site Cultivation for Authorized Dispensary. If the conditional use permit authorizes limited, on-site medical marijuana cultivation at the dispensary, on-site cultivation shall be considered an accessory use and shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the dispensaries’ total floor area and in no case exceed one thousand five hundred square feet. In addition to these area limitations, the accessory use shall conform to the specific zone regulations, Section 17.24.060 Accessory Buildings and Uses, Section 17.32.100 of this title, and applicable Building and Fire Codes. The operations manual shall include information regarding the on-site cultivation including, but not limited to:

     i.      Description of measures taken to minimize or offset energy use from the cultivation or processing of medical marijuana on-site; and

     ii.     Description of chemicals stored or used; and

     iii.    Description of any effluent discharged into the city’s wastewater and/or stormwater system;

     b.     Licensed External Source. Until one year following the date when the California State Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation begins accepting applications for licenses, or sooner, if such a deadline is set by the Bureau, dispensaries shall source their medical marijuana from cultivators and manufacturers that have obtained a local business license or equivalent document showing that the organization is operating in zoning and regulatory compliance from another jurisdiction for the medical marijuana cultivation or manufacturing. One year from the date that the California State Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulation begins accepting applications for licenses, or sooner, if such a deadline is set by the Bureau, all sources of medical marijuana or medical marijuana products sold in a dispensary must also have a state license for their medical marijuana activities. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.100 Medical marijuana cultivating regulations.
     The cultivation of medical marijuana for personal use by a qualified patient shall be permitted in connection with a residence owned or leased by a qualified patient and meeting the minimum standards noted below.

     A.    Medical marijuana Cultivation for Personal Use. An individual qualified patient shall be allowed to cultivate medical marijuana within his or her private residence. If the private residence is leased or rented, a notarized authorization from the property owner must be filed with the city. A primary caregiver shall only cultivate medical marijuana at the residence of a qualified patient for whom he/she is the primary caregiver.

     B.     Zones. Cultivating medical marijuana is allowed in conforming residential low (RL) and residential medium/low (RLIM) zones where there is an existing single-family development subject to the following standards and authorized by a zoning clearance.

     C.     Standards.

     1.     Cultivation shall only occur within an enclosed structure that can be secured and locked including the residence, new or remodeled addition to a residence, residential accessory building or a legally converted garage.

     2.     Garage conversions shall require a replacement in kind prior to authorizing a cultivation area.

     3.     The grow area shall be within a self-contained structure, with a one-hour firewall assembly made of green board, and shall be ventilated with odor control, and shall not create a humidity or mold problem.

     4.     The qualified patient shall reside in the residence where the medical marijuana cultivation occurs.

     5.     The interior area dedicated to the cultivation of marijuana in an existing residence or within a proposed addition to the residence shall not exceed fifty square feet.

     6.     An accessory structure containing a medical marijuana cultivation area shall not exceed fifty square feet and shall be consistent with the accessory structure requirements of the residential zone and Section 17.24.060.

     7.     Medical marijuana cultivation lighting shall not exceed one thousand two hundred watts.

     8.     Evidence of medical marijuana cultivation either within or outside the residence shall not be visible from outside the premises.

     9.     The residence shall maintain kitchen, bathrooms, and primary bedrooms for their intended use and shall not be displaced by medical marijuana cultivation.

     10.   The medical marijuana cultivation area shall be in compliance with the current, adopted edition of the California Building Code Section 1203.4 Natural Ventilation or Section 402.3 Mechanical Ventilation (or its equivalent(s)).

     11.   The medical marijuana personal cultivation and processing shall comply with stormwater, wastewater, and applicable greenhouse gas reduction requirements.

 

     12.   Personal medical marijuana cultivation and processing shall not be visible from the exterior of the premises.

     13.   A qualified patient or primary caregiver shall participate in medical marijuana cultivation in only one residential location within the city of Lemon Grove.

     D.    Prohibitions.

     1.     The cultivation of medical marijuana shall not be authorized by or considered a home occupation and no home occupation permit shall be issued.

     2.     The use of gas products (CO2, butane, etc.) for medical marijuana cultivation or processing for personal use.

     3.     Sale or dispensing of medical marijuana from a residential zoned property.

     4.     Signage identifying any uses related to medical marijuana in a residential zone.

     E.     Deviations.

     1.     Any proposed medical marijuana cultivation for personal use by an individual qualified patient or primary caregiver that does not meet the grow area standard of Section 17.32.090(C)(8) shall require review and approval by the director of development services or designee. The proposed deviation from the cultivation area limitations shall be processed as a zoning clearance. The director of development services or designee shall review the submitted information and make an interpretation of need. A complete application shall include the following documentation:

     a.     Licensed physician’s recommendation or verification of more than one qualified patient living in the residence shall be submitted with the request showing why the cultivation area standard is not feasible.

     b.     Written permission from the property owner.

     c.     Show conformance to the residential zone and accessory building regulation.

     d.     The building official and fire chief may require additional specific standards to meet the California Building Code and Fire Code, including, but not limited to, installation of fire suppression sprinklers.

     e.     Medical marijuana cultivation area shall be enclosed in a structure with a one-hour firewall assembly of green board.

     f.      The medical marijuana cultivation area shall not exceed one hundred square feet. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.110 Transportation of medical marijuana.
     All activities involving the transportation of marijuana for personal patient use, to the extent permitted by The Compassionate Use Act of 1996, shall be conducted by qualified patients and/or the authorized primary caregiver of the qualified patient, where the quantity transported and the method, timing and distance of the transportation are reasonably related to the medical needs of the qualified patient. All personal transportation shall be conducted in accordance with state law.

     All activities involving the transportation of marijuana for a dispensary shall comply with California State Regulations, restrictions and guidelines, as enumerated in Division 8, Chapter 3.5 of the California Business and Professions Code, and established by the Bureau of Medical Marijuana Regulations. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

 

17.32.120 Procedures.
     A.    Administrative Citation and Revocation.

     1.     Any violation of this chapter occurs the city has the authority to immediately cite a dispensary for the violation. The dispensary is given one warning and if not corrected within seven calendar days, the city may issue an administrative citation of five hundred dollars per violation. The citations may escalate according to the schedules identified in Section 1.12.012 until and unless the violations have been corrected.

     2.     A use permit may be revoked according to Section 17.28.020(n) (Revocation of permits and approval). Revocation proceedings may occur for noncompliance with the governing condition

use permit or zoning clearance and any of the standards in this chapter.

     B.     Transfer of Use Permit. The rights of an approved use permit to operate a dispensary may be transferred to another dispensary as a use permit modification according to Section 17.28.020(m).

     C.     Appeals. Any applicant or other interested person may appeal a decision by the development services director according to Section 17.28.020(I).

     D.    Fees. Applications filed under this chapter shall be reviewed and processed on a full cost recovery basis pursuant to the current Master Fee Schedule. The city council may amend the Master Fee Schedule from time to time to ensure for full cost recovery of administration of any permit issued under this chapter.

     E.     Amendments. Amendments to this chapter shall conform to the process identified in Section 17.28.080. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2016)

Title 18 CITYWIDE REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.04 DRAINAGE AND WATER COURSES (Reserved)
Chapter 18.08 EXCAVATION AND GRADING
Chapter 18.12 SIGNS
Chapter 18.14 RECYCLING FACILITIES
Chapter 18.16 ANIMAL KEEPING
Chapter 18.20 HOME OCCUPATION
Chapter 18.24 COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSION
Chapter 18.27 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
Chapter 18.28 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
Chapter 18.32 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
Chapter 18.36 PARK LANDS DEDICATION
Chapter 18.37 SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATION
Chapter 18.40 GENERAL PLAN CONFORMITY
Chapter 18.44 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
Chapter 18.48 HOME-SHARING

Chapter 18.04 DRAINAGE AND WATER COURSES (Reserved)

Chapter 18.08 EXCAVATION AND GRADING
Article I. General Provisions
18.08.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Grading Ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove.” (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.020 Purpose.
     This chapter establishes minimum requirements for grading, excavation and filling of land. It also provides for the issuance of permits, and provides for the enforcement of the chapter provisions. These provisions are supplementary and additional to the subdivision and zoning regulations of the city and shall be read and construed as an integral part of such regulations and the land development patterns and controls established thereby. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.030 Intent.
     The intent of this chapter is to protect life and property, promote the general welfare, enhance and improve the physical environment of the community, and preserve and protect the natural scenic character of the city. In administering these provisions, the following goals should be respected:

     A.    Ensure that future development of lands occurs in the manner most compatible with surrounding natural areas to have the least adverse effect upon other persons, land, or the general public;

 

     B.     Ensure that soil will not be stripped and removed from lands leaving barren, unsightly, unproductive land subject to erosion, subsidence and faulty drainage;

     C.     Encourage design and development of building sites to provide the maximum in safety and human enjoyment, while adapting development to and taking advantage of the natural terrain; and minimizing adverse visual impacts caused by major land form modifications;

     D.    Encourage and direct special attention toward retaining natural plantings and maximum number of existing trees;

     E.     Ensure that the objectives and policies of the adopted general plan for the city are met;

     F.     Meet the requirements of San Diego Regional Water Quality Control Board Order Number R9-2013-0001, as may be amended. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.040 Provisions separate from other requirements.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the inclusion in any zoning permit, subdivision approval, waiver, review or other approval issued or approved pursuant to city ordinances of any condition, provision or requirement concerning the grading of land. Nothing in this chapter shall preclude the requirement for the property owner or applicant to obtain any other permit or approval required by the city engineer or by law from any public or private party or agency.

     B.     This chapter shall not affect the requirements of any other provision of this code requiring permits, fees or other charges, or affect any provision concerning the granting of franchises by any other person, body or agency.

     C.     This chapter is intended to implement the provisions of Chapters 8.48 and 8.52 of this code related to stormwater regulatory requirements including compliance with all implementing regulations of the city related to pollution control related to stormwater discharges, such as the Lemon Grove jurisdictional runoff management program (“JRMP”). (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.050 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter shall be construed as defined in this section:

     “Application package” means a set of materials, i.e., the application form accompanied by maps, studies, etc. as required by the checklist established by the development services director, filed by an applicant to officially request a permit subject to this title, or other titles as may be appropriate.

     “Approval” means a written professional opinion by the responsible principal of record concerning the satisfactory progress and completion of the work under his or her purview unless it specifically refers to the city engineer.

     “Approved plans” means the most current grading plans which bear the signature or stamp of approval of the city engineer.

     “Approved testing agency” means a testing agency approved by the city engineer.

     “Archaeologist” means a person who does scientific study of material remains of past human life and activity.

     “As-graded” means the surface and subsurface conditions and configuration upon completion of grading.

     “Bedrock” means in-place solid rock.

     “Bench” means a relatively level step excavated into earth material on which fill is to be placed.

     “Best management practices (BMPs)” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020. Erosion control measures are BMPs.

     “BMP Manual” or “Manual” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Borrow” means earth material acquired from an off-site location for use in grading on a site.

     “Borrow pit” means premises from which soil, sand, gravel, decomposed granite or rock are removed for any purpose.

     “Building pad” means that portion of the land contained within an area bounded by a line five feet outside the foundation footing for a building being cleared and level.

     “Building site” means that portion of the land containing the building pad(s) and lying within an area bounded by the top of slopes and/or toe of slopes within the lot or parcel.

     “CEQA” means the California Environmental Quality Act and its associated legislation, findings, determinations and requirements.

     “Certify” or “certification” means a signed written statement that the specific inspections and tests required have been performed and that the works comply with the applicable requirements of this chapter, the plans and the permit.

     “City” means the city of Lemon Grove.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer or the director of public works for the city or his or her duly authorized representative.

     “Civil engineer” means a professional engineer registered in the state of California to practice in the field of civil engineering.

     “Civil engineering” means the application of the knowledge of the forces of nature, principles of mechanics, and the properties of materials for evaluation, design and construction of civil works for the beneficial uses of the population.

     “Clearing” and/or “brushing” means the removal of vegetation (grass, brush, trees and similar plant types) above the natural surface of the ground.

     “Compaction” means densification of a soil or rock fill by mechanical or other acceptable procedures.

     “Contour grading” means grading which creates, or results in, land surfaces which reflect the pre-graded natural terrain or that simulates natural terrain, i.e., rounded nonplanary surfaces and rounded, nonangular intersections between surfaces.

     “Contractor” means a contractor licensed by the state to do work under this chapter. A contractor may be authorized to act for a property owner in doing such work.

     “County” means the county of San Diego.

     “Development services director” means the director of development services or duly authorized representative.

     “Discharge” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 8.48.020.

     “Discharger” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Earth material” means any rock, natural soil, or fill and/or any combination thereof.

     “Embankment” or “fill” means any act by which earth, land, gravel, rock, or any other material is deposited, placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location and the conditions resulting therefrom.

     “Engineering geologist” means a certified engineering geologist, registered by the state to practice engineering geology.

     “Engineering geology” means the application of geologic knowledge and principles in the investigation and evaluation of naturally occurring rock and soil for use in the design of civil work.

     “Environmental initial study” is an initial study required under the National Environmental Policy Act and the California Environmental Quality Act which assesses the possible environmental impacts of a proposed project and potential alternatives to mitigate impacts of the proposed project.

     “Environmentally sensitive areas” are defined by Regional Water Quality Control Board for the San Diego region (RWQCB), Order No. R9-2013-0001, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Permit No. CAS0109266, as areas that include but are not limited to all Clean Water Act Section 303(d) impaired water bodies; areas designated as Areas of Special Biological Significance by the State Water Resources Control Board (SWRCB) and the RWQCB; State Water Quality Protected Areas; water bodies designated with the RARE beneficial use by the SWRCB and RWQCB; areas designated as preserves or their equivalent under the Multi Species Conservation Program within the cities and county of San Diego; and any other equivalent environmentally sensitive areas which have been identified by the city.

     “Erosion” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Erosion control measure” means erosion control, sediment control, waste management, discharge prevention, or other BMPs required by this chapter, Chapter 8.48, or the BMP Manual.

     “Erosion control system” means any combination of erosion control measures, as defined in this chapter. Erosion control systems shall meet the requirements of this chapter, Chapter 8.48, and the BMP Manual and shall be designed to protect adjacent private property, watercourses, public facilities and receiving waters from the deposition of sediment or dust.

     “Excavation” or “cut” means any earth, sand, gravel, rock or other similar material which is cut into, dug, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed by people and the conditions resulting therefrom.

     “Expansive soil” means any soil with an expansion index greater than twenty, as determined by the Expansive Soil Index Tests (UBC Std. 29-32).

     “Fault” means a fracture in the earth’s crust along which movement has occurred. An active fault is one that exhibits separation in historic time or along which separation of Holocene deposits can be demonstrated. If Holocene deposits are not offset, but numerous epicenters have been recorded on or in close proximity to the fault, a classification of active may be used.

     Fill, Nonstructural. “Nonstructural fill” means any embankment on which no soil testing was performed or no compaction reports or other soil reports were prepared or submitted.

     “Geologic hazard” means any geologic feature capable of producing structural damage or physical injury. Geologic hazards include:

     1.     Landslides and potential slope instabilities resulting from bedding faults, weak clay stone beds, and over steepened slopes;

     2.     Deposits potentially subject to liquefaction, seismically induced settlement, severe ground shaking, surface rupture, debris flows, or rock falls resulting from fault activity;

     3.     Deposits subject to seepage conditions or high groundwater table.

     “Geotechnical report” means a report which contains all appropriate soil engineering, geologic, geohydrologic, and seismic information, evaluation, recommendations and findings. This type of report combines both engineering geology and soil engineering reports.

     “Grade” means the elevation and cross-sections established for the finished surface. All grades shall be based upon the official datum of the city.

     “Grading” means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

     “Grading permit” means a permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     Grading, Rough. “Rough grading” means the condition where ground surface approximately conforms to the design grade, generally within one-tenth of a foot, and all compaction of fills and embankments have been performed to the specifications required by the soil engineer.

     “Groundwater” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Grubbing” means the removal of roots and stumps.

     “Key” means a designed compaction fill placed in a trench excavated in earth material beneath the toe of a proposed fill slope.

     “Land development” means the making of excavations and embankments on private property and the construction of slopes, drainage structures, fences and other facilities incidental thereto.

     “Land disturbance activity” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Landscape architect” means a landscape architect, registered by the state of California, who performs professional work in physical land planning and integrated land development, including the design of landscape planting programs.

     “Landscape documentation package” means those supplemental landscape-specific attachments required by Section 18.44.040 to be submitted as part of an application package, as required elsewhere in the municipal code.

     “Landslide” means the downward and outward movement of soil, sand, gravel, rock or fill or a combination thereof.

     “Maximum extent practicable (MEP)” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “MS4” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Natural terrain” means the lay of the land prior to any grading.

     “Nuisance” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 17.08.030.

     “Owner” means any person, agency, firm or corporation having a legal, possessory or equitable interest in a given piece of real property.

     “Paleontologist” means a person who holds an advanced degree, who is affiliated with a recognized institution such as a museum or university and who is actively engaged in the research of prehistoric life through the study of plant and animal fossils.

     “Permittee” means any person to whom a permit is issued pursuant to this chapter.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, association, corporation, organization or partnership, or any city, county district or the state or any department or agency thereof.

     “Pollutants” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Pollution” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Preliminary soil engineering report” means a report prepared under the responsible supervision of a soil engineer which includes preliminary information concerning engineering properties of soil and rock on a site prior to grading, describing locations of these materials and providing recommendations for preparation of the site for its intended use.

     “Premises” means contiguous property in the same ownership for the purposes of this chapter.

     “Property owner” means the owner, subdivider or developer of real property which will be benefited by the proposed land development work.

     Property, Public. “Public property” means property owned in fee by the city, or dedicated for public use.

     “Public interest slope” means any manufactured slope which meets any one of the following criteria:

     1.     A vertical height in excess of fifteen feet;

     2.     A vertical height in excess of five feet located on the exterior of a subdivision and exposed to view from any point outside the subdivision;

     3.     A vertical height in excess of five feet which will be visible after completion of the buildings to be placed on the subject graded area from any circulation element road, from any existing or proposed public buildings, public facility, or publicly used property, from any private property two streets or more away from the slope in question or from any private homes existing at the time of creation of the slope.

     “Publicly used property” means property that is used frequently by persons other than the residents and/or owners.

     “Public rights-of-way” means public easements or dedications for streets, alleys, drainage ways and/or other uses.

     “Receiving waters” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Relative compaction” means the in-place dry density (determined by ASTM D1556, or other city engineer approved equal) expressed as a percentage of the maximum dry density (determined by ASTM D1557, or other city engineer approved equal).

     “Retaining wall” means wall designed to resist the lateral displacement of soil or other materials.

     “Runoff” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Sediment” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Slope” means the inclined exposed surface of a fill, excavation or natural terrain.

     “Soil” means earth material of whatever origin, overlying bedrock and may include the decomposed zone of bedrock which can be readily excavated by mechanical equipment.

     “Soil engineer” means a registered civil engineer who holds a valid authorization to use the title “soil engineer” as provided in Section 6736.1 of the California Business and Professions Code. The terms “geotechnical engineer,” “soils engineer” and “soil and foundation engineer” are deemed to be synonymous with the term “soil engineer.”

     “Soil engineering” means the application of the principles of soil mechanics in the investigation, evaluation and design of civil works involving the use of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.

     “Source control BMP (both structural and non-structural” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “State general construction stormwater permit” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Stockpile” means a temporary, uncompacted fill or embankment placed by artificial means, which is designated or intended to be moved, or relocated at a later date.

     “Stop work order” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Stormwater” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Structural post-construction BMP” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020.

     “Subdivider” means a person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be divided into one or more lots or parcels for him or herself or others as defined by those sections of the Government Code known as the Subdivision Map Act.

     “Substantial conformance” means grading that conforms to Section 18.08.480 of this chapter.

     “Terrace” means a relatively level step constructed in the face of a graded slope surface for drainage and maintenance purposes.

     “Unsuitable materials” means any soil or earth material having properties or characteristics, which, under the criteria of this chapter or under the criteria contained in any approved geotechnical report, make it unsuitable for use as fill or for any other intended use. These properties or characteristics include, but are not limited to, organic content of the material exceeding three percent, rock diameters exceeding eight inches, the presence of concrete or asphalt, or the presence of expansive soils within three feet of finish grade of any area intended or designed as a location for a building.

     “Watercourse” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Lemon Grove Municipal Code Section 8.48.020. For the purposes of this chapter, a “private watercourse” is a watercourse that collects runoff from private property and transports water to the public right-of-way and a “public watercourse” is a watercourse that collects runoff from the public right-of-way or water collected in a private watercourse that has reached the public right-of-way. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

Article II. Permits and Fees
18.08.060 Land development work—Permit required.
     A.    Except as exempted in Section 18.08.070, no person shall do any grading nor shall an owner allow any grading on their property unless the person or owner has a valid grading permit issued by the city engineer authorizing such grading.

     B.     An owner is presumed to have allowed grading which has been done on property occupied by him or her or is under his or her dominion and control. This presumption is a presumption affecting the burden of producing evidence.

     C.     A separate grading permit shall be required for each legal parcel, noncontiguous site, development, or each separate subdivision final map for which grading is to be performed. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.070 Designated exceptions.
     The following described grading is exempt from the requirement to obtain a grading permit under the provisions of this chapter:

     A.    Depositing materials in any disposal area operated by or licensed by the city or San Diego County.

     B.     Grading which meets all of the following limitations:

     1.     Grading is on a single legal lot or contiguous ownership;

     2.     Involves the cumulative movement of not more than fifty cubic yards of earth;

     3.     The cut in the cut area and/or the fill in the fill area, at their deepest points, do not exceed a depth of three feet in vertical depth measured from the original ground;

     4.     The fill is not intended to support structures;

     5.     The finished cut and/or fill slopes are not steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1);

     6.     The finished grading does not alter the drainage patterns either upstream or downstream from the grading;

     7.     None of the fill is placed on existing ground having a slope steeper than five horizontal to one vertical (5:1), which is a twenty percent slope;

     8.     None of the grading is closer than five feet to the adjacent ownership;

     9.     The finished slopes are protected from erosion and the downstream properties are protected from siltation resulting from the grading.

     C.     Excavation below finish grade for basements, for footings or foundations for buildings, manufactured homes, retaining walls or other structures or facilities, all if authorized by a valid building permit approved and issued by the development services director. Any embankment constructed with the excess material from the excavation exempted by this section must either be disposed of under an approved grading permit, or be disposed on-site without creating embankments more than three feet in unsupported height.

     D.    Exploratory excavations under the direction of a soil engineer, archaeologist, paleontologist or engineering geologist. Such excavations must be properly backfilled and compacted or otherwise restored.

     E.     When approved by the city engineer, excavation for the sole purpose of recompaction as specified or recommended by an approved soils report.

     F.     Grading for which inspection is provided by the city and which is done by a developer or contractor pursuant to city-approved improvement plans within public rights-of-way and adjacent slope rights areas independent of adjacent land development work, or grading done pursuant to a permit for excavation in public streets.

     G.    Clearing and brushing when directed by the fire chief to mitigate a fire hazard, with the concurrence of the development services director that such clearing and brushing will not cause significant damage to any rare, endangered or protected species of plant or wildlife or cause any significant damage to any habitat of any rare, endangered or protected species of wildlife.

     Note: The above listed exemptions do not apply to clearing, grubbing, brushing or grading when:

     1.     Grading will occur in or physically impact designated or dedicated open space or environmentally sensitive areas designated in the CEQA, the general plan or shown on any approved specific plan;

     2.     Grading will occur in any waterway or wetland, stream, river, channel, pond, lake, marsh, bog, lagoon, vernal pool or riparian habitat;

     3.     Grading will occur in any floodway or floodplain as shown on the San Diego County floodplain maps or on city-revised maps;

     4.     Grading will occur in any officially mapped area in high geologic risk zone;

     5.     Grading will occur in any other sensitive areas such as archaeological sites, historical sites or burial grounds. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.080 Permit applications.
     A.    Any person desiring to perform land development grading not exempted by Section 18.08.070 shall submit a grading permit application in a form approved by the city engineer.

     B.     A separate application with plans, specifications and other supplemental data as specified in this chapter and determined to be necessary by the city engineer, shall be required for each grading permit. The application form shall be signed by the owner or authorized agent of the property to be graded.

     C.     A complete grading permit application shall be submitted for city review and approval with the following items, completed and signed by the applicant or authorized agent, to the satisfaction of the city engineer, or this chapter:

     1.     Grading plan;

     2.     Separate plot plan;

     3.     Preliminary soil engineering report;

     4.     Landscape and irrigation plans consistent with requirements of Chapter 18.44;

     5.     Drainage study;

     6.     Haul route, including source of borrow or disposal;

     7.     Erosion control plan;

     8.     Post-construction stormwater management plan, where required pursuant to Chapter 8.48;

     9.     Grading plan check fee;

     10.   Soil engineering report review fee;

     11.   Deposit for independent third party review of soil report;

     12.   Inspection fees (may be paid at any time prior to issuance of permit);

     13.   Proof of legal lot (may be waived by city engineer if grading is pursuant to an approved tentative map or zoning permit).

     D.    The city engineer may, upon his or her determination and discretion, require additional data or information, eliminate, or modify any of the above requirements determined to be appropriate, including those items in Section 18.08.090.

     E.     The plans, application requirements and necessary fees may be altered or changed at any time between application submittal and permit issuance under the following conditions:

     1.     A change of policy or direction by the city council;

     2.     A change in the grading ordinance or fee schedule approved by the city council;

     3.     Discovery that the plans, application or fees violate or do not meet existing ordinances or policies or conform to the requirements of other permits or approvals, such as zoning permits or subdivision maps;

     4.     Discovery of any design defect, soil or geologic hazard, or any other fact or item which if left unchanged could cause damage, harm or hazard to public or private properties, or to life, limb or the general public’s safety or welfare.

     If such discoveries are made as described in subsections (E)(3) and (E)(4) of this subsection, and changes are so directed, the applicant shall be granted an extension of the application expiration date for thirty days, or for such other period as the city engineer may grant to the applicant, to allow for all required changes to reasonably be made and accomplished.

     F.     The time limits set out in Sections 18.08.260 and 18.08.300 shall apply to all grading plans and applications. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.090 Additional information.
     Other items which may be required by the city engineer in order to complete the grading permit application include:

     A.    Special erosion control plans, including landscape and irrigation plans;

     B.     Hydrology and hydraulic reports;

     C.     Application for environmental initial study (AEIS);

     D.    Geotechnical reports on seismicity and geology;

     E.     Letters of permission from adjacent owners or easement holders to grade off-site or on easements;

     F.     Right of entry;

     G.    Waiver and release to divert or concentrate drainage affecting downstream off-site property;

     H.    Easement and flowage rights documents;

     I.      Other information as determined by the city engineer to be necessary to protect the public interest and fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

     Recommendations included in such reports and approved by the city engineer shall be incorporated in the grading plan, landscape and irrigation plan and the land development specifications. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.100 Grading plan requirements.
     A.    Grading plans shall be prepared and submitted with the grading permit application in accordance with the city engineering standards and the requirements of the city engineer.

     B.     All grading plans shall be signed by a registered civil engineer and by the soil engineer. The city engineer may waive this requirement when the proposed grading is on a single lot or parcel not proposed for further subdivision and in the opinion of the city engineer, the proposed grading entails no hazard to any adjacent property, does not necessitate construction of extensive drainage structures or erosion control facilities, and does not interfere in any way with existing natural or improved drainage courses or channels.

     C.     The city engineer may stop work and require amendment or change of approved grading, erosion control or landscape and irrigation plans for any of the following reasons:

     1.     Extension or renewal of the grading permits;

     2.     Changes have been made in the actual work which are not reflected on the approved plans;

     3.     The scope or quantity of grading has been changed;

     4.     Construction, traffic, drainage, soil, geologic, public safety or environmental problems not considered, known or evident at the time of permit issuance or plan approval become evident. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.110 Plot plans.
     A separate plot plan showing the location of the land development boundaries, lot lines, public and private rights-of-way lines, and precise grading information in accordance with specifications set forth in this chapter and as required by the city engineer shall also be submitted. A print of the approved tentative subdivision map or tentative parcel map showing the required information may be submitted in lieu of a plot plan. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.120 Preliminary soil engineering and geology reports.
     A.    Three copies of a preliminary soils engineering report shall be submitted with the application for a grading permit. Each report shall be prepared by a soil engineer and contain all information applicable to the project in accordance with generally accepted geotechnical engineering practice. The preliminary soil engineering report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     Information and date regarding the nature, distribution, and the physical and chemical properties of existing soils;

     2.     Location of faults as defined by a registered geologist or certified engineering geologist;

     3.     Conclusions as to the adequacy of the site for the proposed grading;

     4.     Recommendations for general and corrective grading procedures;

     5.     Foundation design criteria;

     6.     Slope gradient, height and benching, or terracing recommendations;

     7.     The potential for groundwater and seepage conditions and procedures for mitigation of the groundwater-related problems;

     8.     Other recommendations, as necessary, commensurate with the project grading and development.

     B.     The soil engineer and engineering geologist should refer to the geologic conditions element of the Lemon Grove general plan in preparing the reports required by this section.

     C.     Recommendations contained in the approved reports shall be incorporated into the grading plans and specifications and shall become conditions of the grading permit.

     D.    Preliminary geologic investigations and reports shall be required for all land development projects where known or reasonably inferred instability may adversely affect the property. The preliminary geological investigation report shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     A comprehensive description of the site topography and geology including, where necessary, a geology map;

     2.     A statement as to the adequacy of the proposed development from an engineering geologic standpoint;

     3.     A statement as to the extent that known or reasonably inferred stability on adjacent properties may adversely affect the project;

     4.     A description of the field investigation and findings;

     5.     Conclusions regarding the effects geologic conditions will have on the proposed development;

     6.     Specific recommendations for plan modification, corrective grading and/or special techniques and systems to facilitate a safe and stable development;

     7.     Provide other recommendations, as necessary, commensurate with the project grading development.

     E.     The preliminary geological investigation report may be combined with the preliminary soils engineering report. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.130 Landscape and irrigation plans.
     A.    Except for agricultural grading plans, all slopes to be constructed, but only final slopes of any borrow pit, shall be provided with an irrigation system which shall be used by the permittee to promote the growth of plants to protect the slopes against erosion. A landscape documentation package, if required by Chapter 18.44, shall accompany grading plan submitted for grading permits.

     B.     The grading on the project shall be designed for the efficient use of water by minimizing soil erosion, runoff and water waste, resulting from precipitation and irrigation.

     C.     The plans shall include specifications for the preparation of the existing soils or for the application of topsoil amendments to the slopes to encourage vigorous growth. The permittee shall be responsible for full compliance with the standards and procedures established by the city in this chapter or other applicable ordinances, standards or manuals. Landscape and irrigation plans and specifications shall maximize the use of drought resistant plants and shall provide for water conservation measures throughout the planting irrigation and maintenance plans and specifications. The plan shall show the finished configuration and elevations of each landscaped area including the height of graded slopes, the drainage pattern, pad elevations, finish grade and any stormwater retention improvements.

     D.    The landscape documentation package shall be prepared by a licensed landscape architect, licensed civil engineer, licensed architect, or other landscape professional appropriately licensed by the state and shall contain all of the elements required by Section 18.44.070.

     E.     The permittee shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of the irrigation system until the city engineer determines that the system has been properly installed and meets the minimum requirements of this section and the requirements of Chapter 18.44. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.140 Minimum BMPs for land disturbance activities.
     All dischargers engaged in land disturbance activities shall implement BMPs as detailed in the city’s BMP Manual, this chapter, and Chapter 8.48, as applicable to the project. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.150 Erosion prevention.
     Project proponents shall implement erosion control measures described in the BMP Manual, this chapter, and Chapter 8.48 to minimize the project’s erosion potential. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.160 Erosion control plan requirements.
     As applicable, all applications for permits related to construction activities, regardless of the date of submittal and including but not limited to projects that require an approved grading plan or permit, shall include an erosion control plan designed to limit erosion of all disturbed portions of the property and to eliminate the transport of soil onto adjacent properties or into streets, storm drains, or drainage ways. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.170 Erosion control required.
     A.    Plans for an erosion control system shall be prepared and submitted for the review and approval of the city engineer as a part of any application for a construction permit. The erosion control system shall comply with the requirements of the latest state general construction stormwater permit (NPDES Permit No. CAS000002) and any amendments thereto, the MS4 Permit, Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 8.48, and this chapter to satisfy the requirements for erosion control and to eliminate the discharge of sediment and pollutants. The erosion control plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following information:

     1.     Name, address, and a twenty-four hour phone number of the owner or responsible party, and the person or contractor responsible for installing and maintaining the erosion control system and performing emergency erosion control work;

     2.     The name, address and signature of the civil engineer or person who prepared the plan;

     3.     All desilting basins, debris basins, silt traps, and other desilting, velocity retarding and protection facilities necessary to adequately protect the site and downstream properties from erosion and its effects, preserve natural hydrologic features, and preserve riparian buffers and corridors;

     4.     The streets, easements, drains, and other improvements;

     5.     The location and placement of gravel bags, diverters, check dams, temporary erosion control measures such as mulches or soil binders, slope planting, drains, and other erosion controlling devices and measures as required by the BMP Manual;

     6.     Access routes to all such erosion control facilities and how access shall be maintained during inclement weather.

     B.     Erosion control system standards shall be as follows:

     1.     Erosion control measures shall be implemented as required by the city’s BMP Manual, this chapter, and Chapter 8.48.

     2.     The permittee or owner shall be responsible for control of erosion on all areas of grading until acceptance of the completed grading by the city council. This responsibility extends to completed and occupied lots.

     3.     No earth or organic material shall be deposited or placed where it may be directly carried into a stream or body of standing water.

     4.     Equipment and workers for emergency work shall be made available at all times. All necessary materials shall be available on-site, stockpiled at convenient locations, and present in sufficient quantities to facilitate rapid construction of temporary devices at all times. Failure to maintain sufficient materials on-site to prevent and control discharges of sediment and other pollutants in accordance with the requirements of this chapter and the city’s BMP Manual is a violation of this chapter.

     5.     All removable protective devices shown shall be in place at the end of each working day when there is a fifty percent chance of rain within a forty-eight-hour period. If the developer does not provide the required installation or maintenance of erosion control structures within two hours of notification at the twenty-four hour number on the plans, the city engineer may order city crews to do the work or may issue contracts for such work and charge the cost of this work along with reasonable overhead charges to the cash deposits or other instruments implemented for this work without further notification to the owner. No additional work on the project except erosion control work may be performed until the full amount drawn from the deposit is restored by the developer.

     6.     At any time of year, an inactive site, or inactive portions of an active site, shall be fully protected from erosion and discharges of sediment. A site or portion of a site is considered inactive if construction activities have ceased for a period of fourteen or more consecutive days. If construction activities have ceased for fourteen or more consecutive days on only a portion of the site, only that portion of the site is considered inactive.

     C.     No grading work shall be allowed between October 1st and the following April 30th on any site when the city engineer determines that erosion, mudflow or sediment of silt discharge may adversely affect downstream properties, drainage courses, storm drains, streets, easements, or public or private facilities or improvements unless an approved erosion control system has been implemented on the site. If the city determines that it is necessary for the city to cause erosion control measures to be installed or cleanup to be done, the developer shall pay all of the city’s direct and indirect costs including extra inspection, supervision, and reasonable overhead charges. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.180 BMP maintenance.
     All BMPs for erosion prevention and sediment control shall be functional at all time. Prior to the rainy season and after each major storm, all BMPs shall be inspected to assure the functionality. BMP maintenance shall be conducted throughout the life of the project. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.190 Grading and grading for building construction.
     An owner of land desiring to perform land development work incidental to and in connection with the construction of a building or structure shall present an application and obtain a grading permit. The city engineer may require a field inspection of the completed grade with representatives of the public works department, the development services department, the permittee, the civil engineer, and the soil engineer prior to commencement of work authorized under a building permit. The permittee shall request the inspection of the work, if required, two working days prior to the inspection. The grading phase of the land development work shall be completed and a soils report, including, but not limited to, relative compaction of the pads and verification of pad elevations shall be submitted prior to commencement of work authorized under the associated building permit. The development services director may direct the building official to suspend or revoke any building permit in accordance with Section 303 of the Uniform Administrative Code where it is found that land development is being done or has been done illegally without a grading permit, or is in violation of a permit, until a grading permit is issued pursuant to the provision of this chapter. The development services director will not certify to the completion of the building where land development work has been done until a grading permit is issued and certified as complete. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.200 Early subdivision grading.
     Grading of the subdivision will not be permitted prior to approval of the final map or parcel map unless specifically approved as a condition of the tentative subdivision or tentative parcel map. If early subdivision grading is approved, the subdivider may make application to do so under a standard grading permit. This application shall be accompanied by detailed plans and specifications based upon the approved tentative map in conformity with the provisions of Sections 18.08.080 through 18.08.140 of this chapter. A grading schedule and cost estimate based upon plans and specifications shall accompany the application. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.210 Environmental review.
     A.    Prior to the issuance of any grading permit, the city engineer shall refer the application for such permit to the development services director for environmental review pursuant to CEQA.

     B.     The development services director shall review each application referred to him or her to determine whether the grading, if carried out as proposed, could have a significant impact on the environment. If the development services director determines that the grading may have a significant impact on the environment, he or she shall return the application to the city engineer with appropriate scoping guidance to be furnished to the applicant for preparation of necessary environmental studies, or for the preparation of an application for environmental initial study. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.220 Right of entry—Indemnification of city.
     As a prerequisite of issuance of any grading permit, the owner of the site to be graded, and the contractor, if any, shall grant to the city permission, a right of entry into the site for inspection and/or correction of grading not performed in compliance with the terms and conditions of the permit. The owner and the contractor shall agree to indemnify the city for any claims or damages which may result from the city’s entry onto the property including any corrective action taken pursuant to such right of entry. The right of entry and indemnification agreement form shall be approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.230 Restriction on permit issuance—Excessive grades.
     Except for the movement of earth for small projects such as custom lots, individual building foundations, and driveways as approved by the development services director, or for local roads or trenches to mitigate a geologic hazard to adjacent property, or as required for the construction of necessary access or fire roads, as approved by the city engineer, no person shall grade upon nor shall any permit be issued for grading upon natural grades or slopes which exceed twenty-five percent gradient through a vertical rise of more than twenty-five feet, unless specifically approved by the city council or planning commission. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.240 Nonstructural fills.
     A.    Nonstructural (uncompacted) fills are prohibited, except for temporary stockpiles, unless specifically authorized by the city engineer.

     B.     Applications for grading permits involving nonstructural fills shall be accompanied by an agreement signed by the property owner. The agreement for development of nonstructural fills shall be prepared by the city engineer and shall contain the following provisions and such other provisions as may, in the opinion of the city attorney and of the city engineer, to afford protection to the property owner and the city:

     1.     The development work shall be designated as nonstructural fill and shall be constructed in accordance with grading plans approved by the city engineer;

     2.     The owner acknowledges that as a nonstructural fill, the site is not eligible for a building permit until, subject to the review and approval of the city engineer, a soils investigation report, additional geotechnical reports in accordance with Section 18.08.120, and any other pertinent information as deemed necessary by the city engineer, have been submitted and approved by the city;

     3.     The land development work shall be done and maintained in a safe, sanitary and non-nuisance condition at the sole cost, risk and responsibility of the owner and his or her successors in interest, who shall hold the city harmless with respect thereto;

     4.     The agreement for nonstructural fills shall be presented to the city council for approval, and if approved, shall be recorded in the office of the San Diego County recorder. The notice shall remain in effect until release of the agreement is filed by the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.250 Drainage easement required.
     A.    For all public watercourses, the applicant may be required to grant or cause to be granted to the city, a drainage easement in accordance with the specifications set forth by the city engineer prior to the issuance of the grading permit.

     B.     For all private watercourses where the continuous functioning of the drainage way is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, the applicant may be required to record a covenant, a maintenance agreement and/or deed restriction placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainage way(s) on the owners of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage easements, as required by the city engineer, shall be acquired by the applicant. Such easements shall be subject to approval by the city engineer and recorded prior to issuance of the grading permit.

     C.     For all watercourses where no public or private improvements are to be installed, but which must, in the opinion of the city engineer, be kept open and clear for natural stormwater runoff, the applicant may be required, prior to the issuance of a grading permit, to grant a flowage easement to the city. Flowage easements shall be granted on a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.260 Permit applications—Expiration and extension.
     Any grading permit application for which a valid grading permit has not been issued, whether or not the grading plans have been approved and signed by the city engineer, shall expire, automatically, one hundred eighty days after receipt of the application by the city, after which time the application and plans shall be deemed as expired and invalid. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.270 Issuance of permits.
     The city engineer shall issue grading permits for land development work upon approval of applications and plans; receipt of prescribed studies, reports and other required documents, receipt of fees, and securities, receipt of the required originals, sepias and prints of the approved grading plans signed by the city engineer, the soil engineer, the landscape architect, the engineer geologist and others as required by the city engineer, who have been retained by the permittee to perform the work. The permit shall include, or refer to, the conditions, plans and specifications which shall govern the work authorized. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.280 Denial of permits.
     A.    Hazardous Grading. The city engineer shall not issue a grading permit in any case where he or she finds or where it may reasonably be inferred that the work as proposed by the applicant will:

     1.     Damage any private or public property; or

     2.     Expose any property to landslide or geologic hazard; or

     3.     Adversely interfere with existing drainage courses or patterns; or

     4.     Cause erosion which could result in the depositing of mud, silt, or debris on any public or private street or way or in the city’s MS4; or

     5.     Create any hazard to person or property.

     B.     Geological Hazard. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the land area for which grading is proposed is subject to geological hazard to the extent that no reasonable amount of corrective work can eliminate or sufficiently reduce the hazard to person or property, the grading permit shall be denied.

     C.     Flood Hazard. If, in the opinion of the city engineer, the proposed grading would adversely affect the flow of runoff or would alter runoff to the detriment of upstream, downstream or adjacent properties, the grading permit shall be denied.

     D.    Subdivision or Zoning Permits. Under either of the following circumstances, a grading permit shall not be issued unless and until a subdivision map or a zoning permit has been approved or conditionally approved, and it has been determined by the city engineer and the development services director that the subdivision map or zoning permit is not threatened with expiration:

     1.     If the purpose of the proposed grading, as stated in the application is to prepare the land for subdivision or for some use for which a zoning permit is required; or

     2.     Notwithstanding the purpose of the proposed grading as stated in the application, if the city engineer and development services director find that the purpose of the proposed grading is to prepare the land for subdivision or other purpose for which a zoning permit is required.

     E.     Other Reasons. The city engineer shall deny issuance of a grading permit if so directed by the city council; or if prohibited therefrom by a duly enacted moratorium, court order, injunction, or other legal order; or if the applicant or owner has failed to comply with the provisions of this code; or if the work proposed is not consistent with the city general plan, or any element thereof, or any specific plan, land use ordinance or regulation, zoning ordinance regulation or permit, or subdivision map. The city engineer shall deny applications which are not in the interest of the public health, safety, or general welfare, or do not constitute a reasonable use of land as indicated by the existing zoning or an approved land use plan. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.290 Appeals.
     An applicant may appeal the city engineer’s denial of, or the conditions of approval of, an application for a grading permit to the city planning commission. The applicant or the permittee may appeal a decision of the city engineer within ten working days after the decision is made. Appeals shall be in writing and shall state the specific nature of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed with the development services director, who shall set a hearing within sixty days, and shall notify the owners of record, interested persons signing the appeal in question, and owners of adjacent land identified by the city engineer as being affected by the proposed grading. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.300 Permit expiration, extension and cancellation.
     A.    Expiration. Every duly issued grading permit shall be valid for the time period specified on the permit up to a maximum of one year from the date of issuance. All work covered in the permit shall be completed within such a period, except as specified in this section.

     B.     Every permit issued shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by the permit is not commenced and diligently pursued within one hundred eighty days from the date of permit issuance, or stopped, suspended or abandoned for a period of one hundred eighty days.

     C.     If work is not commenced or diligently pursued, within the extension period specified in this section, then the permit shall thereafter be deemed expired and null and void.

     D.    For purposes of this section, “diligently pursued” work shall be grading of such magnitude, frequency, or complexity as to require the regular services of the permittee’s soil engineer and/or civil engineer or other professionals, and which is inspected at regular intervals by the city.

     E.     Extensions. Upon written request from the permittee, submitted prior to the expiration of the one hundred eighty-day period in which work was to commence, the city engineer may extend the period in which the permittee must start work, for one hundred eighty days, provided the permittee demonstrates that circumstances beyond the permittee’s control prevented commencement of the approved work.

     F.     If the work authorized by the grading permit is not completed within the permit period, the city engineer, upon written request from the permittee, submitted prior to the expiration of the permit, may extend the permit for a period of one year.

     G.    Cancellation. The city engineer may cancel a permit or may require the plans to be amended in the interest of public health, safety and welfare or under any of the following conditions upon the request of the permittee. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.310 Revocation of permits.
     A.    The city engineer may revoke any permit granted under the provisions of this chapter if the city engineer determines that the permit was obtained by fraud, or that one or more of the conditions upon which the permit was granted have been violated, or that the permittee failed or refused to correct a deficiency or hazard upon the receipt of written notice and within the time specified in such notices, or that the permittee fails or refuses to perform any of the conditions or standards established for any subdivision, zoning permit or other approval granted by the city, or fails to correct any hazard or condition as referred to in Section 18.08.590.

     B.     The permittee, owner or other party aggrieved or adversely affected by the revocation of the grading permit may appeal such action to the city council. Any such appeal shall be in writing, accompanied by a filing fee as shown in the master fee schedule and submitted to the city clerk within ten working days after the decision is made by the city engineer. The appeal shall cite reasons and contain other information as necessary to explain why the city engineer’s action should be rescinded or modified. Upon receipt of any such written appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing.

     C.     Any interested person may appear at the hearing and present evidence. At the conclusion of deliberations on an appeal of a permit revocation, the city council may deny the appeal, modify existing conditions of, or add new conditions to the permit, or reinstate the permit.

     D.    If a permit is revoked, no further work shall be done upon that site except to correct hazards and to complete any work required by the permittee’s agreement with the city engineer or city council. Every agreement and every security required by this chapter shall remain in full force and effect notwithstanding any revocation. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.320 Fee schedule—Generally.
     A.    Fees required by this chapter shall be collected by the finance director. Such fees shall be as presently designed or as may in the future be amended.

     B.     The city engineer may require the payment of additional fees for any of the following reasons:

     1.     Extension or renewal of the grading permit;

     2.     Enlargement of the scope or quantity of grading or any change which increased the need for inspection or administration of the project;

     3.     Additional soil or geotechnical review by a third party of any modified grading.

     C.     No permit shall be issued, and no land development shall be permitted until the fees applicable under this chapter have been received by the finance director. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.330 Plan check and permit fees.
     A.    Before accepting an application for grading and/or landscape and irrigation plans and specifications for checking, the finance director shall collect a plan-checking fee. The amount of the plan-checking fee for grading and landscape and irrigation plans shall be as determined by the city engineer and as set forth by council resolution.

     B.     The plan checking fee for a grading permit authorizing additional work under a valid permit shall be the difference between the plan check fee paid for the original permit and the fee required for the entire project. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.340 Preliminary soils engineering report review fee.
     Before accepting a preliminary soils engineering report for review, the finance director shall collect a report review fee. A fee will be charged for each individual report submitted for review. The amount of the review fee shall be as determined by the city engineer and set forth by council resolution. Additional deposits may be required for independent review of the soil engineering report. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.350 Inspection deposit.
     Prior to the issuance of the grading permit, a deposit shall be paid to the finance director to cover the city’s expenses, costs, and overhead for field inspection, office engineering, and administration of the work performed, including landscape and irrigation work. This will be based on an estimate of the hours needed for inspection. The amount of the deposit shall be as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.360 Work commenced before permit issuance—Fee.
     In addition to any penalty prescribed for violation of this code or for violation of the provisions of this chapter, and in addition to the fees required in this chapter, a separate fee of one hundred dollars shall be assessed for any work for which a permit is required by this chapter, commenced prior to obtaining such permit. Payment of such fee shall not relieve any person from any liability under the provisions of this code or from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter. The fee prescribed in this section shall not be construed as penalty but is added to defray the expense of the enforcement of the provisions of the chapter and shall be assessed for each violation cited. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.370 Fee exemptions.
     Permits for grading when approved and inspected by a city, county, state or federal agency, may be issued without all or part payment of any of the above fees as approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.380 Refunds.
     A.    No fee collected pursuant to this chapter shall be refunded in whole or in part except as provided in this section:

     1.     Plan check fees may be refunded, less any city expenses, including overhead incurred, upon the applicant’s request, provided no plan checking has commenced. There shall be no refund of any plan check fees after issuance of a permit.

     2.     Report Review Fees. Prior to review of a report, any fees paid for report review shall be fully refundable, less a handling charge, upon the applicant’s request, providing the permit has expired, or is withdrawn, or if the project does not warrant preparation of a soil engineering report.

     3.     Grading inspection fees may be refunded in full, less a handling charge and city expenses, at any time prior to the start of the work authorized by the permit, upon the applicant’s request, provide the grading application has expired or has been withdrawn.

     B.     No refund shall be made, however, if the applicant or permittee has any outstanding debts owed to the city, or if corrective work remains to be done on the grading work itself.

     C.     No refund shall be made pursuant to this section if a request for refund is submitted to the city more than one year from the date of payment of the fee as to which a refund is claimed; nor shall any refund be paid if the total refundable amount, after deduction of city costs as provided in this section, is less than twenty-five dollars. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

Article III. Design Standards
18.08.390 Design responsibilities.
     A.    Civil Engineer. It shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer who prepared the grading plans to incorporate the applicable recommendations from the soil engineering and geology reports and to incorporate any city engineer approved alternative concept grading plan into the grading plan.

     B.     The civil engineer shall be responsible for establishing line and grade for the grading and drainage improvements and shall act as the coordinating agent in the event the need arises for liaison between the other professionals, the contractor and the city engineer. The civil engineer shall also be responsible for the preparation of plan revisions, and upon completion of the work, the submission of as graded drawings incorporating all changes and/or additions made during construction. Prior to the release of building permits for any given lot or lots, the civil engineer shall submit a written statement as evidence that rough grading for land development has been completed within standard tolerances in accordance with the approved plans and that all embankments and cut slopes and pad sizes are as shown on the approved plans.

     C.     Landscape Architect. The designing landscape architect shall incorporate applicable recommendations from the soils engineering reports along with appropriate measures related to soil engineering into the landscape and irrigation plans and conditional approval recommendations. The landscape architect shall also prepare plan revisions, to include securing approval from the city engineer prior to installation, and shall submit as-graded drawings incorporating all changes and/or additions made during construction. The landscape architect shall, if requested by the city engineer, prepare alternative concept contour grading plans for review and approval by the city engineer.

     D.    All groundcover shall provide one hundred percent coverage within nine months of planting, or additional landscaping shall be required in order to meet this standard.

     E.     Soil Engineer. The soil engineer is responsible for performing the preliminary soils engineering investigation and preparing the preliminary soils during grading, providing compaction inspection and testing, and preparing the final soils engineering report. The soil engineer is also responsible for reviewing and signing the grading plan insuring and assuring that they comply with the soils and geotechnical recommendations of the preliminary soils engineering report. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.400 Setbacks.
     A.    Setbacks and other restrictions specified by this section are minimums and may be increased by the city engineer or by the recommendation of the civil engineer, soil engineer or engineering geologist, if necessary for safety and stability, or to prevent damage to adjacent properties from deposition or erosion, or to provide access for slope maintenance and drainage. Where zoning requirements exceed the minimums in this section, the zoning setbacks shall govern.

     B.     Retaining wall may be used to reduce the required setbacks when approved by the city engineer.

     C.     The tops and toes of slopes shall be set back from the outer boundaries of the permit area, including slope rights areas and easements, as follows:

     1.     Top of Cut Slope. Top of cut slopes shall not be made nearer to a site boundary line than one fifth of the vertical height of cut with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of ten feet, as measured horizontally.

     2.     Toe of Fill Slope. The toe of fill slopes shall be made not nearer to the site boundary line than one half the height of the slope with a minimum of two feet and a maximum of twenty feet, as measured horizontally.

     D.    Setbacks between graded slopes (cut or fill) and structures shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

     E.     A usable side yard of at least five feet from any building wall shall be provided to the toe and top of a slope, unless waived by the city engineer.

     F.     No provision in this section shall be construed to allow less than the required setback for berms and drainage unless an approved drainage device is used to reduce these requirements. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.410 Cuts.
     A.    Cut slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1) unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city engineer and development services director that the project would be substantially improved with steeper cut slopes.

     B.     Requests for approval of cut slopes steeper than 2:1 must be accompanied by a geotechnical report that establishes such slopes will be stable, and accompanied by a landscape architect report that establishes such slopes can be adequately landscaped. In no case shall cut slopes steeper than 1-1/2:1 be allowed under any waiver of the 2:1 standard.

     C.     The city engineer may require slopes flatter than 2:1 in order to achieve the stated design and landscaping purposes of the city.

     D.    Unless specifically approved by the city council or planning commission, no cut shall exceed a vertical height of forty feet. In approving cut slopes higher than forty feet, the following shall be considered:

     1.     The lack of feasible alternative grading designs which result in slopes of forty feet or less; and the furtherance of general plan goals and objectives by the proposed development; or

     2.     Overriding benefits to the city from the development proposal. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.420 Fills.
     A.    Fill slopes shall be no steeper than two horizontal to one vertical (2:1), exclusive of benches and terraces. The city engineer may require slopes flatter than 2:1 in order to achieve the stated design and landscaping purposes of the city. Where a fill slope is to be located near the site boundary and the adjacent off-site property is developed, special precautions shall be incorporated in the work as the city engineer deems necessary to protect the adjoining property from damage as a result of such grading.

     B.     Unless specifically approved by the city council or planning commission, no fill shall exceed a vertical height of forty feet. In approving fill slopes higher than forty feet, the following shall be considered:

     1.     The lack of feasible alternative grading designs which result in slopes of forty feet or less; and the furtherance of general plan goals and objectives by the proposed development; or

     2.     Overriding benefits to the city from the development proposal.

     C.     Slope stability analyses shall accompany soil engineering reports for all fill slopes exceeding forty feet in height, where authorized by the city council or planning commission, regardless of the slope ratio. The soil engineer shall provide a written statement approving the slope stability. In addition, the soil engineer shall recommend alternative methods of construction or compaction requirements necessary for stability. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.430 Terraces.
     All slopes thirty feet or more in vertical height shall have drainage terraces at least six feet in width established at not more than thirty foot vertical intervals on all cut or fill slopes to control surface drainage and debris. Where only one terrace is required, it shall be at mid-height. Suitable access shall be provided to permit proper cleaning and maintenance. Such drainage terraces shall be improved with a paved swale or ditch at least one foot deep, with a minimum grade of two percent and wide enough to carry the one-hundred year storm runoff arriving at the terrace. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.440 Berms.
     Unless waived by the city engineer, a compacted earthen berm shall be constructed at the top, or along the line of vertical curvature, of all slopes steeper than 5:1. The berm shall conform to the slope and shall be a minimum of one-half foot high and two feet wide. The city engineer may require larger berms if necessary to achieve the stated design purposes of the city. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.450 Stormwater runoff.
     Stormwater runoff from lots or adjacent properties shall not be carried over cut or fill slopes steeper than 5:1. Such runoff shall be provided to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Surface runoff shall not be permitted to flow from one residential lot to another. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.460 Subsurface drainage.
     A.    Cut and fill slopes shall be provided with subsurface drainage as necessary for stability, and as recommended by the soil engineer and/or the engineering geologist.

     B.     All canyon fills and buttress fills shall be provided with subdrains, unless waived by the city engineer, based upon the information provided by the engineering geologist and/or the soil engineer indicating that they are not necessary and recommending against them. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.470 Contour grading.
     The city engineer may require public interest slopes to be rounded into existing terrain to produce a contoured and smooth transition from cut or fill faces to natural ground and abutting cut or fill surfaces. Such slopes shall be contour graded and landscaped pursuant to a landscape plan prepared by a landscape architect and approved by the city engineer. The contours of the finished slope shall approximate the natural contours to the satisfaction of the city engineer. The brows or tops of slopes may be straight to match the lot lines and facilitate placement of lot fences. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.480 Grading—Standards for substantial conformance.
     A.    The grading will be considered in substantial compliance if the pad elevations and slope heights shown on the approved grading plan are within plus or minus one foot of the elevations shown on the tentative map or approved conceptual grading plans.

     B.     The city engineer and the development services director have discretion to permit up to a two-foot elevation variation if they determine that the change will not adversely affect views, drainage and unusable yard areas, and the change is needed to create a better design. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

Article IV. Performance Security
18.08.490 Required security.
     A.    No grading permit shall be issued for grading unless the applicant shall first post a security with the city comprised of a cash deposit or a combination of cash deposit and corporate surety bond of a surety authorized to do business in the state. An instrument of credit or other security pledging the performance of the work, may be submitted in lieu of the surety bond to insure installation of required structures, drains, landscaping, irrigation and other improvements shown on the grading plans. Such funds are trust funds for the purposes of satisfying the cost of correcting any deficiency, hazard or injury created by the work or lack of maintenance thereof. An irrevocable standby letter of credit issued by a financial institution subject to regulation by the state or federal government may be posted in lieu of the surety bond, instrument of credit or other security.

     B.     The estimated cost of the work shall be determined by the city engineer after reviewing the civil engineer’s estimates. If the city engineer determines that the size, complexity and scope of the work does not justify the full amount of the security, he or she may waive all or part of the amount to the extent that there is no hazard or danger. If the scope of work increases, or new conditions are discovered after grading commences, the city engineer may increase the amount of the security.

     C.     The security shall be in the form approved by the city attorney. The total amount of the security shall be equal to one hundred fifty percent of the estimated cost of the grading work authorized by the permit plus an additional sum equal to one hundred percent of the estimated cost for the construction of drainage structures or facilities, including standard terrace drains, slope planting, irrigation system, erosion control devices, retaining walls and similar facilities authorized by the permit. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.500 Cash deposit requirements—In lieu of bond.
     A.    The cash deposit shall be equal to twenty percent of the calculated security, as approved by the city engineer. Interest shall not be paid on cash deposits.

     B.     In no instance shall the cash deposit be less than one thousand dollars or more than twenty thousand dollars. In instances where twenty percent of the appraised calculated security exceeds twenty thousand dollars, that remaining portion of the security in excess of twenty thousand dollars shall be combined with the remaining eighty percent of the approved security in the form of a corporate surety bond, or other security authorized by Section 18.08.490.

     C.     The cash deposit shall be used to satisfy the cost of correcting any deficiency, hazard or injury created by the work in violation of the terms and conditions of the grading permit and in violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law or ordinance; or for maintenance, cleanup or repair of any public or private street or easement, or for the maintenance, upkeep or installation of debris basins, erosion control devices, etc. Use of the cash deposit or a portion thereof shall in no way limit or release the obligation of the permittee or surety to satisfy the cost of correcting any deficiency, hazard or injury created by the work or to maintain the same in safe condition. If the amount of the cash deposit is insufficient to satisfy the cost in full, the surety shall be liable to satisfy the remainder of the cost in excess of the cash deposit to the extent that the remainder does not exceed the full penalty amount of the bond. In addition, if suit is brought upon the surety by the city and judgment is recovered, the surety shall pay all costs incurred by the city in such suit, including a reasonable attorney’s fee to be fixed by the court. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.510 Erosion control security requirements.
     When the city engineer determines, pursuant to Section 18.08.150 of this chapter, that plans for erosion control system be prepared as part of the grading permit, the applicant shall furnish the city a cash deposit in connection with an agreement to perform erosion control work. The amount of deposit shall be one hundred percent of the cost estimate for the work shown on the erosion control plan, subject to the approval of the city engineer. Section 18.08.490 shall be applicable regarding types of securities acceptable by the city. In addition to the required security for erosion control work, a cash deposit in the amount of five thousand dollars shall be required for emergency erosion control work and/or for emergency cleanup. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.520 Required terms and conditions of securities.
     A.    Every surety bond and instrument of credit shall include and every cash deposit and letter of credit shall be made on the conditions that the permittee shall:

     1.     Comply with all provisions of this chapter, applicable laws and ordinances;

     2.     Comply with all the terms and conditions of the grading permit to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     3.     Complete all of the work contemplated under the grading permit within the time limit specified in the grading permit, or if no time limit is so specified, the time limit specified in this chapter. The city engineer may, for sufficient cause, extend the time specified in the permit, but no such extension shall release the owner or the surety on the bond or person issuing the instrument of credit;

     4.     Each security shall remain in effect until the completion of the work to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.530 Use of securities for work done by city.
     In the event of failure to complete the work or failure to comply with all conditions and terms of the grading permit, the city engineer may order such work that in his or her opinion is necessary to correct any deficiencies or eliminate any dangerous condition and leave the site in safe, stable and nuisance-free condition to his or her satisfaction. The permittee and the surety executing such bond or person issuing the instrument of credit, letter of credit or making the cash deposit shall continue to be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for the payment of all necessary costs and expenses that may be incurred or expended by the city in causing any and all such work to be done. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.540 Release of securities.
     A.    Cash deposits, bonds, or other security shall be released upon request in writing by the developer when work is complete and approved by the city engineer.

     B.     No security under the provisions of this chapter shall be required from the state, or any of its political subdivisions or any governmental agency. However, a contractor working for the state or any of its political subdivisions or any governmental agency shall present a security for performance unless proof is submitted that the work is covered by a separate and similar security inuring to the benefit of the state or agency. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

Article V. Grading Operations
18.08.550 Work authorized by permit.
     The issuance of a grading permit shall constitute an authorization to do only that work which is described or illustrated on the application for the permit, or in the plans and specifications approved by the city engineer. The work shall be done in accordance with any conditions imposed by the city engineer and in accordance with the requirements of this article. Conditions imposed by the city engineer shall be shown on the grading plans under the heading “General Notes.” (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.560 Responsibility of permittee.
     It shall be the responsibility of the permittee to know the conditions and/or restrictions placed on the grading permit and as outlined in applicable sections of this chapter, and as continued on the approved report(s) and to insure that all contractors, subcontractors, employees, agents and consultants are also knowledgeable of the same, and insure that they carry out the proposed work in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and with the requirements of the permit and this chapter. The permittee shall also be responsible to maintain in an obvious and accessible location on the site, a copy of the permit and grading plans bearing the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.570 Contractor qualifications.
     A.    Every person doing land development shall meet such qualifications as may be determined by the city engineer to be necessary to protect the public interest. The city engineer may require an application for qualification which shall contain all information necessary to determine the person’s qualifications to do the land development.

     B.     All land development work shall be performed by a contractor licensed by the state to perform the types of work required by permit. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.580 Time of grading operations.
     A.    All grading operations, including the warming up, repair, arrival, departure or running of trucks, earth moving equipment, construction equipment and any other associated grading equipment shall be limited to the period between seven a.m. to six p.m. each day, Monday through Friday. No earth moving or grading operations shall be conducted on Saturdays, Sundays or holidays recognized by the city without written permission of the city engineer.

     B.     No grading shall be allowed between October 15th and the following April 15th on any site when the city engineer determines that erosion, mud flow or sediment discharge from grading may adversely affect downstream properties, drainage courses, storm drains, streets, easements, or public or private facilities or improvements unless an erosion control system approved by the city engineer has been implemented on the site to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.590 Temporary suspension of permit.
     A.    The city engineer has the authority to temporarily suspend all work on a grading project and suspend the permit by issuing a written stop work order if he or she determines that field conditions present an immediate hazard or danger to life or property; if the work being done is contrary to the approved plans or conditions thereof; if the work being done under a grading permit issued for a subdivision or zoning permit is contrary or conflicting with any approved changes and/or modifications made to the originally approved or conditionally approved tentative map or zoning permit subsequent to the issuance of the grading permit; if there is lack of supervision of the grading operation, lack of engineering control, lack of soil engineering control or lack of dust or air pollution control; if archaeological or paleontological artifacts or resources are discovered; or for any other reason which in the city engineer’s opinion, presents a threat to the public safety or welfare immediately, or in the future, or which may cause unstable earth conditions. This temporary suspension shall continue in effect until the hazard or condition is corrected to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

     B.     It shall be the responsibility of the owner to furnish any additional information, investigations and reports necessary to resolve the stop work order conditions. The owner shall pay for all work associated with furnishing these items, as well as any additional staff time in resolving the stop work order conditions. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.600 Transfer of responsibilities.
     A.    If the civil engineer, soil engineer, engineering geologist, landscape architect, the testing agency, or the grading contractor of record are changed during the course of the work, the work shall be stopped until:

     1.     The owner submits a letter of notification verifying the change of the responsible professional; and

     2.     The new responsible professional submits in writing that he or she has reviewed all prior reports and/or plans (specified by date and title) and work performed by the prior responsible professional, and that the responsible professional concurs with the findings, conclusions and recommendations and is satisfied with the work performed. The responsible professional must state that he or she assumes all responsibility within his or her purview as of a specified date.

     B.     All exceptions to subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section must be approved by the city engineer.

     C.     Where clearly indicated that the firm, not the individual professional, is the contracting party, the designated engineer, architect or geologist may be reassigned and another individual of comparable professional accreditation within the firm may assume responsibility, without complying with the requirements of subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.610 Construction of fills.
     A.    Preparation of Ground. The ground surface shall be prepared to receive fill by removing vegetation, noncomplying fill, topsoil and other unsuitable materials, and by scarifying to a depth of one foot to provide a bond with the new fill. Where existing slopes exceed five feet in height and/or are steeper than 5:1, the ground shall be prepared by benching into sound bedrock or other competent material as determined by the soil engineer and approved by the city engineer. The lowermost bench beneath the toe of a fill slope on natural ground shall be a minimum ten feet in width and at least one foot into dense formational materials. The ground surface below the toe of the fill shall be prepared for sheet flow runoff, or a paved drain shall be provided.

     B.     Where fill is to be placed over an existing cut slope, the bench under the toe of the new fill shall be at least fifteen feet wide and shall meet the approval of the soil engineer and/or engineering geologist as a suitable foundation for fill.

     C.     Expansive Soils. Whenever expansive soils are encountered within three feet of the finish grade of any area intended or designed as a location for a building, the permittee shall cause expansive soil to be removed to a minimum depth of three feet below finish grade and replace with properly compacted, nonexpansive soil.

     D.    Fill Material. Any organic material shall not be permitted in fills.

     E.     Except as outlined in subsection F of this section, no rock or similar irreducible materials with a maximum dimension greater than eight inches shall be buried or placed in fills.

     F.     Unless the engineer properly devises a method of placement, continuously inspects placement and approves the soil stability and competency, the following conditions shall also apply:

     1.     Prior to issuance of the grading permit, potential rock disposal area(s) shall be delineated on the grading plan;

     2.     Rock sizes greater than eight inches in maximum dimension shall be at least six feet or more below grade, measured vertically, and ten feet measured horizontally from slope faces, and shall be two feet or more below the bottom of any utility pipeline;

     3.     When the design of the development or covenants and restrictions provide assurance that no structure or utilities will be placed on a precisely definable area, these dimensions may be reduced with the approval of the city engineer;

     4.     Rocks greater than eight inches shall be placed so as to be completely surrounded by soils; nesting of rocks will not be permitted.

     G.    All fill slopes shall be overfilled to a distance from finished slope face that will allow compaction equipment to operate freely within the zone of the finished slope, and then cut back to the finish grade to expose the compacted core. Alternate methods may be employed by the grading contractor subject to approval by the soil engineer and city engineer. In such instances, the grading contractor shall provide detailed specifications for the method of placement and compaction of the soil within a distance of an equipment width from the slope face.

     H.    Buttress/Stabilization Fills. Recommendations for buttress fills or stabilization fills by the soil engineer shall be accompanied by a report by the soils engineer or certified engineering geologist setting forth the soil or geologic factors necessitating the buttress/stabilization fill, stability calculations based on both static and pseudostatic conditions (pseudostatic loads need not normally be analyzed when bedding planes are flatter than twelve degrees from the horizontal), laboratory test data upon which the calculations are based, the buttress/stabilization fill, a scaled section of the buttress/stabilization fill and recommendations with details of subdrain requirements.

     I.      Utility Line Backfill. Backfills for on-site utility line trenches, such as water, sewer, gas and electrical services shall be compacted and tested in accordance with Section 18.08.780(D) of this chapter. Alternate materials and methods may be used for utility line backfills provided that the material specification and method of placement are recommended by the soil engineer and approved by the city engineer prior to backfilling.

     J.      The final utility line backfill report shall include a statement of compliance by the soil engineer that the tested backfill is suitable for the intended use. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.620 Lot grading—Safety precautions.
     A.    At any stage of grading work, whether an approved grading plan, or a grading permit is required, if the city engineer determines that authorized grading is likely to endanger any public or private property or result in the deposition of debris on any public way or interfere with any existing drainage course, the city engineer may specify and require reasonable safety precautions to avoid the danger. The permittee may be responsible for removing excess soil and debris deposited upon adjacent and downstream public or private property resulting from his or her grading operations. Soil and debris shall be removed and damage to adjacent and downstream property repaired as directed by the city engineer. Erosion and siltation control shall require temporary or permanent siltation basins, energy dissipaters, or other measures as field conditions warrant, whether or not such measures are a part of approved plans. Cost associated with any work outlined in this section shall be incurred by the permittee.

     B.     No off-site work will be required when, in the opinion of the city engineer, the permittee has properly implemented and maintained erosion control measures in accordance with the city’s BMP Manual and the deposition of soil and debris or erosion on adjacent properties is the direct or indirect result of actions of the downstream property owner. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.630 Public protection from hazards.
     During grading operations, the contractor and property owner shall take all necessary measures to eliminate any hazard resulting from the work to the public in its normal use of public property or right-of-way. Any fences or barricades installed shall be approved by the city engineer and shall be properly constructed and maintained. They shall separate the public from the hazard as long as the hazard exists. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.640 Public facilities within public rights-of-way.
     The following provisions of this section shall apply unless provision is made by a secured agreement pursuant to land development work done in conjunction with the authorized subdivision of property.

     A.    A property owner shall pay the city for all costs of placing, repairing, replacing or maintaining a city-owned facility within a public right-of-way when the city facility has been damaged or has failed as a result of the construction or existence of the owner’s land development work during the progress of such work;

     B.     The costs of placing, replacing or maintaining the city-owned facility shall include the cost of obtaining an alternate easement if necessary;

     C.     The city engineer shall notify the property owner of such damage or failure as set forth in the provisions of this section. The city may withhold certification of the completion of a building or other permitted work where a notice has been issued. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.650 Protection of adjacent property.
     A.    Notwithstanding the minimum standards set forth in this chapter, the permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to adjacent property and no person shall excavate on land so close to the property line as to endanger any adjoining public street, sidewalk, alley or other public or private property without supporting and protecting such property from settling, cracking or other damage which might result.

     B.     In addition, each adjacent property owner is entitled to the lateral and adjacent support which his or her land receives from the adjoining land, subject to the right of the property owner of the adjoining land to make proper and usual excavations on the same for purposes of construction or improvement, under the following conditions:

     1.     Any owner of land or his or her lessee intending to permit or to make an excavation greater than ten feet in depth within ten feet of his or her property lines shall give reasonable notice to the owner or owners of land abutting the property lines affected by such excavation, stating the depth for which such excavation is intended to be made and when the excavation will begin;

     2.     In making any excavation, reasonable care and skill shall be used and reasonable precautions taken to ensure that the soil of adjoining property will not cave in or settle to the detriment of any building or other structure which may be thereon;

     3.     No land development work shall be approved which physically prevents the use of existing legal or physical and usable (in the opinion of the city engineer) access to any parcel. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.660 Maintenance of protective devices.
     The owner of any property on which a fill or excavation has been made pursuant to a grading permit granted under the provisions of this chapter, or any other person or agent in control of such property shall maintain in good condition and repair all retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures or means, temporary or permanent BMPs, and other protective devices pursuant to Chapter 8.48 or the BMP Manual, or as determined by the city engineer, and planting shown in the approved plans and specifications or in the as-graded drawings or as required by the grading permit. Facilities dedicated for use by the public and accepted for such use by a public agency are excepted. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.670 Protection of utilities.
     A.    During grading operations the permittee shall be responsible for the prevention of damage to any public utilities or services.

     B.     The responsibility applies within the limits of grading and along any routes of travel of equipment.

     C.     Before starting any excavation work the permittee shall be responsible to contact Underground Service Alert, Incorporated and coordinate the proposed excavation with all interested utility companies, districts and agencies. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.680 Debris on public streets.
     The California Vehicle Code and this chapter forbid the placing, dumping or depositing of soil and rocks on the public streets or any portion of the public right-of-way. All vehicles engaged in hauling materials under the permit provisions of this chapter shall refrain from depositing soil or debris on the public streets by any means, including, but not limited to, spillage from the bed of a truck or other vehicle and debris collected on the wheels of the haul vehicle. The city engineer may require a cash deposit to insure the cleanup of public streets. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.690 Dust control.
     The contractor/permittee conducting any earth moving operation under this chapter shall be responsible for controlling dust created by its grading operations or activities at all times. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.700 Cleanup.
     The permittee conducting any earth-moving operation under this chapter which requires vehicles to haul earth materials on any public street shall be responsible for the complete removal of such materials (soil, mud or other material) from the street, if spilled, dumped or deposited on a public street. If the permittee fails to completely remove such spillage, the city engineer may order the necessary removal work. The permittee and the surety shall be firmly bound under a continuing obligation for payment of all costs incurred or expended by the city pursuant to Sections 18.08.500 and 18.08.530. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.710 Preservation of existing monuments.
     All existing survey monuments shall be shown on the grading plan. Evidence indicating that arrangements have been made for the preservation and/or relocation of existing monuments shall be submitted to the city engineer prior to issuance of a grading permit. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.720 Archaeological or paleontological resources.
     If any archaeological or paleontological resources are discovered during grading operations, such operations shall cease immediately and the permittee shall notify the city engineer of the discovery. Grading operations shall not recommence until the permittee has received written authority from the city engineer to do so. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

Article VI. Supervision, Testing Inspection and Enforcement
18.08.730 City engineer—Responsibilities.
     A.    The city engineer shall enforce the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided in this section.

     B.     The city engineer may establish and implement special inspection requirements and augment his or her resources or expertise as he or she deems necessary to properly inspect a particular grading project. The cost of these special requirements or augmentations shall be paid for by the benefiting permittee.

     C.     Prior to the approval of any land development work requiring grading plans and specifications, the city engineer may inspect the site to determine that the plans and specifications are current and reflect existing conditions.

     D.    After grading permit issuance, but prior to any land development work involving grading, brushing or clearing, there shall be a pre-grading meeting. Prior to pouring curbs and gutters or placement of base materials, there shall be a pre-paving meeting held on the site. The permittee, or his or her agent, shall notify the city engineer at least two working days prior to the meetings and shall be responsible for notifying all principals responsible for grading and paving related operations.

     E.     The city engineer or designee shall inspect the land development project at various stages of work requiring approval and at any more frequent intervals necessary to determine that adequate inspection and testing is being exercised.

     F.     The city engineer shall require inspection of work done in connection with land development to insure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and shall release the security when such work is properly completed.

     G.    The city engineer shall cause land development being done without a permit to be stopped until a permit has been obtained. The city engineer may require that such work done without a permit be removed or corrected at the expense of the responsible person. Where land development work involves an embankment improperly constructed or constructed without adequate testing, he or she shall cause such embankment to be reconstructed or, in lieu thereof, order the work stopped and corrected as set forth in Sections 18.08.590 and 18.08.820(D) of this chapter. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.740 Liability of city.
     A.    Neither the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any conditions imposed by any city official under this chapter, shall relieve any person from any responsibility for damage to persons or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to persons or property.

     B.     The city engineer or an employee duly authorized with the enforcement of this chapter, acting in good faith and without malice for the city in the discharge of these duties, shall not render him or herself liable personally and is relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may accrue to persons or property as a result of any act required or by reason of any act or omission in the discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the city engineer or employee, because of such act or omission performed by him or her in the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, shall be defended by the legal department of the city until final determination of the proceedings. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.750 Supervised or regular grading—Observation required.
     A.    All grading, except grading for a borrow pit, in excess of two thousand five hundred cubic yards shall be performed under the general observation of and coordination of the civil engineer who signed the grading plans and shall be designated as “supervised grading.”

     B.     Grading not supervised in accordance with this section shall be designated as “regular grading.”

     C.     For grading of two thousand five hundred cubic yards or less, the permittee may elect to have the grading performed as either supervised grading or regular grading. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.760 Regular grading requirements.
     A.    The city engineer shall cause regular grading work to be inspected to the extent he or she deems necessary and shall require inspection of excavations and fills and compaction control by a soil engineer. The grading plan shall be a part of the building permit plan set.

     B.     The city engineer shall require sufficient inspection by the soil engineer to assure that the soil engineer has adequately considered all geologic conditions.

     C.     The soil engineer shall file a report with the city engineer assuring the compaction and acceptability of all fills. Where potentially expansive soils are present at either cut or fill grade, the soil engineer shall provide written recommendation regarding treatment given or to be given to such soils. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.770 Supervised grading requirements.
     A.    For supervised grading it shall be the responsibility of the civil engineer supervising the grading to supervise and coordinate all field surveys, setting of grade stakes in conformance with the plans, and site inspection during grading operations to assure that the site is graded in accordance with the permit.

     B.     Soils reports shall be required and geology reports may also be required as specified in Sections 18.08.780, 18.08.790 and 18.08.830. In addition to the copies filed with the city engineer, copies of such reports shall be sent by the permittee to the civil engineer supervising the grading.

     C.     The soil engineer shall make such tests and inspections as necessary to assure that the recommendations given in the preliminary soils engineering report and incorporated in the grading plan, specifications or the permit have been followed, and comply with the requirements of Section 18.08.780. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.780 Soil engineer—Observation and testing responsibilities.
     A.    General. The soil engineer’s area of responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, the professional inspection and approval concerning the preparation of ground to receive fills, testing for required compaction, stability of all finish slopes, design of buttress fills where required and incorporating data supplies by the engineering geologist.

     B.     Preliminary and final soils reports shall be required as specified in this chapter. During grading all necessary analyses, compaction data, soil engineering and engineering geology recommendations and reports shall be submitted to the client for distribution as required, and a copy of all such documents shall be provided to the city engineer.

     C.     When preliminary soils engineering reports are not required, the city engineer may yet require inspection and approval by the soil engineer. The soil engineer’s responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, approval of cleared areas and benches to receive fill, the compaction and testing of fills and their inspection and approval. The soil engineer will submit a statement that all embankments under his or her direction have been compacted to a minimum of ninety percent relative compaction percentage approved by the city engineer. Prior to the release of building permits for any given lot or lots, the soil engineer shall submit a compaction report to the satisfaction of the city engineer as evidence that rough grading has been compacted in accordance with the approved preliminary soils engineering report.

     D.    Density Testing. All fills shall be compacted to a minimum of ninety percent relative compaction unless a lesser density has been specifically approved by the city engineer. Field density tests shall be performed in accordance with ASTM D1556, or as revised (sand cone test), or equivalent, as approved by the city engineer. At least twenty-five percent of the total tests shall be by ASTM D1556 to verify the accuracy of the equivalent method. All such tests shall be reasonably and uniformly distributed within the fill or fill slope surface so that representative results are obtained.

     E.     At least twenty percent of the field density tests taken shall be located within three feet of the final slope location and at least one density test shall be taken within the outer twelve inches of finished slope face for every five thousand square feet of slope area.

     F.     Locations of field density tests shall be determined by the soil engineer or approved testing agency, but shall be sufficient in both horizontal and vertical placement to provide representative testing of all fill placed.

     G.    Field density tests shall be performed on the basis of at least one test for one thousand cubic yards of compacted fill and at least one test for each two feet of fill thickness.

     H.    Testing in areas of critical nature or special emphasis shall be in addition to a network of representative sampling. Where lower density and very high potential expansion characteristics exist, as determined by the soil engineer, lesser compaction may be granted by the city engineer upon justification and recommendation by the soil engineer.

     I.      Testing for expansive soil sufficient for each building pad shall be performed on soil within three feet of the finish grade of any land development intended or designed as a location for a building. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.790 Engineering geologist—Responsibilities.
     The engineering geologist’s area of responsibility shall include, but not be limited to, professional inspection and approval of the stability of cut slopes with respect to geological matters, and the need for subdrains or other groundwater drainage devices. The engineering geologist shall report his or her findings to the soil engineer for engineering analysis. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.800 Required inspections.
     The following inspections by the city shall be required of the items of work listed, at the stage or time indicated. The permittee shall notify the city engineer at least one working day ahead of the time the work will be ready.

     A.    Excavation and Fill.

     1.     Canyon cleanout: after all brush and unsuitable material have been removed and an acceptable base has been exposed, but before any fill is placed;

     2.     Toe bench and key: after the natural ground or bedrock is exposed and prepared to receive fill, but before fill is placed;

     3.     Over-excavation: after the area has been excavated but before fill is placed;

     4.     Excavation: after the excavation is started, but before the vertical depth of the excavation;

     5.     Fill: after the fill has started, but before the vertical height of the fill exceeds ten feet and every ten-foot interval thereafter.

     B.     Concrete or Gunite Drainage Devices.

     1.     Cross gutter:

     a.     Subgrade: after the subgrade is prepared and required reinforcement placed,

     b.     Concrete during concrete placement;

     2.     Curb and gutter (private property):

     a.     Subgrade: after subgrade is made, forms in place, with required reinforcement,

     b.     Concrete: during concrete placement;

     3.     Terrace drains, down drains, brow ditches and all over-paved drainage devices:

     a.     Subgrade: after grade is made but prior to placement of welded wire mesh or reinforcing steel,

     b.     Reinforcement: after thickness control wire and reinforcing steel or welded wire are in place,

     c.     Concrete: during concrete or gunite placement.

     C.     Drainage Devices other than Concrete or Gunite.

     1.     Subdrains:

     a.     After excavation but prior to placement of filter material and pipe. The subdrain pipe and filter material shall be on-site for inspection,

     b.     After filter material and subdrain have been placed but prior to covering with backfill;

     2.     Storm drains and inlets:

     a.     After placement of storm drains, but prior to covering with backfill,

     b.     After placement of inlet forms but prior to pouring concrete;

 

     3.     Earth swales: prior to rough grading approval.

     D.    Rough Grading. An inspection will be made when all rough grading has been completed. This inspection may be called for at the completion of rough grading after the city engineer has reviewed and approved the required reports and the civil engineer has submitted the written report required by Section 18.08.830(A)(1)(c) indicating substantial conformance to line and grade.

     A building permit will not be issued until rough grading has been approved and receipt of the final soils report required by Section 18.08.830(A)(2)(a) and the report required by Section 18.08.830(A)(2)(d).

     E.     Irrigation.

     1.     Pipe Lines and Control Valves. During installation of main and lateral lines, inspections shall be made to assure continuous support of all pipe, properly assembled fittings and valve installation, as well as proper backfill procedures.

     2.     Coverage Test. When the irrigation system is completed, a coverage test shall be performed in the presence of the city engineer or appointed inspector.

     F.     Planting.

     1.     General Soil Preparation. After the finish grade has been established and appropriate drainage is accomplished, incorporation of amendments shall be inspected. Amendment material shall be approved prior to import. Material invoices and/or licensed weighmaster’s certificates may be required.

     2.     Plant Pit Preparation. During the preparation of all plant pits, inspections shall confirm standard procedures are followed to maximize the promotion of healthy root development. Material invoices may be required.

     3.     Staking and/or Guying Procedures. Upon completion of planting, all nursery stakes directed to be removed, and proper staking and/or guying practices shall be accomplished. Inspection of procedures will confirm compliance.

     G.    Erosion Control Measures.

     1.     After excavation of desilting basins but prior to fill placement, prefabricated devices are to be available on-site for inspection;

     2.     After fill placement for desilting basins but prior to placement of concrete or other non-erosive materials;

     3.     After completion of an erosion control system in accordance with an approved erosion control plan and the requirements of the city engineer.

     H.    Final Inspection. A final inspection by the city shall be made when all work including installation of all drainage structures, irrigation, slope planting and other protective devices, has been completed and all written professional approvals, certifications and the required reports and as-graded drawings have been submitted. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.810 Notification of noncompliance.
     If, in the course of fulfilling responsibility under this chapter, the city engineer, the soil engineer, the engineering geologist, or the testing agency finds that the land development work is not being performed in accordance with approved plans, specifications or this chapter, the discrepancies shall be reported immediately in writing to the grading contractor, the property owner, and the city engineer. Recommendations for corrective measures shall be submitted for approval by the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.820 Stopping and correction of work.
     A.    Whenever the city engineer determines that any work does not comply with the terms of a permit, or this chapter, or that the soil or other conditions are not as stated on the permit, or that work is being improperly, or in a hazardous manner, he or she may order the work stopped by notice in writing served on any persons engaged in doing or causing of such work to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until authorized by the city engineer to proceed

with the work. See also Section 18.08.600 of this chapter for related provisions.

     B.     Whenever any work on which city inspections are required is covered or concealed by additional work without first having been inspected, the city engineer may require, by written notice, that such work be exposed for examination. The work of exposing and recovering shall not entail or be subject to expense by the city.

     C.     If the city engineer finds the soil or other conditions not as stated in the approved plans and geotechnical reports or in additional information which was required for issuance of the grading permit, he or she may issue a stop work order until approval is obtained for a revised grading plan which will conform to the conditions existing at the site.

     D.    Work may be resumed and the stop order shall be rescinded upon the city engineer’s determination that conditions have changed, corrections have been made, or the cause or actions which required a stop order have been acceptably remedied or alleviated to his or her satisfaction. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.830 Completion of work.
     A.    Final Reports. Upon completion of the rough grading work or at the final completion of the land development work under the grading permit, but prior to approval of the grading securities or issuance of a notice of completion or certificate of use and occupancy:

     1.     The responsible civil engineer shall submit to the city engineer:

     a.     A certification letter stating that the grading was done per the approved plan or an as-graded version of the grading plan (as-graded drawings) prepared, signed and dated by the responsible civil engineer which shall include original and “as-graded” ground surface elevations, pad elevations, slope ratios, and elevations and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage facilities, location and scaled sections of all buttress/stabilization and fills, subdrains and general location and depth of all areas of removal of unsuitable soil.

     b.     The as-graded drawings submitted by civil engineer shall include the landscape and irrigation sheets of grading plan showing the as-built landscape and irrigation works. The civil engineer shall work directly with the landscape architect to complete these as-built drawings.

     c.     Prior to issuance of a building permit, a written statement (rough grading report) signed by the civil engineer reporting that the site is rough graded in conformance with the approved grading plan, as modified or amended by any construction changes approved by the city engineer, and which specifically states the following items were performed under his or her supervision, and are shown correctly on the as-graded drawings:

     i.      Staking of line and grade for all engineered drainage devices and retaining walls (rough and final grading);

     ii.     Staking of property corners for proper building and slope location (rough grading);

     iii.    Location of permanent walls or structure on property corners or property lines;

     iv.    Location and slope ratio of all manufactured slopes;

     v.     Construction of earthen berms and positive building pad drainage.

     2.     The soil engineer shall submit to the city engineer:

     a.     A final soils engineering report prepared by the soil engineer, including type of field testing performed, compaction reports, suitability of utility trench and retaining wall backfill, summaries of field and laboratory tests and other substantiating data, and comments on any changes made during grading and their effect on the recommendations made in the preliminary soils engineering report. Each field density test shall be identified, located on a plan or map, the elevation of the test, and the test method of obtaining the in-place density described; either ASTM D1556-78 or the approved equal shall be so noted; daily reports from the soils tech should be included;

     b.     Written approval as to the adequacy of the site for the intended use as affected by geologic factors, a statement of compliance to finish slope heights and gradients, and when required by the city engineer, shall submit an as-graded geologic map;

     c.     The utility line backfill report required by Section 18.08.610(J);

     d.     A final geological report or certification by a certified engineering geologist indicating that all geologic problems identified in the engineering geological report have been addressed.

     B.     Notification of Completion and Certificate of Completion. The permit holder or agent shall notify the city engineer when the grading operation is ready for final inspection. Final approval shall not be given until all work, including installation of all drainage facilities and their protective devices, required irrigation system installed protective devices, required planting, and all erosion control measures have been completed in accordance with the final approved grading plan and the as-graded drawings, required reports and statements of compliance consistent with this section and Chapter 18.44 have been submitted. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.840 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. Each such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during any portion of which any violations of any provisions of this chapter are permitted, continued or committed by such person, firm or corporation and shall be punishable therefor as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.850 Violations—Public nuisance.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, any grading done contrary to the provisions of the chapter is also a public nuisance. Upon order of the city council, the city attorney is authorized to commence necessary proceedings provided by local or state law to abate, remove and/or enjoin such public nuisance. Any grading done without graders first having obtained a grading permit thereof, regardless of whether such failure is due to neglect or refusal, shall be prima facie evidence that a public nuisance has been committed. To implement this section, the city attorney may proceed as in a civil or criminal penalty procedure. The civil remedy may be before a court within the local jurisdiction of the city or may be an adjudicatory hearing before the city council. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.860 Denial of further permits.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Sections 18.08.830 and 18.08.840, any grading done contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall result in denying issuance of any further permits involving development and use of the property up to a maximum of three years. In addition, depending on the time required to resolve the grading violation, the city may record with the court recorder, notice of grading violation and denial of issuance of any further permits. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.870 Lot grading—Responsibility of permittee—Protection of adjacent property.
     A.    For all public watercourses, the applicant shall grant or cause to be granted to the city, at the city engineer’s discretion, a drainage easement (riparian buffers and corridors) in accordance with the requirements of the city engineer prior to the issuance of a grading permit, or prior to the approval of a grading plan.

     B.     For all private watercourses, including brow ditches, where the continuous functioning of the drainage way is essential to the protection and use of multiple properties, a covenant, a maintenance agreement and/or deed restriction shall be recorded by the applicant, placing the responsibility for the maintenance of the drainage way(s) on the property owners of record of each respective lot affected. Permanent off-site drainage or flowage easements, as required by the city engineer, shall be acquired by the applicant. Such easements shall be subject to approval by the city engineer and recorded prior to approval of the grading plan, or issuance of a grading permit.

     C.     No man-made dams, ponds, diversions, flow decelerators or excessive vegetation shall be placed, allowed to be placed, or allowed to grow within the property subject to an approved grading plan, or a grading permit, without suitable provisions, as approved by the city engineer, for maintenance. Erosion or siltation as a result of these features shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner.

     D.    The permittee has the right to the proper discharge of natural drainage, within the provisions of this chapter, into natural drainage courses. The quantity of peak runoff shall be limited to the quantity of peak runoff of predevelopment conditions. This includes the right to discharge, within natural basins, runoff due to decrease of permeability of the property from grading operations, landscaping, and the construction of improvements and to discharge a reasonable silt load in this runoff comparable to the historic, predevelopment condition. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.880 Establishment of permanent vegetation.
     A.    The face of all cut and fill slopes, in excess of three feet in vertical height, but only final slopes of any borrow pit, shall be planted and maintained with a ground cover or other planting to protect the slopes against erosion and instability. Planting shall commence as soon as slopes are completed on any portion of the site and shall be established upon all slopes prior to the final approval of the grading. In order to minimize the period during which a cut or filled surface remains exposed, such planting shall provide for rapid short-term coverage of the slope as well as long-term permanent coverage. Planting materials and procedures shall conform to regulations adopted by the city engineer. Other plant materials as specified by a landscape architect may be approved by the city engineer. The permittee shall maintain such planting until it is well established as determined by the city engineer.

     B.     Minimum Requirements. In addition to planting with ground cover, slopes in excess of fifteen feet in vertical height shall be planted with shrubs in two and one-quarter-inch pots or trees having a one-gallon minimum size at ten feet on center in both directions on the slope. The plant and planting pattern, but not the quantity, may be varied upon the recommendation of landscape architect and approval by the city engineer.

     C.     Where cut slopes are not subject to erosion due to their rocky character or where the slopes are protected with pneumatically applied concrete mortar or otherwise treated to protect against erosion and instability to the satisfaction of the city engineer, the requirement of this section may be waived by the city engineer. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.890 Preservation of natural hydrologic features, riparian buffers and corridors.
     All natural hydrologic features and riparian buffer zones and corridors must be preserved to eliminate or minimize runoff from construction sites. Polluted runoff generated in construction sites should be treated to maximum extent practicable prior to discharge into the said features. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.900 General construction permit requirements.
     A.    Dischargers required to comply with the state construction general stormwater permit shall maintain on site and make available for inspection on request by the city any state-issued waste discharge identification number (“WDID”) for the site, and a copy of the notice of intent (“NOI”) filed with the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to that permit.

     B.     Dischargers required to prepare a SWPPP under the state general construction storm water permit must prepare the SWPPP, implement the SWPPP and maintain it at the site, readily available for review. Failure to comply with an applicable state-required SWPPP is a violation of this chapter.

     C.     Dischargers required to conduct monitoring under the state construction general storm water permit must conduct such monitoring in conformance with requirements specified by the state, retain records of such monitoring on site, and make such records available for inspection by an authorized enforcement official or authorized enforcement staff. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

18.08.910 Penalties.
     A.    Administrative Penalties. Administrative penalties may be imposed pursuant to the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Any later-enacted administrative penalty provision in the code shall also be applicable to violations of this chapter, unless otherwise provided therein.

     B.     Misdemeanor Penalties. Non-compliance with any part of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor and may be enforced and punished as prescribed in the Penal Code and Government Code of the state of California, and the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     C.     Penalties for Infractions. Any violation of this chapter may be charged as an infraction at the discretion of the prosecutor. Infractions may be abated as a nuisance or enforced and punished as prescribed in this code, Penal Code and Government Code of the state of California.

     D.    For Civil Actions. In addition to other penalties and remedies permitted in this chapter, a violation of this chapter may result in the filing of a civil action by the city. Except where a maximum monetary amount is specified, the following may also be awarded without monetary limitations in any civil action:

     1.     Injunctive relief;

     2.     Costs to investigate, inspect, monitor, survey, or litigate;

     3.     Costs to place or remove soils or erosion control materials, costs to correct any violation, and costs to restore environmental damage or to end any other adverse effects of a violation;

     4.     Compensatory damages for losses to the city or any other plaintiff caused by violations; and/or restitution to third parties for losses caused by violations;

     5.     Civil penalties;

     6.     Reasonable attorney fees; and

     7.     Fines assessed against the city by the RWQCB.

     As part of a civil action filed by the city to enforce provisions of this chapter, a court may assess a maximum civil penalty in accordance with the general penalty clause as set forth in Section 1.12.010 of this code, or any other penalty adopted by the city, but in any case to be assessed per violation of this chapter for each day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, permitted or maintained by such person(s).

     In determining the amount of any civil liability to be imposed pursuant to this chapter, the court shall take into consideration the nature, circumstances, extent, and gravity of the violation or violations, whether any discharge caused the violation is susceptible to cleanup or abatement, and, with respect to the violator, the ability to pay, the effect on ability to continue in business, any voluntary cleanup efforts undertaken, any prior history of violations, the degree of culpability, economic savings, if any resulting from the violation, and such other matters as justice may require.

     E.     Penalties and Remedies Not Exclusive. Penalties and remedies under this section may be cumulative and in addition to other administrative, civil or criminal remedies. (Ord. 428 § 1, 2015; Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 18.12 SIGNS
18.12.010 Title and purposes.
     This chapter shall be known and cited as the sign ordinance of the city of Lemon Grove. The purposes and objectives of this chapter include:

     A.    To implement the purposes, policies, and programs of the general plan;

     B.     To maintain and improve the esthetic environment of the city, so as to improve the quality of life and the economic value of the city;

     C.     To promote traffic safety for motorized and nonmotorized vehicles and pedestrians;

     D.    To prevent or minimize hazards to motorists which can be caused by signs which distract attention, simulate or might be confused for official traffic control signs and signals, and by signs which move or simulate motion;

     E.     To minimize the view obstruction to motorists and pedestrians which could otherwise result from signs;

     F.     To encourage the effective use of signs as means of communication in the city;

     G.    To minimize the visual clutter which can result from unregulated signage, and to minimize the adverse impacts of signs upon public and private property;

     H.    To establish reasonable, nonarbitrary, nondiscriminatory standards for regulating the size, number, height, location and other physical characteristics of signs;

     I.      To maintain open space and preserve vistas;

     J.      To preserve and enhance the character of the residential neighborhoods and minimize conflicts between commercial and residential land uses;

     K.    To avoid unreasonable limitations on free expression by signs while exercising reasonable controls over signs to serve and protect the public health, safety and welfare;

     L.     To reinforce the identity of specific areas of the city and to promote business;

     M.    To reduce the litter and traffic hazards that can result when temporary signs become dislodged.

 

18.12.015 Scope.
     This chapter regulates signs, as defined in Section 18.12.020, which are located on private property located within the city limits of Lemon Grove, as well as signs located on public property owned by public entities other than the city of Lemon Grove, and over which the city of Lemon Grove holds zoning or land use regulatory power. Signs on property owned or controlled by the city of Lemon Grove, and all public rights of way, are subject to policy set by the city council. Such policies are not stated in this chapter.

 

18.12.020 Definitions.
     A.    Purpose And Applicability. The purpose of this section is to promote consistency and precision in the interpretation of the city’s sign regulations. The meaning and construction of words and phrases which appear in the definitions section of Title 17 shall apply except where defined in this chapter or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not defined or elsewhere in Title 17, their common meaning shall apply.

     B.     Definitions.

     “Affix” means and includes attach, erect, construct, install, place, suspend, paint, post, or display.

     “Allowed” or “allowable” means that a certain type of sign may be legally displayed in Lemon Grove. Allowable signs may be either subject to a permit requirement, or exempt from a permit requirement. See also: permitted and exempt.

     Area. See “Sign area.”

     “Arterial streets” means those streets designated as major or Class I collector streets on the general plan.

     “Balloon” means an object made of an airtight material, no greater than eighteen inches in diameter at its widest point, filled with air or gas and used as a sign.

     “Banner” means a strip of cloth, thin plastic or other flexible material on which a sign is painted, printed, or otherwise displayed.

     “Building face” means the single exterior wall of a building that lies most nearly parallel to the public right-of-way. In the case of a building located on a corner, or with more than one exterior wall facing the public right of way, any of such walls may be considered as a building face.

     “Building frontage” means the linear dimension of the building face.

     “Bulletin board” means either a changeable or erasable copy sign consisting of a permanent sign frame and opaque backing with a provision for removable lettering, or a permanent sign frame and opaque backing with a provision for posting of notices on temporary materials such as paper.

     “Commercial copy” or “commercial message” means a message displayed on a sign which pertains primarily to the name, location, or products, proposed economic transactions, services or activities of a business or profession carried on for profit or gain.

     “Commercial mascot” means a person or animal used as a medium for a commercial message. Includes costumes, masks, makeup and hand held signs used for commercial speech purposes.

     “Construction project sign” means a sign displayed on a construction or development project during the time of actual construction.

     “Copy” means the words, symbols, and/or devices used to display or convey a meaning, image or message when displayed on a sign.

     “Display face” means the surface area of a sign upon which the copy is, or may be, mounted, affixed or displayed.

     “Drive-in” or “Drive-through” means an establishment which by design, physical facilities, service, or packaging procedures, encourages or permits customers to be served while remaining in their motor vehicles.

     “Establishment” means a place of business, professional services, or organized activities (not including residential use), profit seeking or nonprofit, with its furnishings and staff, which may be regarded as the smallest unit conveyable by sale, rent, or lease.

     “Exempt sign” means an allowable sign that does not require a permit.

     “Expired sign” means a sign bearing a commercial message which promotes an event on a certain date, and that date has passed by more than seven days.

     “Freestanding sign” means a sign which is not attached to a building, but instead either: (a) has its base mounted directly on the ground (a monument sign); or (b) is supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces in or upon the ground (a pole sign), and which is permanently mounted in a fixed location.

     “Freeway-oriented sign” means a sign which is so located and oriented as to be primarily visible to motorists on a nearby freeway or freeway ramp.

     “Flag” means a piece of fabric, usually rectangular in shape, with a distinctive design that is used as a symbol or signaling device and is usually displayed hanging free from a staff or pole, to which it is attached by one edge.

     Frontage, Street. “Street frontage” means the length of the property line of a single parcel which abuts a legally accessible street or right-of-way.

     “Inflatable sign” means an object made of an airtight material, generally greater than eighteen inches in diameter at its widest point, filled with air or gas to form a three dimensional shape and used as a sign.

     “Main building” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated, or a building in which the principal activity of any establishment(s) is/are conducted. There may be more than one main building on a single lot.

     “Moving sign” means any sign that has any visible moving parts, visible revolving parts, or visible mechanical movement. Includes signs which emit smoke, steam or vapors, and signs which use illumination techniques to create an illusion of motion.

     “Monument sign” means a type of freestanding sign with its base resting directly on the ground, as opposed to being mounted on one or more poles.

     “Noncommunicative aspects” means those aspects of the city’s sign regulations which control location, size, height and illumination.

     “Noncommercial copy” means a message which pertains primarily to matters other than commercial products, services or activities.

     “Noncommercial establishment” means an establishment which is not principally involved in profit seeking activity.

     “Nonconforming sign” means a sign which was legally erected prior to the adoption, revision or amendment of an ordinance, but which fails by reason of such adoption, revision or amendment, to conform to the requirements of such new ordinance. Such sign may be nonconforming because of its type, size, location, dimensions, display of motion, type of lighting, or other factor addressed in the regulations of a sign ordinance.

     “Offsite sign” means a sign which identifies, advertises or directs attention to businesses, buildings, occupancies, accommodations, goods, services, or activities supplied or originated outside of the specific establishment, property, or business or industrial complex where the sign is displayed. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial copy.

     “Onsite sign” means a sign which identifies or promotes an establishment, business or building, accommodations, goods, services, commodities or activities which are available or conducted within the specific establishment, property, or business or industrial complex where such sign is displayed. The onsite/offsite distinction applies only to commercial copy.

     “Parapet wall” means that part of any building wall entirely above the roof line.

     “Permitted” means that an allowable sign may be legally displayed only with a permit issued by the city. Includes other forms of the word, such as “permissible” and “permittable.”

     “Pennant” means a flag or banner which is longer in the fly than in the hoist, and may be used to display a message or sign; usually triangular and usually attached to a rope, cable or wire.

     “Pole sign” means a type of freestanding sign which is mounted on one or more poles, beams or similar support structures.

     “Portable sign” means a sign which by the nature of its construction and/or mounting is easily moved. Includes, but is not limited to, a sign mounted on wheeled devices, watercraft and aircraft; also includes a sign which is leaned against another structure, a sign which is held in place only by gravity and is easily dislodged, a sign which is easily detached from its mounting device, and a sign which is held by or mounted upon humans or animals.

     “Projecting sign” means any sign which is attached to a wall and which projects horizontally from a structure or building face or wall by more than twelve inches. Projecting signs also include signs painted on, or otherwise attached to or displayed on, awnings, canopies and marquees.

     “Ridge line, of a roof” means the high point of a roof where two or more sloping roof surfaces meet, or the highest point of a roof with a curved surface.

     “Roof sign” means a sign attached to a roof or wholly above the top of a building parapet wall or entirely above the eaves of a pitched roof.

     “Sign” means any structure, device or material, temporary or permanent, fixed or portable, moving or stationary, whether located inside or outside a building, which is visible from any lot line, and the primary purpose of which is to convey an idea, advertising, endorsement, identification or information by means of visual symbols, lettering, illustration or other form of visual communication; includes display surfaces together with such structures as used to support, maintain, and illuminate the display surfaces. Does not include exterior paint or building décor when such are merely part of the architectural elevations and do not constitute an integral part of the sign copy. The following are not within the definition of sign:

     a.     Interior Signs. Signs or other visual communicative devices that are located entirely within a building or other enclosed structure and are not visible from the exterior thereof, provided the building or enclosed structure is otherwise legal;

     b.     Architectural Features. Decorative or architectural features of buildings (not including lettering, trademarks or moving parts);

     c.     Symbols Embedded in Architecture. Symbols of noncommercial organizations or concepts including, but not limited to, religious or political symbols, when such are permanently integrated into the structure of a permanent building which is otherwise legal;

     d.     Personal Appearance. Items or devices of personal apparel, decoration or appearance, including tattoos, makeup, costumes (but not including commercial mascots);

     e.     Manufacturers’ Marks. Marks on tangible products, which identify the maker, seller, provider or product, and which customarily remain attached to the product even after sale;

     f.      Fireworks, Etc. The legal use of fireworks, candles and artificial lighting not otherwise regulated by this chapter;

     g.     Mass Transit Signage. Advertisements or banners mounted on trains or duly licensed mass transit vehicles that legally pass through the city;

     h.     Certain Doormats. Doormats and welcome mats at the entrance to legal residential uses;

     i.      Certain Insignia on Vehicles and Vessels. On street legal vehicles and properly licensed watercraft: license plates, license plate frames, registration insignia, noncommercial messages, messages relating to the business of which the vehicle or vessel is an instrument or tool (not including general advertising) and messages relating to the proposed sale, lease or exchange of the vehicle or vessels;

     j.      Grave stones or grave markers;

     k.     Foundation stones and corner stones, when cut into any masonry surface or inlaid so as to be part of the building when constructed of bronze or other incombustible material;

     l.      Newsracks and newsstands.

     “Sign area” means the face or display area of a sign, including the border thereof only when the border carries or displays part of the message or copy.

     “Sign height” (freestanding sign) means the distance from the ground to the top of a freestanding sign.

     “Special event” means an event which is outside the scope of normal operation of an establishment. By way of example only, special events may include short-term sales or promotional events, grand opening or remodeling sales, campaigns for new memberships on unusual terms, etc.

     “Statuary sign” means a sign or advertising device which uses all three spatial dimensions to portray or display the image, logo, symbol, copy or message, and the smallest dimension is greater than twelve inches. Includes figurines, statues, dolls, and the like. Does not include works of art which convey no commercial message, are not specifically associated with any product or service, and are not displayed primarily to attract customers for a commercial purpose. Does not include signs which meet the definition of wall sign.

     “Temporary sign” means any sign constructed of cloth, canvas, light fabric, cardboard, wallboard, posterboard or other light materials, with or without frames, and mounted in a nonpermanent manner.

     “Wall sign” means any sign attached parallel to, painted on or affixed to the wall or window of a building or structure, when such sign does not extend more than twelve inches from the building face. Signs extending more than twelve inches from the building face or wall are categorized either as statuary or projecting signs. Includes permanent window signs.

     “Window sign” means copy which is affixed to a window so as to be read or viewed from the exterior thereof.

 

18.12.030 General provisions.
     The provisions of this section apply to all signs in all zones.

     A.    Effective Date. The effective date of this chapter is thirty days after the second reading of an ordinance duly adopting this chapter, by the Lemon Grove city council.

     B.     Permit Requirement. All signs displayed in the city must have a permit, unless they qualify as exempt from the permit requirement under Section 18.12.080, Exempt Signs. The procedure for obtaining a sign permit is detailed in Section 18.12.090.

     C.     Owner Consent Required in All Cases. Before a permit may be issued for a permanent sign, the applicant must provide written evidence of the consent of the legal owner of the tax parcel on which the sign is proposed to be displayed. Signs which are exempt from the permit requirement, under Section 18.12.080, may be erected or displayed only with the consent of the legal owner of the tax parcel on which the sign is displayed.

     D.    Message Substitution. Noncommercial copy may be substituted for any commercial copy on any sign which is allowed, either by permit or exemption, by this chapter. Noncommercial copy of any kind may be substituted for any other type of noncommercial copy on any sign that is allowed by this chapter, either by permit or exemption. Such substitution of message may be made without any additional approval or permitting. This provision prevails over any more specific provision to the contrary within this chapter. The purpose of this provision is to prevent any inadvertent favoring of commercial speech over noncommercial speech, or favoring of any particular noncommercial message over any other noncommercial message. This provision does not create a right to increase the total amount of signage on a parcel, does not affect the requirement that a sign structure or mounting device be properly permitted, and does not override provisions in private leases.

     E.     Compliance With Applicable Codes. All signs must comply with all applicable safety codes, such as building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and grading, and other construction codes in effect at the time the sign is constructed and mounted for public display. Signs undergoing substantial rebuilding, remodeling or refurbishing must conform to all codes in effect at the time such remedial work occurs.

     F.     Deviations—Relationship of Chapter to Planned Developments and Conditional Use Permits. Except as expressly provided to the contrary herein, all deviations from the requirements of this chapter must be approved by the variance procedure pursuant to Section 18.12.110 of this chapter and Section 17.28.060 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Unless expressly provided to the contrary herein, the sign aspects of all planned development permits and conditional use permits shall be controlled by this chapter, and shall be processed by reviewing only the noncommunicative aspects of the proposed sign(s), and without regard to the proposed message, content, or copy of the proposed sign(s).

     G.    Classification of Signs. Every sign erected or proposed to be erected, shall be classified by the community development director in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Any sign which does not clearly fall within one of the classifications provided herein shall be placed in the classification which the sign, in view of its design, location, physical characteristics, and purpose, most nearly approximates. Such classification shall be final unless appealed pursuant to Section 18.12.100 of this chapter.

     H.    Interpretations by Community Development Director. The community development director shall interpret the provisions of this chapter as they apply to particular signs or sign permit applications, in light of the general policies stated in this section. All such interpretations by the community development director shall be final unless appealed as provided by Section 18.12.100 of this chapter.

     I.      Permanent Structures Displaying Offsite Commercial Messages Generally Prohibited. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter, no permanent structure may be built or used for the display of offsite commercial messages.

     J.      Signs To Be Permanently Affixed and Not Movable. Unless otherwise explicitly provided in this chapter, all exterior signs shall be permanently affixed to a building, permitted sign support or firmly attached to the ground, and shall not be portable or movable in nature. Temporary signs are prohibited, except as expressly allowed pursuant to this chapter.

     K.    Sign Maintenance. All elements of every sign including, but not limited to, sign face, supports, poles, lights and temporary construction materials, shall be maintained in good and safe structural condition including the replacement of missing or defective parts, painting, repainting, cleaning, or other acts required for the maintenance of said sign. The maintenance duty falls jointly and severally upon the person or entity to whom the permit is issued, the person or entity who erected or posted the sign, the land owner who granted permission for the sign to be erected or posted, and upon the owner of the land upon which the sign was erected or posted, even if erection or posting was done without the knowledge or consent of the owner. The maintenance duty devolves to all successors in interest. When a sign is in such physical condition as to present a significant and immediate threat to the safety of persons or property, the sign may be abated as provided in Section 18.12.130 of this chapter.

     L.     Sign Supports. Except as expressly provided for in this chapter, the supporting members of all signs shall be free of any exposed bracing, angle iron, guy wires, cables, and similar devices.

     M.    Sign Lighting. No sign shall be constructed in such a way that any bare light bulb over fifteen watts is visible from the front of the sign or from beyond the property line. This prohibition does not apply to neon or argon lamps, but does apply to the type of fluorescent lighting commonly used on the interior of offices.

     N.    Signs Not To Be Served by Overhead Power Lines. No sign shall be connected to visible overhead electric power lines.

     O.    No Obstruction of Entryways and Exits. Signs shall not be constructed so as to obstruct any door, window, or fire escape of any building, or to impede free passage by pedestrians over any public right-of-way.

     P.     Signs On or Over Public Rights-of-Way. No sign shall be placed on any area actually used as a public right-of-way, unless an encroachment permit is granted for the sign.

     Q.    Signs on Public Property. Signs may be placed on public property only in accordance with a policy established or approved by the city council.

     R.     Signs on Corner Lots. On the street side of a corner lot, no sign exceeding three and one-half feet in height shall be placed within a triangular area formed by a line drawn between points on the property line and twenty feet from the intersecting property lines. The purpose of this rule is to prevent view obstructions at street corners.

     S.     Maximum Allowable Signage. The following rules apply to the calculation of maximum signage for signs in all zones.

     1.     Transferability of Signage Rights.

     a.     Wall Signs and Projecting Signs for a Single Establishment. Signs or permitted sign area for one establishment may not be transferred from one establishment to another, even if both are located on the same property or share contiguous street frontages or adjacent areas within a building. Any single establishment may increase the otherwise allowable display area of any one permanent sign by up to ten percent by transferring the same amount of display area from another sign which the establishment is allowed to display; however, this provision does not allow the sign area on any one wall to exceed the per wall area limits stated in Section 18.12.040(C)(1).

     b.     Freestanding Signs. Continuous street frontages may be combined to qualify for a freestanding sign, the display face of which may be shared by establishments contributing to the qualifying frontage; however, the arrangements for sharing such sign space are a matter of private agreement, and the city will take no part in determining the manner of sharing of display space on a freestanding sign. If a single establishment qualifies for a freestanding sign, such sign may be located anywhere on the same parcel as the establishment, or in the case of contiguous parcels all used by a single establishment, the freestanding sign may be located on any of such parcels.

     2.     Multi-Faced and Unusually Shaped Signs. Unless specifically prohibited, signs which are single, double, multi-faced, curved, cylindrical, spherical, triangular or oddly shaped, may be permitted, provided they satisfy all other applicable rules and regulations.

     3.     Sign Area Calculation. The area of a sign is calculated under the rules stated in this subsection.

     a.     Copy Within Frame or on Mounting Device. When sign copy is within a frame or on a mounting device, the sign area includes all of the display face up to the internal borders of any frame or mounting device; the surface area of the frame or mounting device is included in the sign area only when such frame or mounting device is used as an integral part of the message or copy.

     b.     Copy Not Within Frame or on Mounting Device. When sign copy is not within or on a frame or mounting device, the area of the sign is determined by including all the copy in the smallest possible two sets of parallel lines, and calculating the area thus enclosed.

     c.     Breaking Single Wall Into Separately Calculated Areas. A single surface displaying sign copy, such as a single wall, may be broken up into a maximum of three discrete sections, each with its own area calculation, and each counting toward the maximum number of signs an establishment may display.

     d.     Multiple Signs on a Single Wall. If a single side of a building displays separate bodies of copy, each mounted on a different surface (i.e., one on a window and the other on the wall above the window), then each shall be considered a separate sign, with its own calculation of sign area, and each shall count toward the total number of allowable signs.

     e.     Area of Multifaced Signs. For multifaced signs the area is the maximum display face viewable from any one position at any one time.

     f.      (Reserved)

     g.     Area of Statuary Signs. For statuary signs, the area is computed by selecting the viewing angle which produces the largest visible area, and then from that angle enclosing the statue within two sets of parallel lines and calculating the area thus enclosed.

     h.     Area of Freestanding Signs. The area of a freestanding sign is the largest display face visible from any single position at any one time, calculated according to provisions in subdivisions a and b of this subsection.

 

18.12.040 Signs in commercial, industrial and residential/professional districts.
     This section applies to all signs in all commercial and industrial districts, and to signs in the R/P (residential/professional) district.

     A.    Maximum Height—General Rule. Other than freeway-oriented signs, signs may not extend more than three feet in height above the ridge line of the roof of the building to which the sign relates.

     B.     Maximum Allowable Signage—In General. For establishments on the ground floor of a main building, the maximum allowable signage is a function of: (1) the zone in which the establishment is located, (2) the qualifying street frontage of the establishment, and (3) the surface area of wall(s) facing public rights-of-way. Allowable signage for any one establishment is not determined in total display surface area, but rather by number and type(s) of sign(s), with area and height limits applying to each type of sign. Signs which are exempt under Section 18.12.080 (Exempt signs) do not count toward the maximum allowable signage.

     C.     Permanent Signage for Establishments Located on the Ground Floor of a Main Building. Establishments located on the ground floor of a main building qualify for a maximum of three permanent signs, of which at least one must be a wall sign. The area of a wall sign is calculated according to the rules stated in Section 18.12.030(S)(3). Additional signage may be permitted in certain locations and at particular times, as detailed in subsection D of this section.

     1.     Wall Signs—Maximum Area. An establishment chooses one building face of the building in which it is located as its “qualifying wall.” In the case of multiple establishments in the same building, each establishment may choose as its qualifying wall only a wall which is allocable to the space actually used by the establishment. The total combined area of all permanent wall signs for each establishment shall not exceed twenty percent of the building face of the qualifying wall, up to a maximum of two hundred fifty square feet, except in the R/P (residential/professional) district, where the combined area of all wall signs may not exceed fifty square feet. Wall signs are not required to be displayed on the largest or qualifying building face. On any one wall, a maximum of twenty percent of the building face may be used to display permanent wall signs, including permanent window signs.

     2.     Wall Signs—Minimum Area. Notwithstanding subsection(C)(1) of this section, any establishment located on the ground floor of a main building may display a wall sign of at least thirty-six square feet even if such a sign occupies more than twenty percent of the wall area.

     3.     Permanent Window Signs.

     a.     Construction Methods. Permanent window signs may be made of paint, gold or silver leaf or similar material, decals and transfer letters, symbols, and the like, applied directly to the window by heat, pressure, or by means of an additional adhesive. Such signs may also consist of neon signs mounted in close proximity to a window so as to be viewed primarily from outside the establishment through the window.

     b.     Maximum Size. Permanent window signs shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the window surface area. The use of a permanent window sign shall not prevent an establishment from also displaying a wall sign, but permanent window signs count towards the total number of permissible signs, and the area of permanent window signs shall be subtracted from the permitted wall sign area for the establishment.

     4.     Maximum Area of All Window Signs. Notwithstanding the rules regarding temporary window signs (Section 18.12.080(S)), the total area of all window signage (permanent and temporary) shall not exceed forty percent of the window surface area.

     5.     Projecting Signs.

     a.     Maximum Area. In the GC (general commercial), HC (heavy commercial) and LI (light industrial) districts, the total area (one side) of a projecting sign shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each one foot of street frontage allocable to the establishment, up to a maximum of seventy-five square feet. In the LC (light commercial), NC (neighborhood commercial) and R/P (residential/professional) districts, the total area of a projecting sign shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each two feet of building frontage allocable to the establishment, up to a maximum of fifty square feet.

     b.     Projecting Signs—Maximum Height. No part of any projecting sign shall exceed a height of fifteen feet, as measured from the average surface grade elevation immediately below such sign to the topmost part of such sign. An encroachment permit is required for any sign which will project over public property or any public right-of-way.

     c.     Maximum Projection. Except awnings and canopies, projecting signs may not project over public property more than three feet, may not project above the eaves, parapet or second story roof line of a building by more than three feet, or be closer than seven and one half feet to the finished grade.

     d.     Maximum Number of Projecting Signs. Other than canopies and awnings, an establishment may display a maximum of one projecting sign per wall.

     6.     Signs on Awnings, Canopies or Marquees. Signs may be located on or suspended from marquees or they may be painted on or sewed on the awnings or canopies. The area of such signs counts towards the total allowable area for projecting signs. Area of signage on awnings, canopies and marquees is calculated in the same manner as signage on multi-faced signs, Section 18.12.030(S)(3)(e). Certain umbrella signs are exempt under Section 18.12.080(M).

     7.     Freestanding Signs. Freestanding signs are of several distinct types, each with their own particular rules: (a) small monument signs; (b) standard freestanding signs; (c) freestanding signs at motorfuel dispensing stations; (d) entryway monuments at shopping centers and major establishments; and (e) freeway-oriented signs. Each freestanding sign, except freeway-oriented signs, counts as one of the maximum allowable number of permanent signs. The rules for small monument signs and standard freestanding signs are stated in this subsection, the rules for entryway monuments at shopping centers and major establishments are stated in subsection (D)(7) of this section; the rules for freeway-oriented signs are stated in subsections (D)(8) and (D)(5)(g) of this section; and the rules for freestanding signs at motor fuel dispensing stations are stated in subsection (D)(9) of this section.

     a.     Qualifying Frontage. For properties having street frontage on more than one public right-of-way, all continuous street frontage lines are combined for the purpose of calculating qualifying frontage for a freestanding sign.

     b.     Small Monument Signs. To qualify for a small monument sign, a property parcel must have at least one hundred feet of continuous street frontage. Adjacent street frontages may be combined to qualify for a small monument sign. Any sharing of display area on a small monument sign is purely a matter of private agreement. The display area of a small monument sign may not exceed thirty-five square feet. The height of a small monument sign may not exceed six feet. For transferability of small monument signage rights, see Section 18.12.030(S)(1)(b).

     c.     Standard Freestanding Signs. A property/parcel qualifies for a standard freestanding sign if it has one hundred fifty feet or more of street frontage. A standard freestanding sign may be either of the monument or pole type. The maximum height and area of standard freestanding signs are determined according to the appendices, Section 18.12.140 of this chapter. Within the appendices, Tables 1 and 2 respectively determine the maximum size and height of standard freestanding signs located in the LC (light commercial), NC (neighborhood commercial) and R/P (residential/professional) districts. Tables 3 and 4 respectively determine the maximum area and height of standard freestanding signs located in the GC (general commercial), HC (heavy commercial) and LI (light industrial) districts. Notwithstanding such tables, the height of a standard freestanding sign may not exceed the greater of twenty-five feet or three feet above the ridgeline of the roof of the building to which the sign relates.

     d.     Freestanding Sign Height. The height of a freestanding sign is the distance from the average horizontal surface grade immediately within five feet of the base of the sign to the top of its highest element. When any part of such sign is located within five feet of a sidewalk, the height of the freestanding sign shall be from the average horizontal surface area immediately within five feet of the base of the sign or from the level of the sidewalk. Where there is no sidewalk, the height of the sign shall be measured from the level of the public street centerline nearest the sign.

     e.     Limitation on Qualifying Frontage. The same street frontage may not be counted as qualifying for both a small monument sign and a standard freestanding sign.

     f.      Statuary Signs. Statuary signs are allowable with a sign permit. The area of a statuary sign is calculated by the method stated in Section 18.12.030(S)(3)(g). A statuary sign counts as one of the total number of signs an establishment may display. Any given establishment may display a maximum of one ground-mounted statuary sign. Pole mounted or projecting statuary signs are not allowed. Use of a statuary sign disqualifies the establishment from also having a freestanding sign, even if the establishment would otherwise be entitled to a freestanding sign. There is no frontage requirement to qualify for a statuary sign permit.

     8.     Signs in Business and Industrial Complexes.

     a.     Business and Industrial Complexes Composed of Five or More Establishments and Built after the Effective Date of the Ordinance Codified in this Chapter. Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, no sign permit shall be issued for establishments within a business or industrial complex built after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, planned and developed as a unit and composed of five or more establishments, unless the sign for which the permit is required is consistent with a business or industrial complex sign permit issued by the community development director.

     b.     Business and Industrial Complexes Existing Prior to the Effective Date of the Ordinance Codified in this Chapter. The owners of any group of five or more existing businesses or industrial establishments developed as a unit, on property under a single ownership, may apply for a business or industrial complex sign permit.

     c.     Criteria for Approval of Business and Industrial Complex Signs Permits. The total sign area and number of signs within a business or industrial complex shall not exceed the allowable height, the sum of the sign areas and the numbers of signs that would otherwise be allowed if each establishment were independently signed pursuant to the general sign regulations.

     d.     Consistency Requirement. Signs in business and industrial complexes must be consistent in physical characteristics. This rule is not intended to regulate copy or message content.

     e.     The message substitution policy shall be deemed to be automatically included in any sign permit or sign program for a business or industrial complex.

     D.    Additional Allowable Signage for Establishments Located on the Ground Floor of a Main Building. In addition to the signage allowable under subsection C of this section, establishments located on the ground floor of a main building qualify for the following signs:

     1.     Rear Wall Sign. In all commercial and industrial districts, as well as the R/P district, one wall sign with an area no larger than three square feet may be displayed on the rear wall which abuts either a street (other than that providing primary public access) or an alley. When the property which displays such rear wall sign lies directly across a nonarterial street or alley from a residential zone, such sign may not be illuminated, and is exempt from the prohibition stated in Section 18.12.070(M). Where an establishment abuts two parallel, or nearly parallel, streets, the community development director shall determine which provides primary access.

     2.     Temporary Signs for Special Events. An establishment qualifies for a temporary sign permit for special events, as detailed in this subsection. Such permit will allow for erection of banners and pennants made of paper, cloth, plastic or other temporary materials, as well as inflatable objects and balloons. However, rotating and flashing devices commonly known as spinners and reflectors are not allowed. A maximum of two signs shall be allowed per special event. Permits for temporary signage related a special event will be granted for not more than sixty days in any one calendar year. The total area of signage allowable under this section shall not exceed the amount of wall signage which could be permitted for that establishment.

     3.     Temporary Signs for Limited Special Event Lot Sales. Commercially zoned properties conducting limited special event lot sales, as permitted by Section 17.28.040 of this code, may display not more than two temporary signs made of cloth, plastic, or similar temporary material, each with a maximum area not to exceed twelve square feet. The signage allowable under this provision may be on display a maximum of ___ consecutive days.

     4.     Temporary Signs for Lot and Sidewalk Sales. Commercial establishments conducting lot and sidewalk commercial activities, as permitted by Section 17.28.040 of this code, may display temporary pennants and banners and not more than two temporary signs made of paper, cloth, plastic, or similar temporary material, each with a maximum area not to exceed twelve square feet.

     5.     Temporary Noncommercial Signs. The rules for temporary noncommercial signs are stated in Section 18.12.080, Exempt signs.

     6.     Inflatable Object Signs. Upon approval of a temporary sign permit, an establishment may display inflatable objects for a maximum of thirty days per calendar year in conjunction with special events. The objects must be located so as not to block required parking, driveways or emergency access to the premises.

     7.     Display Prior to Permit. For special event signs that are displayed prior to obtaining a temporary sign permit, the number of display days is calculated from the date on which the earliest-displayed sign first went on display.

     8.     Removal Requirement. All temporary signs for special events shall be removed at the earlier of: (1) two business days after the conclusion of the special event; or (2) the expiration of the permit.

     9.     Drive-In or Drive-Through Establishments. In addition to otherwise allowable signage, drive-in or drive-through establishments qualify to display one additional permanent sign which may not exceed seven square feet in sign area (measured one side only). Drive-in or drive-through establishments also qualify for one intercom-equipped signboard by which customers or patrons communicate from their vehicles with the staff located inside the establishment; such intercom signboard may not exceed fifty square feet in sign area and may not exceed eight feet in height.

     10.   Grocery Stores Located in Buildings Without Windows or With Limited Window Area. The following regulations are intended to allow grocery stores with little or no windows to have similar temporary sign rights as grocery stores with windows. Sign display cases as provided in this subsection shall be placed on no more than two walls of any such establishment. One wall used for these sign display cases may be viewable from the street providing primary access but not a freeway. One wall with these sign display cases must be the wall with the primary pedestrian access point to the grocery store and shall be viewable primarily from the on-site parking area for that store.

     a.     In addition to signage otherwise allowable, grocery stores located in buildings without windows may display temporary signs in one of the following methods:

     i.      Temporary Signs Located in Display Cases. Each temporary sign shall be no larger than four feet by six feet in size. No more than four sign display cases may be placed on any one wall, and the total area of such display cases shall not exceed the lesser of ten percent of the area of the wall upon which they are displayed. Such display cases must be solid and rigid in construction, and have a solid cover which prevents the temporary signage inside from being blown down or damaged by weather. Such display cases may not be illuminated.

     ii.     Temporary Signs Not Located Within a Display Case. Each temporary sign shall be no larger than four feet by six feet in size. No more than four temporary signs may be placed on any one wall and the total area of these temporary signs shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area upon which they are displayed. Each temporary sign shall consist of rigid, weather-proof materials and lettering. Each temporary sign shall be securely fastened to the wall of the building and approved by the community development director.

     b.     Grocery stores located in buildings in which the wall areas viewable from the adjacent street or main parking area have windows that make up less than five percent of the wall areas may display temporary signs in the same number and manner described in subsection (D)(9)(a) of this section. The total area of all temporary signs displayed, both in any windows and in the allowed display cases, shall not exceed ten percent of the wall area upon which they are displayed.

     11.   Automobile, Truck and Motorhome Sales Facilities Sign Permits. In addition to the signage otherwise allowed, upon the approval of a sign permit by the community development director, automobile, truck and motorhome sales facilities located within special treatment area V may display banners, flags, pennants, streamers and similar devices pursuant to the following standards:

     a.     Light Poles. Each light pole within the dealership may display banners and bunting, below the light fixtures, having an area no greater than forty square feet per side. If displays are mounted on more than two arms, the total area of all sides of the displays shall not exceed eighty square feet per light pole. Atop each light pole, a flag or pennant up to nine square feet in size may also be displayed. These flags or pennants shall not project more than six feet above the top of the light poles.

     b.     Wall and Fence Banners. In addition to banners and flags allowed elsewhere by this section, banners are allowed on walls, fences and between light poles. The total area of all such banners within a dealership shall not exceed one thousand two hundred square feet. Such banners shall be oriented for viewing primarily from the freeway or within the dealership, not from adjacent residential neighborhoods.

     c.     Vehicle Displays. Each vehicle may have a balloon or pennant attached to it so long as they do not extend more than eight feet above the vehicle.

     d.     Strings of Pennants and Streamers. A dealership may display strings of pennants and streamers, with material extending no more than eighteen inches from the string. These strings shall be limited to the area of the property within one hundred feet of the SR 94 and College Avenue rights-of-way. Strings of pennants and streamers shall be limited to one linear foot per foot of street or freeway frontage, and shall not project more than fifteen feet above the ground.

     e.     All banners, flags, pennants and streamers shall be kept clean and in a state of good repair at all times.

     f.      In addition to the inflatable objects allowed by subsection (D)(2)(g) of this section, a dealership may display a tethered inflatable object for an additional ninety days per calendar year. Such objects shall be no larger than ten feet in diameter or fifteen feet in length, and shall not be tethered to a line longer than seventy-five feet in length. Such object shall also be tethered in such a manner that it does not extend outside the vertical projection of any exterior property line of the dealership.

     g.     Such sales facilities also qualify for a freeway oriented sign that does not exceed fifty feet in height and five hundred square feet in display area. One hundred seventy-five square feet of this area may be devoted to a moving electronic message board.

     12.   Establishments with Service Bays. In addition to otherwise allowable signage, an establishment which has fifty percent or more of its building face occupied by vehicle service bays, which generally remain open during normal business hours, may display temporary signs or banners, of the type approved for display on the interior surface of windows by Section 18.12.080(S), within the service bays, subject to the following limitations:

     a.     Display Time Limit. Such signs are to be used for short-term sale or promotional activity only and may not be displayed for more than sixty consecutive days. Sign copy must be changed at least every sixty days so as not to become permanent.

     b.     Maintenance Duty. Any such signs which have become torn, frayed, stained or faded shall be removed or replaced immediately.

     c.     Permissible Display Location. Such signs must be displayed parallel to the front of the building and entirely within the service bay. When service bay doors are closed, signs permitted by this section will be inside the doors. Such signs must be displayed in the upper half of the service bay opening and no portion of the sign shall be less than eight feet above the ground, pavement or floor below.

     d.     Mounting. Such signs shall be firmly held in place by wires or similar devices and shall not be designed to be substantially affected by action of the wind.

     e.     Streamers, Etc. Streamers, pennants and balloons may not be displayed as part of, or in lieu of, the permitted signs.

     f.      Maximum Total Area. Where signs are displayed in service bays pursuant to the standards established in this subsection, the total combined area of all permanent signs displayed on the exterior of the building and all temporary signs displayed within the service bays shall not exceed twenty-five percent of the building face area.

     13.   Entryway Monument Signs at Shopping Centers and Major Establishments. This provision applies to shopping centers and major establishments which fall into at least one of the following categories: (1) the building(s) on the legal parcel contains at least five separate establishments; (2) the establishment is located on land which is at least one acre in area. Such shopping centers and major establishments qualify for one freestanding sign to be located near each driveway entrance fronting onto an arterial street or freeway exit or entrance. Such signs may not exceed fifty square feet in area, and may not exceed eight feet in height. Such signs do not count toward the maximum number of signs that may be displayed by separate establishments within the shopping center.

     14.   Freeway-Oriented Signs. An establishment qualifies for a freeway oriented sign by having a minimum of one hundred fifty feet of street frontage. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, no freeway oriented sign may be located so as to be viewable from a freeway which is elevated more than fifty feet above grade for distance of more than one hundred feet. Allowable freeway-oriented signs must be located within three hundred feet of the boundary of a freeway or freeway ramp right-of-way, and must be erected on the same legal parcel as the establishment to which the sign relates. The maximum height of a freeway-oriented sign is fifteen feet above the elevation of the centerline of the nearest freeway or freeway ramp. The maximum size of a freeway-oriented sign is one hundred twenty square feet. In no event shall any given establishment be allowed more than one freeway-oriented sign. In no event may a freeway-oriented sign display an offsite commercial message. Freeway-oriented signs may be illuminated. Freeway-oriented signs do not count toward the maximum number of signs which an establishment may display.

     15.   Freestanding Signs at Motor Fuel Dispensing Stations. In addition to signage otherwise allowable, motor fuel dispensing stations qualify for one freestanding sign for each street from which motorists may enter the fueling area, when such signs are used for complying with state or federal laws or regulations regarding posting of fuel grades, prices, and similar information. Such freestanding signs must be located in such a manner that they do not impede the flow of motor vehicles into or out of such facility, or the flow of motor vehicles or pedestrians on the public rights-of-way. The maximum display area of each fuel grade and price sign allowed under this subsection is fifteen square feet, unless state or federal law requires a larger sign, in which case the minimum size under state or federal law shall also be the maximum size under this chapter. The area of a fuel price sign may be combined with the otherwise allowable area of a monument sign. The maximum height of such sign is five feet.

     E.     Maximum Permanent Signage for Establishments Located on the Second Floor of a Main Building. Establishments located on the second floor of a main building are limited to one sign each, which may be either a wall sign or a projecting sign. If it is a wall sign, the maximum area is twenty percent of the outside wall surface allocable to the establishment. If the sign is of the projecting type, then the maximum area is one square foot of sign for each one foot of building frontage allocable to the establishment, up to a maximum of twenty-five square feet.

     F.     Maximum Permanent Signage for Establishments Located on the Third or Higher Floor of a Main Building. Establishments located on the third or higher floor of a main building may not display exterior signs. This rule does not prevent such an establishment from being identified on a building identification sign.

     G.    Special Sign Districts. The city may, by ordinance, create special sign districts to reinforce the identity of specific areas of the city, to create shopping areas with consistent ambiance and visual tone, to promote business, to strengthen the city’s tax base and to implement the general plan. Such districts shall be created through the zoning ordinance amendment process pursuant to the provisions of this code. Special sign districts shall be considered overlay zones which modify the underlying zoning with regard to sign regulations. The zoning amendment process for creation of a special sign district may be initiated by resolution of the planning commission or city council or by application of one or more of the owners or duly authorized agents thereof, of the property within the area proposed to be included in the special sign district. The creation of, and rules relevant to, such special sign districts is in the legislative discretion of the city council. The message substitution policy shall automatically apply to and be deemed a part of any sign district created under this provision.

     H.    High Rise Buildings. Buildings which consist of four or more floors may display a maximum of one wall or projecting sign, the size of which may not exceed the lesser of five percent of the building wall on which the sign is mounted, or two hundred fifty square feet. Such sign must be located on the exterior of the topmost floor, and may be illuminated at night. The top of such sign may not be more than three feet above the ridge line of the roof of the building to which the sign relates. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.12.050 Signs in residential districts.
     A.    Application of Section. This section applies to all signs in all residential districts except R/P (residential/professional). The rules for residential professional districts are stated in Section 18.12.040.

     B.     Commercial Messages Generally Prohibited in Residential Districts—Exceptions. Except as expressly allowed by this section, no commercial message signs may be displayed in any residential district. This specifically includes, but is not limited to, signs related to home-based businesses or occupations, which may not be displayed on residences. Notwithstanding the foregoing, onsite commercial signs which were legal when the signs were first constructed may remain on display until the establishment ceases operation, so long as the sign is not increased in size, new illumination is not added, the sign is not moved, and the sign is maintained in safe condition.

     C.     No Illumination of Signs in Residential Districts. No sign in a residential area may be illuminated, except as expressly provided in this section.

     Exception—Temporary Displays. Temporary noncommercial signs may be displayed in residential neighborhoods during the time period commencing November 15th and ending January 5th. Such displays may be illuminated and do not require a permit.

     D.    Occupant Signs. Signs identifying the occupants and address of a residential building of three or fewer units may be displayed without a permit. Such signs may not exceed two square feet in area and may not be mounted higher than the roof line of the building to which they relate. Such signs may not be illuminated.

     E.     Apartment Building Identification Signs. Buildings containing four or more legal dwelling units which are offered to the public for rent or lease qualify for one apartment building identification sign. Such sign may not display more than two faces. Such sign may be a wall sign, a projecting sign or a freestanding sign. A freestanding sign shall not be located in the front half of any required front yard or in any side or rear yard, and shall not be more than four feet in height above finished grade. Such signs may be illuminated only by flood lighting which does not expose electrical bulbs to public view. For buildings or complexes with four or more units but less thirteen units, the maximum sign area is twelve square feet. For buildings or complexes with thirteen or more units, the maximum sign area is twenty-four square feet.

     F.     Subdivision Tract Signs. One subdivision tract sign, not exceeding forty square feet in area per display face, may be permitted for a limited period of time beginning with the recordation of the final map and ending when the first sale of all lots or units is completed. Such sign shall not be illuminated, and may have a maximum of two display faces. Additional signs, flags and banners permitted or authorized by state law do not count towards the maximum signage under this subsection. Directional signage for tract housing developments is controlled by Section 18.12.060, Temporary signs.

     G.    Noncommercial Signs. In all residential districts, noncommercial establishments (not including residences) may erect one freestanding or wall sign of up to thirty-two square feet in area for each display face. No part of the freestanding sign may be closer than five feet to the nearest public right-of-way or any driveway providing access to this or any adjacent site. The height of the sign above finished grade shall conform to the height limits of the appendices, Table 2 of Section 18.12.140 of this chapter, but with a limit of eight feet in maximum sign height. If a sign is a freestanding sign, such signs may have no more than two display faces. Such establishments on properties with more than one street frontage may have either an additional freestanding sign or a wall sign up to thirty-two square feet in size on each street frontage of more than one hundred linear feet. Such establishments on properties greater than one acre in size may increase the area of their sign on the main street frontage by ten square feet for each additional acre, or portion thereof, to a maximum of sixty-four square feet. Such signs may be illuminated by flood lighting which does not expose electrical bulbs to public view, or by an internally illuminated cabinet.

     H.    Permanent Noncommercial Signs on Residential Uses. On all legal residential uses located on private land within the city, regardless of zoning, the resident thereof may display noncommercial messages on signs, without permits, subject to:

     a.     Maximum cumulative area: six square feet (measured one side);

     b.     Maximum height: six feet;

     c.     Illumination: allowed;

     d.     Minimum setback, if freestanding: five feet from any property line;

     e.     Display time: not limited.

     I.      Temporary Noncommercial Signs. The rules for temporary noncommercial signs are stated in Section 18.12.080, Exempt signs. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.060 Temporary signs.
     A.    (Reserved)

     B.     Rules Applicable to All Temporary Signs. Unless otherwise provided, all temporary signs are subject to the following rules:

     1.     Private Display—Consent. All temporary signs may be displayed only upon private property for which the legal owner has given written consent to the display, except in the case of non-commercial signs, for which oral consent is sufficient until denied or revoked in writing by the owner.

     2.     No Damage to Earlier Displayed Signs. Persons placing temporary signs on display shall not remove, damage, or block the view of any other signs, whether competing or not, and whether temporary or permanent, which were placed on display at an earlier time.

     3.     Removal Requirement. The permit holder or other persons who display temporary signs which concern only an event with a specific conclusion date shall remove all such signs not later than five calendar days after such event has concluded.

     4.     Construction Standards. All temporary signs shall be constructed and mounted in such a manner that they shall not rip, shred, tear or blow away by exposure to normal weather conditions.

     5.     Maximum Size. The display face of any allowable temporary sign shall not exceed six square feet.

     6.     Single Permit for Multiple, Related Signs. In the case of multiple copies of the same temporary sign being displayed simultaneously, and/or in the case of a series of temporary signs with changing copy but relating to the same subject matter, a single permit may be issued for the entire set.

     7.     Display of Temporary Signs on City Owned Property. Temporary signs may be displayed on property owned by the city only pursuant to a policy established or approved by the city council.

     8.     Temporary Noncommercial Signs. The rules for temporary noncommercial signs are stated in Section 18.12.080, Exempt signs. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.070 Prohibited signs.
     Except as explicitly allowed in this chapter, the following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city.

     A.    Hazardous Signs. Signs which are detrimental to the public safety, including any sign which by virtue of its design, construction or lighting might reasonably be mistaken for a traffic light or signal or is located in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision or the view of any authorized traffic sign, signal or device; or which because of its location would prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape; or is attached to a standpipe or fire escape, or is in such physical condition to pose a threat of death, damage or injury to persons or property, are prohibited. The determination that a given sign will be, or has become, hazardous shall be made by the community development director, whose determination is final unless appealed pursuant to Section 18.12.100. The rules of abatement and removal of hazardous signs are stated in Section 18.12.130.

     B.     Signs on Public Property. Except as specifically allowed by this chapter, signs may be displayed on public property only in accordance with policy approved by the city council.

     C.     Wind-Activated Signs and Banners. Except as specifically allowed by other provisions of this chapter, spinners, pennants, streamers, balloons, or other air-borne and wind-activated devices are prohibited, except:

     1.     Public Event Banners, Etc. Decorative pennants and banners for use in conjunction with public events, i.e., events open to the general public and which are sponsored or endorsed by public entities or nonprofit or noncommercial entities, are allowable.

     2.     Special Event. Subject to the limitations stated in Section 18.12.040(D)(2), airborne and wind-activated devices may be permitted for special events.

     D.    Moving and Portable Signs.

     1.     Portable Signs. Portable signs are prohibited on private property or in a public right-of-way, except when necessary for traffic safety purposes, or as authorized by the city in conjunction with a public event, or where specifically permitted by this chapter.

     2.     Moving Signs. Except as explicitly allowed by this chapter, moving signs are prohibited.

     E.     Signs on Vehicles.

     1.     Applicability. As used in this subsection, vehicles include wheeled vehicles, aircraft over which the city has regulatory jurisdiction, and watercraft. This provision applies to all vehicles in the city, regardless of whether they are motorized or nonmotorized, operable or nonoperable, registered or unregistered; however, this subsection does not apply to aircraft which have received an FAA waiver for towing aerial signs, pursuant to 14 CFR Section 91.311.

     2.     General Prohibition.

     a.     Except as allowed by this subsection, signs on vehicles are prohibited.

     b.     Exceptions. Signs on vehicles are allowed on vehicles, without sign permits, only when the copy or message relates only to the business or establishment of which the vehicle itself is a part; pertains to the sale, rent, lease or hiring of such vehicle; or is a noncommercial message.

     3.     Physical Requirements. All allowable signs on vehicles must be painted or firmly attached directly to the vehicle and must not extend or project more than three-quarters of one inch beyond the vehicle’s original profile.

     4.     No Parking for Commercial Advertising Purposes. Vehicles displaying signs may not be parked in such a manner that they function primarily as commercial advertising devices. Vehicles may not be used as mounting or holding devices for commercial signs.

     F.     Off-Site Commercial Signs. Off-site commercial signs are prohibited, except as expressly permitted by this chapter.

     G.    Flashing Etc. Except for traffic, directional and safety signs, the following signs are prohibited: signs which flash, reflect or have bare bulb illumination over fifteen watts per bulb, signs which because of their lighting or reflected light are detrimental to surrounding property. This prohibition does not apply to neon and argon lamps designed for outdoor display.

     H.    Flood Lighting. Flood lighting used primarily for illumination of any sign is prohibited, except when such lighting is installed on private property and is hooded or shielded so that the light source is not visible from adjacent residential and commercial properties and public rights-of-way. Security lighting which incidentally illuminates signs shall not be considered flood lighting for the purpose of this chapter.

     I.      Flame. Open flame as a source of illuminating a sign is prohibited.

     J.      Bench and Garbage Receptacle Signs. Signs painted, attached, affixed or mounted on public benches are prohibited, except as permitted by franchise agreement between the bench provider and the city. Garbage receptacle signs are prohibited unless such receptacles have been donated by a noncommercial organization and the city has accepted the donation and approved the receptacle sign which bears only the name or logo of the contributing organization.

     K.    Roof Signs. Except where otherwise specified, signs mounted on roofs are prohibited. However, any roof, the slope of which varies more than forty-five degrees from the horizontal plane, shall be considered wall space for the purpose of this rule. However, noncommercial temporary displays, whether using illumination or not, may be mounted on roofs in residential zones during the time period November 15th through January 5th.

     L.     Any sign located adjacent to driveways or on corner lots that obstruct vehicular sight distance as determined by the city engineer.

     M.    Business Signs Facing Residential Districts. Commercial messages, located so as to face any residential district or use other than nonilluminated directional signs as described in this chapter, are prohibited. This prohibition does not apply to commercial establishments which face streets designated as arterial streets on the general plan. Notwithstanding the foregoing, when a commercial establishment faces a residential district or use, is not located on an arterial street, and has no other street frontage for identification, such establishment qualifies for a permit for a sign facing the residential district; however, such a sign may not be illuminated. On-site directional signs located on such establishments may be illuminated.

     N.    Signs Which Interfere With Solar Energy Collection Devices. Any sign which blocks or shadows solar energy collection devices from direct sun exposure in a manner inconsistent with any state or city regulation is prohibited. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.080 Exempt signs.
     A.    Application of Section. The signs described in this section are exempt from the permit requirement, do not count towards the total combined area of permitted signage otherwise allowable, and do not count towards the total number of signs which may be permitted for a given establishment or residence, or towards the maximum area of allowable signs. Unless otherwise stated, the rules of this section apply in all zones.

     B.     Owner Consent Required. Signs which are exempt from the permit requirement under this section may be erected or displayed only with the consent of the legal owner of the tax parcel on which the sign is displayed.

     C.     Temporary Noncommercial Signs. Temporary noncommercial signs may be displayed for a period of sixty days without obtaining a sign permit in a commercial, industrial and residential district property and in excess of the size limitations under this section provided said signs conform to Sections 18.12.060(B)(1)—(4) and 18.12.070. Said temporary signs may not exceed sixteen square feet for any single sign.

     D.    Real Estate Signs. Real estate signs as described in Civil Code Section 713 may be displayed on private land located within the city, subject to: (1) maximum number of signs per lot or property: in residential zones and on legal residential uses, one; in all other zones or on nonresidential uses, two; (2) maximum area: in residential zones and legal residential uses, six square feet; in all other zones, sixteen square feet; (3) maximum display time: until the advertised property is sold, rented or leased.

     E.     Temporary Real Estate Directional Signs. Signs which identify and provide directional information to any residential property which is offered for sale, or for rent for the first time, are allowable without a permit, subject to the rules applicable to all temporary signs, Section 18.12.060(B) and the following:

     1.     Maximum Number and Placement. Temporary real estate directional signs shall be located only along the most direct single route to the development along arterial streets; no more than one sign shall be permitted at each intersection.

     2.     Removal Requirement. The persons placing temporary signs on display shall remove them at the earlier of when the subject property is sold or when the permit expires;

     3.     Maximum Area and Height. The area of each sign shall not exceed nine square feet and the height shall not exceed five feet.

     4.     Time Limit. Permits for temporary real estate directional signs shall be issued for a limited period of time, not to exceed twelve months or until the first sale or rental of all units is completed, whichever occurs first.

     5.     Relationship to State Law. Temporary real estate directional signs allowed under this subsection are in addition to those specifically allowed by state law.

     F.     Construction Project Signs. Construction signs may be displayed, without permit, on the same parcel(s) as the project being developed or built, during the time period beginning with the issuance of a building permit and ending with the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the last unit or portion of the building. Such signs are subject to:

     a.     Maximum number:

     i.      In residential zones, one;

     ii.     In all other zones: two;

     b.     Maximum area:

     i.      In residential zones: six square feet;

     ii.     In all other zones, sixteen square feet;

     c.     Maximum height: in all zones, not more than three feet above where the roof line of the completed structure will be.

     All such signs shall be removed before a certificate of occupancy is granted for the last unit or portion of the project.

     G.    On-Site Directional Signs. Signs facilitating or controlling the efficient or safe movement of pedestrians or vehicles on private property may be displayed without permit. Such signs shall not be used for commercial advertising purposes. Such signs shall be located on the property to which they pertain, and shall not exceed an area of three square feet nor a height of three feet. Parking identification signs on wheel stops, and legal signs not exceeding the height and area standards for traffic and safety signs, are also allowable without permit.

     H.    Bulletin Boards. One bulletin board is allowable per establishment, without permit. All bulletin boards must be securely attached to a wall. Bulletin boards at commercial establishments shall not exceed nine square feet. Bulletin boards at noncommercial and nonprofit establishments shall not exceed twenty square feet in area.

     I.      Warning Signs. Signs displaying messages warning of danger are allowable without permit, so long as they do not exceed three square feet in area.

     J.      Public Message Signs. Signs displaying noncommercial messages for public information, such as designation of restroom, telephone locations, smoking rules and door openings, are all allowable without permit. Such signs may not exceed three square feet in area.

     K.    Signs Required or Authorized by State or Federal Law. Signs and notices required by or specifically authorized by state or federal law are allowable without permit, so long as such signs conform to the requirements of the authorizing law. When the authorizing law states a minimum size for such sign, but no maximum size is stated, then the minimum size under the state or federal law shall also be the maximum size under this chapter.

     L.     Public Interest Notices. Notices placed on bulletin boards or kiosks maintained by the state or any subdivision of the state for the purpose of displaying such notices, are allowable without permit.

     M.    Flags and Flagpoles. Flags or similar devices bearing noncommercial images and symbols may be displayed without permit, subject to:

     a.     Maximum vertical dimension: five feet;

     b.     Maximum horizontal dimension: eight feet;

     c.     Maximum number: not limited;

     d.     Maximum cumulative area of all flags on a parcel: forty square feet (one side);

     e.     Maximum height of pole: thirty feet above grade;

     f.      Maximum number of poles per lot or parcel: one.

     N.    Certain Umbrellas. Establishments serving food for consumption on the premises may display commercial or noncommercial messages on outdoor table umbrellas, without a permit.

     O.    Historical Site Plaques. Plaques or signs designating a building as a historical structure may be displayed without a permit.

     P.     Professional and Business Shingles. Name plate signs for a professional office, or a professional office within another establishment, or shingle type signs, which announce the name and type of profession, business, or activity, may be displayed without a permit by any establishment located on the ground or second floor of a main building in all commercial and industrial zones, as well as in the residential/professional zone. Any such sign shall not exceed three square feet in area, must be fastened directly to the building or hang from an awning, building overhang or canopy, and may not extend beyond the property line. No such sign may be displayed in a residential zone or on a residential use.

     Q.    Barber Poles. Traditional barber poles bearing no advertising message are allowable without permit.

     R.     Vending Machine Signs. Permanent signs painted on or attached to vending machines, gas pumps, ice containers or similar dispensing devices, may be displayed without permit so long as they are oriented primarily to pedestrians on the property and not towards the street, and the message or copy thereon relates to the items vended by such machine. Vending machine signs may not display offsite commercial messages.

     S.     Time and Temperature Signs. Signs in commercial and industrial zones which indicate the time and temperature are allowable without permit. Such signs shall not exceed fifty percent of the area permitted for wall signs.

     T.     Temporary Window Signs. Up to twenty-five percent of the total combined window surface area of establishments located on the ground floor of a main building may be covered with temporary window signs made of paper, cloth, plastic, cardboard, or similar temporary materials. No permit is required for such signs. Any temporary window signs must be either attached to the interior of the window, or of weatherproof paint affixed to the exterior of the window, or both. Temporary window signs shall be properly maintained. To qualify for this exemption, sign copy shall be changed, at a minimum, every sixty days, so as not to become permanent. Window signs which do not change copy at least once in any sixty-day period shall be considered permanent, and are allowable only with a permit.

     U.    Informational Signs. In commercial and industrial districts, window signs which display general information are allowable without permit. Such signs include: hours of operation, whether the business is open or closed, contractors’ license numbers, credit card and trading stamp policies, languages spoken, menus for eating establishments and security service and burglar alarm decals. The total area of all such signs displayed by a single establishment shall not exceed two square feet in area, shall be considered permanent window signs.

     V.    Noncommercial Group Signs. Signs displaying the name(s) or message(s) of noncommercial organizations or groups may be displayed on private land within the city, subject to:

     a.     Conformance with any applicable special sign district regulations;

     b.     Physical type: freestanding;

     c.     Maximum area: six square feet per display face;

     d.     Maximum number of display faces: two;

     e.     Maximum height: eight feet;

     f.      Illumination: allowed;

     g.     Location: near entrances to the city from a freeway or freeway offramp;

     h.     Orientation: facing drivers as they enter the city.

     W.    Directional Signs:

     1.     Class I Directional Signs. Signs which identify and provide directional information to public and private noncommercial facilities may be displayed without permit. In addition, signs which provide direction to general areas of the community such as “Central Business District” and specific areas such as “Bus Station” are also allowed without permit.

     a.     Location. Class I directional signs may be located on private property or, if consistent with a policy adopted or approved by the city council, within the public right-of-way or on city-owned property.

     b.     Size: Class I directional signs shall have a face area not exceeding four square feet and a height not exceeding eight feet.

     2.     Class II Directional Signs. In areas where street identification or house numbering systems do not exist or are inadequate to a degree as to make finding a particular location unduly difficult, signs intended solely to provide directional information to a particular property or residence may be displayed without permit.

     a.     Limit. Not more than one sign each with an area not to exceed four square feet, or a height of eight feet, shall be permitted per each property or residence.

     b.     Information. Signs shall contain only the name of the property owner or resident and directional information to the property or residence.

     X.    Single-Day Events for Charitable and Other Noncommercial Groups and Establishments. Moving and portable signs which are held by persons may be displayed, without permit, by charitable, nonprofit and noncommercial organizations, as part of a fund raising or other single day special event. In such cases, the portable or moving signs and the events to which they relate must comply with all other applicable laws. Such signs may be displayed only on the day of the actual fund raising event, may not exceed six square feet in size, and no more than four such signs may be displayed for each location at which the fund raising event is taking place. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010)

 

18.12.090 Sign permits and approval requirements.
     A.    Sign Permits Required. Except signs which are exempt under Section 18.12.080 or other explicit provisions of this chapter, no sign shall be erected, placed, created by painting, structurally altered, or relocated until a sign permit has been obtained from the community development department.

     B.     Building Permit. Where required by the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Electrical Code, Uniform Sign Code, or other code or ordinance adopted by the city, a building and/or electrical permit shall be obtained prior to the erection, attachment or installation of a sign. All signs requiring a permit must also comply with all safety codes, such as building, grading, electrical, plumbing, and mechanical codes.

     C.     Encroachment Permit. If the particular sign is required to have an encroachment permit by the provisions of this chapter, then the encroachment permit may be processed simultaneously with the sign permit application, or as one aspect of the sign permit application itself.

     D.    Sign Permit Application. Applications for sign permits shall be submitted to the community development department and shall be accompanied with three copies of a sign plan which includes the following:

     1.     A drawing, at an appropriate scale, of the entire property upon which the sign is to be displayed. The drawing shall indicate the location of the property lines and abutting streets and the location and dimensions of existing and proposed buildings and signs;

     2.     An illustration, at an appropriate scale, of the proposed sign, indicating dimensions, area, materials, colors, and types of illumination;

     3.     Structural and electrical details, when applicable;

     4.     The address of the property upon which the sign is to be displayed;

     5.     The name, address, and telephone number of the applicant and property owner;

     6.     The written consent of the legal owner on which the sign is proposed to be erected, as well as all lessees or persons having possession of the property;

     7.     Such other information as the community development director may require to determine that the proposed sign or signs will comply with this and all other applicable ordinances and policies of the city. Such additional information shall not include the sign copy or content, but shall be related only to the noncommunicative aspects of the proposed sign.

     E.     Single Permit for Multiple, Related Signs. In the case of multiple copies of the same temporary sign being displayed simultaneously, and/or in the case of a series of temporary signs with changing copy but relating to the same subject matter, a single permit may be issued for the entire set.

     F.     Combined Permit Fee. Upon approval of the sign permit application by the community development director, the applicant shall pay a sign permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. Where a sign permit and a variance and/or an encroachment permit are required or requested concurrently, the largest of the application fees shall constitute the entire fee to be paid at the time of application.

     G.    Completeness of Application. If the community development director finds that any sign permit application is incomplete, the director shall, within twenty-one calendar days of when the application was first submitted, provide written notice of incompleteness to the applicant, specifying the missing items of information. Any applicant who receives such a notice has twenty-one calendar days in which to submit a complete application without paying the application fee anew. Failure of the director to give notice of incompleteness within the twenty-one day time period shall result in the application being deemed complete as of the date of application.

     H.    Determination of Application. The community development department shall issue a sign permit upon determining that a proposed sign is in conformance with this chapter and other applicable requirements and standards of the city. Approval of a sign permit may be conditional upon compliance with applicable provisions of this chapter, safety codes, or other applicable law. Such determination must be made within twenty-one calendar days of when the application is initially submitted, unless the application is found to be incomplete. If the determination is not made and notice thereof given within the required time, then the application shall be deemed denied, and the applicant shall then have an immediate right of appeal. The applicant may waive the requirement for timely determination.

     I.      Post Facto Permit. Whenever a sign has been erected, attached, or installed prior to the issuance of the required permits, and a permit is requested so as to legalize the sign, the fees for such permits shall be doubled to cover additional administrative expenses to the city.

 

18.12.100 Appeals and judicial review.
     A.    Levels of Review and Determination—Sign-Related Decisions. Sign-related decisions are made initially by the community development director, and may be appealed first to the planning commission and then to the city council. The planning commission and the city council are appellate bodies. Sign-related decisions include, but are not limited to, determinations on applications for sign permits, encroachment permits, removal or abatement orders, and interpretations or applications of this chapter.

     B.     Time for Determination and Time for Appeal. At each level of appeal, the appellate body must make a determination on a sign-related decision within twenty-one calendar days after notice of appeal has been duly given. Unless an applicant or appellant waives time, failure to make the determination within the twenty-one calendar day period means that the application or appeal is deemed denied as of the twenty-first day, and gives the appellant an immediate right of appeal to the next level, or to judicial review.

     C.     Notice of Appeal Requirements. Appeals shall be addressed to the appellate body, on a form available in the office of the community development department, or in letter form, and shall state the basis of the appeal. Appeals shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. Appeals shall be accompanied with a filing fee established by city council resolution and shall be filed within fifteen days following the action or decision from which

the appeal is made, or the time in which the applicant or appellant has an immediate right of appeal. Failure to file an appeal within the required time waives all objections and appeal rights.

     D.    Public Hearing on Appeal. Upon receipt of a properly filed appeal, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the appellate body at the earliest possible date, not more than twenty-one days after the notice of appeal has been properly filed. The appellate body shall hear the evidence presented and shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision being appealed; such decision shall be made in public and in writing. If the appellate body fails to timely render its decision, then the appeal shall be deemed denied as of the twenty-first date following notice of appeal. However,

 

these time requirements may be waived by the appellant.

     E.     Effect of Appeal Upon Decision. An action or decision of the community development director, or of the planning commission, or of the city council, which has been properly appealed, shall not become effective unless or until the appellate body makes its decision on the appeal. During the appellate period, the status quo shall be maintained.

     F.     Notice of Hearing. Notice of hearings regarding appeals from decisions made according to this chapter will be made in the following manner:

     1.     For appeals of administrative decisions and interpretations of the community development director, written notice of the place, time, and date of the hearing shall be mailed to the appellant and the owner of the subject property not less than ten days prior to the hearing.

     2.     For appeals regarding variances, notice shall be given as prescribed in Section 17.28.020 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     G.    Prompt Judicial Review.

     1.     Any person who believes that the community development director, planning commission or city council has arrived at an erroneous or improper sign-related decision may seek judicial review of such determination, pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8, in any civil court located in San Diego County having subject matter jurisdiction.

     2.     Time Limits for Seeking Judicial Review. Such civil action must be filed within twenty-one calendar days of when the final decision is rendered, or the appeal deemed denied by the passage of time without determination. Failure to seek judicial review within these stated time periods waives all right to object or seek judicial review. In the event of a person timely seeking judicial review before the matter has been finally decided by the planning commission or city council, the city shall waive all objection based on the appellant’s failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.12.110 Variances.
     A.    Application of Section. This section is intended to relieve the owner of the property from an inability to identify his property or business establishment in the same manner as is enjoyed by other properties of like character in the same vicinity and zone.

     B.     Findings of Fact Required. A variance shall not be granted which confers a special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the subject property is situated. The planning commission may grant a variance only upon making all findings of fact enumerated in Section 17.28.060 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code, without consideration of the message content or display copy of the proposed sign.

     C.     Procedure. Application for variances from the standards established in this chapter shall be filed and processed subject to the requirements of Section 17.28.020 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     D.    Consideration Factors. In processing a variance application for a sign, no consideration shall be given to the message content of the proposed sign, unless such message is illegal under state or federal law. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.12.120 Enforcement.
     A.    Violation—Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the penalties established in Section 17.04.070 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     B.     Enforcement. Except where provision is otherwise herein specifically provided, enforcement of the provisions of this chapter shall be covered by Section 17.28.020 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code. Alternatively, violations of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action for declaratory and injunctive relief, or any other remedy available by law. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.12.130 Amortization, abatement and removal.
     A.    Policy. It is the public policy of the city of Lemon Grove to bring all signs located within the city into conformance with the current sign ordinance as soon as possible, without infringing upon the vested rights of those persons or entities who display nonconforming signs.

     B.     Nonconforming Date. For purposes of determining the amortization period for any nonconforming sign which was legal when first erected or placed on display, the “nonconforming date” is the earliest of: the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or the date on which any particular sign became nonconforming either under this chapter or a prior version of this chapter or other provision of city law. The adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall not extend or reset the amortization period for any sign which was nonconforming under a prior version of this chapter, and which is also nonconforming under this chapter.

     C.     Amortization and Abatement Period. Excepting signs described in Business and Professions Code Sections 5412 et seq. and 5490 et seq., every sign in the city which fails to conform to this chapter or a predecessor version of this chapter, shall be altered or removed in accordance with the following schedule.

     1.     Within One Year. Within one year of the nonconforming date the following nonconforming signs shall be removed or altered to conform to this chapter:

     a.     Prohibited Signs. Prohibited signs, as detailed in Section 18.12.070; however, if such signs were illegal when first erected or placed on display, they are subject to abatement as an illegal sign.

     b.     Nonconforming signs in residential zones, except as specifically allowed to continue by Section 18.12.050.

     2.     Within Seven Years. Every nonconforming sign not subject to the one-year abatement rule stated in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be removed or altered to conform to this chapter within seven years of the nonconforming date.

     3.     Extension of Amortization Period. The city council may extend the abatement period for any sign subject to abatement pursuant to this section if the council finds that the sign has exceptional historical, cultural, or other special value to the community.

     D.    Illegal Signs. Any sign which has been installed in a manner which is inconsistent with the nonocommunicative aspects of regulations in effect at the time of its installation, shall be removed or altered to conform to current law, within fifteen calendar days of notification by the community development director or his designee, unless the physical condition of the sign poses an immediate threat to the health and safety of persons and property, in which case the community development director or his or her designee may summarily abate the sign.

     E.     Abandoned Signs. Any sign which is located on property which remains vacant for forty-five days or more, any sign which was created for an occupant, product or business unrelated to the present occupant or business, and any sign which pertains to a time, event or purpose in such a manner as to no longer serve its original purpose shall be declared an abandoned sign by the community development director and shall be removed within the time period set forth in subsection I of this section.

     F.     Abandoned Sign Structures. All sign structures and supports shall be removed completely when the sign to which they have been attached is removed. Any such sign structure or support which remains after the removal of a sign shall be treated as an illegal sign.

     G.    Inadequately Maintained Signs. Any sign which is inadequately maintained or allowed to remain in a state of disrepair for more than thirty days after the owner of the sign or the owner of the premises whereon such sign is displayed has been given written notification that such state of inadequate maintenance or disrepair must be corrected, shall be abated within the time period set forth in Section 18.12.130(I). For the purpose of this section, “inadequate maintenance” and “disrepair” mean:

     1.     Lack of maintenance including but not limited to: sign supports, poles, and faces which require washing; copy which is wholly or partially faded, obscured, or otherwise illegible; paint or other surface covering which is peeling or badly oxidized; the presence of rust or corrosion.

     2.     Damage including but not limited to: holes or visible cracks in face materials or supports, warping or other physical distortion of sign face, and electrical defects including burned-out lights.

     H.    Notice to Abate a Sign. When a sign is required to be abated pursuant to this chapter, the community development director shall notify the owner(s) of the property and business where such sign is displayed and, in the case of off-site signs, shall also notify the sign owner if record of ownership is on file with the city, that such sign must be abated and its continued display is unlawful and constitutes a public nuisance. The notice to abate shall be served in either of the ways indicated in the following subsections (H)(1) and (2). Alternative subsection (H)(3) shall be employed only when the name or address of the responsible property, business, or sign owner is not available:

     1.     By certified mail (return receipt) to:

     a.     The property owner at the address shown on the last equalized assessment roll or other such records of the assessor or tax collector as contain more recent addresses,

     b.     The business owner at the address shown on the most recent city business license application,

     c.     The sign owner, in the case of an off-site sign, at the address shown on the most current record available to the city;

     2.     By hand delivery to the property owner and business owner, or to the sign owner in the case of an off-site sign;

     3.     By posting at a conspicuous place on the land or abutting public right-of way and insertion of an advertisement at least once a week for the period of two weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Lemon Grove. Such newspaper advertisement shall be general notice that property in the city of Lemon Grove has been posted in accordance with this chapter and shall contain a general statement of the effect of such postings. The appeal periods shall run from the date upon which the property was posted pursuant to this section.

     I.      Timely Compliance.

     1.     Abatement Requirement. Except where this chapter specifies another period of time within which compliance must be achieved, or when a valid appeal has been filed within the time limits prescribed in Section 18.12.100; upon receipt of the notice to abate a sign, the responsible business owner, property owner, or sign owner shall, within thirty days, abate such sign.

     2.     Extension of Time To Abate. An additional extension of time, not to exceed thirty days, may be granted by the community development director, if the responsible business owner, property owner, or sign owner files a written request for such extension prior to the expiration of the initial thirty-day abatement period.

     3.     Basis of Time Extension. Any request for extension of time for compliance with the notice to abate shall include the following:

     a.     A statement of reasons why the sign cannot be abated within the thirty-day period;

     b.     Evidence of a good faith intention to comply with the notice to abate prior to the end of the thirty-day extension of time such as a signed contract with a sign company or salvage company indicating that the nonconforming sign will be removed by a specific date.

     J.      Method of Abatement. Abatement of signs shall be accomplished in the following manner:

     1.     Painted Signs. For signs painted on buildings, walls, fences, and other structures, abatement shall be accomplished by removal of the paint which constitutes the sign, or by painting over the sign with a color that matches the color of the building or structures.

     2.     All Other Signs. For all other signs, abatement shall be accomplished by complete removal of the sign and all dependent structures and supports; or after issuance of a sign permit, modification, alteration, relocation, or replacement in conformance with all provisions of the current sign ordinance.

     K.    Signs as Public Nuisance. Any nonconforming sign, any abandoned or inadequately maintained sign, or any illegal sign which has not been removed or brought into conformance within the time limits stated in this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance, subject to abatement in the same manner as any other nuisance.

     L.     Planning Commission Hearing.

     1.     Failure to Comply. If the responsible business owner, property owner or sign owner fails to comply with a notice to abate a sign within the prescribed time period, the community development director shall place the matter on the next regular planning commission agenda as a public hearing item. Notice for the hearing shall be given in the manner established for the hearing of appeals in Section 18.12.100.

     2.     Planning Commission Findings. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the planning commission shall examine the evidence presented to determine which of the following findings can be made:

     a.     The sign ordinance requires the abatement of the subject sign at this time.

     b.     The notice to abate has been properly given in the manner required by the sign ordinance.

     c.     The responsible business owner, property owner, or sign owner has been given the full amount of time for abatement as permitted by the sign ordinance.

     d.     The reasonable business owner, property owner, or sign owner has submitted evidence of his or her good faith effort to comply with the order to abate within the prescribed time period, but practical difficulties beyond his or her control have prevented timely compliance. Such difficulties may include:

     i.      The unavailability of special equipment which is necessary for the removal of the sign.

     ii.     The inability of the city to approve necessary permits in a timely manner.

     iii.    Any similar circumstances.

     M.    Planning Commission Action.

     1.     If the planning commission is able to make all of the findings enumerated in subsections (C)(2)(a) through (c) of this section, but not finding in subsection (c)(2)(d), it may direct the community development director to cause the abatement of the sign. If the planning commission can also make finding in subsection (c)(2)(d), it may direct the community development director to suspend actions to abate the sign for an additional period of time not to exceed thirty days.

     2.     The action of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council, within fifteen days of its decision, in the manner established in Section 18.12.100.

     N.    Removal of Sign and Account of Costs.

     1.     At the completion of the sign abatement work, on each separate property, the community development director shall determine the total cost of such work including administrative and incidental costs to the city. A report of the work accomplished and the total cost in the abatement of signs on each separate property shall be filed with the city clerk.

     2.     City Council Hearing on Report and Account. The city clerk shall set the community development director’s report and account of costs for public hearing by the city council. Notice of public hearing shall be given in the manner established in Section 18.12.100.

     a.     Evidence to Be Considered—Actions. In the hearing, the city council shall consider the report and account of costs together with any written or oral comments, objections or protests by any interested parties. At the conclusion of the hearing, the city council shall either approve the report and account of costs as submitted or as modified or corrected by the city council.

     b.     Assessment Resolution. The city council shall adopt a resolution assessing such amount as liens upon the respective parcels of land as shown on the last available assessment roll. The property owner shall be notified of the city council’s action within fifteen days.

     2.     Recording of City Council Resolution. The city clerk shall prepare and file with the county auditor of the county of San Diego, a certified copy of the resolution of the city council.

     3.     Payment. The city treasurer may accept payment of any amount due for sign abatement at any time prior to the city council hearing as called for in this section.

     4.     Assessment. The provisions of Section 39580 to 39585, inclusive, of the Government Code are incorporated by reference and made a part of this chapter. The county auditor shall enter the assessment in the county tax roll. The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes; and if delinquent, the amount is subject to the same penalties and procedures of foreclosure and sale as is provided for ordinary municipal taxes.

 

 

18.12.140 Appendices.
 

TABLE 1: Area of Freestanding Signs in CC, LC and R/P Districts



 

TABLE 2: Height of Freestanding Signs in CC, LC and R/P Districts



 

TABLE 3: Area of Freestanding Signs in GC, HC and LI Districts

 



 

TABLE 4: Height of Freestanding Signs in GC, HC and LI Districts

 
Chapter 18.14 RECYCLING FACILITIES
18.14.010 Purpose.
     A.    To implement the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986.

     B.     To establish reasonable rules and regulations regarding the siting and operation of recycling facilities.

     C.     To make recycling of usable materials convenient to the consumer.

     D.    To prevent the generation of unreasonable noise levels.

     E.     To prevent litter and the encouragement of vermin.

     F.     To prevent the generation of dust, odors, and other unpleasant or unhealthy airborne emissions.

     G.    To prevent the unauthorized accumulation or discharge of liquid and solid wastes.

     H.    To prevent the creation of fire and explosion hazards.

     I.      To maintain adequate traffic circulation and parking.

     K.    To preserve and enhance the quality of the physical appearance of the city.

 

18.14.020 Definitions.
     A.    Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to incorporate definitions which are consistent with the terms used in the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. The meaning and construction of words and phrases which appear in Chapter 17.08 of the city’s zoning ordinance shall apply except where defined in this section or where the context of such words or phrases clearly indicates a different meaning. Where words are not defined in this section or elsewhere in the city’s municipal code, their common meanings shall apply.

     B.     Definitions.

     1.     “Collection facility” means a recycling facility which serves as a center for the acceptance by donation, redemption, or purchase, of recyclable materials from the public. Such a facility does not use power-driven processing equipment except as indicated in Section 18.14.040(D)(13) and may include the following:

     a.     Reverse vending machine(s);

     b.     Small collection facilities which occupy an area of not more than five hundred square feet, and may include:

     i.      A mobile unit,

     ii      Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than fifty square feet,

     iii     Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures,

     iv.    Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials;

     c.     Large collection facilities which may occupy an area of more than five hundred square feet and may include permanent structures.

     2.     “Mobile recycling unit” means an automobile, truck, trailer or van, licensed by the Department of Motor Vehicles which is used for the collection of recyclable materials. A mobile recycling unit also means the bins, boxes or containers transported by trucks, vans, or trailers, and used for the collection of recyclable materials.

     3.     “Processing facility” means a recycling facility comprised of a building or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials. Processing means the preparation of material for efficient shipment, or to an end-user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, compacting, flattening, grinding, crushing, mechanical sorting, shredding, cleaning, and remanufacturing. Processing facilities include the following:

     a.     A light processing facility occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of gross collection, processing and storage area and has up to an average of two outbound truck shipments per day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding, and sorting of source-separated recyclable material and repairing of reusable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

     b.     A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility.

     4.     “Recyclable material” means reusable material including, but not limited to metals, glass, plastic and paper, which are intended for reuse, remanufacture, or reconstitution for the purpose of using the altered form. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials. Recyclable material may include used motor oil collected and transported in accordance with Section 25250.11 and Section 25143.2(b)(4) of the California Health and Safety Code.

     5.     “Recycling facility” means a center for the collection and/or processing of recyclable materials. A certified recycling facility or certified processor means a recycling facility certified by the California Department of Conservation as meeting the requirements of the California Beverage Container Recycling and Litter Reduction Act of 1986. A recycling facility does not include storage containers or processing activity located on the premises of a residential, commercial, or manufacturing use and used solely for the recycling of material generated by that residential property, business or manufacturer.

     6.     “Reverse vending machine” means an automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers including, but not limited to aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value as determined by the state. A reverse vending machine may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

     A bulk reverse vending machine is larger than fifty square feet; is designed to accept more than one container at a time; and will pay by weight instead of by container.

 

18.14.030 Permits required.
     A.    General Provisions. No person shall permit the placement, construction, or operation of any recycling facility without first obtaining a permit pursuant to the provisions set forth in this section.

     B.     Specific Permits Required. Recycling facilities may be permitted as set forth in subsections (B)(1) through (5) as follows:

     1.     Reverse vending machines may be established in the neighborhood commercial, general commercial, and heavy commercial zones by administrative permit.

     2.     Small collection facilities may be established in the general commercial and heavy commercial zones and upon the sites occupied by existing supermarkets in other commercials zones by minor use permit.

     3.     Large collection facilities may be established in the general commercial, heavy commercial and light industrial zones by conditional use permit.

     4.     Light processing facilities may be established in the light industrial zone by conditional use permit.

     5.     Heavy processing facilities may be established in the light industrial zone by conditional use permit.

 

18.14.040 Criteria and standards.
     A.    General Criteria and Standards. Those recycling facilities permitted with an administrative permit shall meet all of the applicable criteria and standards listed. Those recycling facilities permitted with a minor use permit or conditional use permit shall meet the applicable criteria and standards, provided that the community development director, planning commission, or city council may relax such standards or impose stricter standards as an exercise of discretion upon a finding that such modifications are reasonably necessary in order to implement the general intent of this section, the purposes of this title and the goals and policies of the city’s general plan.

     B.     Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machine(s), enclosed within a commercial structure do not require discretionary permits. Reverse vending machines do not require additional parking spaces for recycling customers and may be permitted in the neighborhood commercial, general commercial, and heavy commercial zones with an administrative use permit provided that they comply with the following standards:

     a.     They shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city of Lemon Grove;

     b.     They shall be located within thirty feet of the entrance to the commercial structure and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation;

     c.     They shall not occupy parking spaces required by the primary facility;

     d.     They shall occupy no more than fifty square feet of floor space per installation, including any protective enclosure, and shall be no more than eight feet in height;

     e.     They shall be constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material;

     f.      They shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions and the identity and telephone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative;

     g.     They shall have a sign area of a maximum of four square feet per machine, exclusive of operating instructions;

     h.     They shall be maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis;

     i.      Operating hours shall be at least the operating hours of the host use;

     j.      They shall be illuminated to ensure comfortable and safe operation if operating hours are between dusk and dawn.

     C.     Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities may be established in the general commercial and heavy commercial zones by minor use permit. The following shall be considered the minimum standards for such facilities:

     1.     They shall be established in conjunction with an existing commercial use or community service facility which is in compliance with the zoning, building and fire codes of the city of Lemon Grove;

     2.     They shall be no larger than five hundred square feet and occupy no more than five parking spaces not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers;

     3.     They shall be set back at least ten feet from any street line and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular site distance or circulation;

     4.     They shall accept only glass, metals, plastic containers, papers and reusable items. Used motor oil may be accepted with permission of the health official and the fire chief;

     5.     They shall use no power-driven processing equipment except for reverse vending machines;

     6.     They shall use containers that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof material, covered when site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule;

     7.     They shall store all recyclable material in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and shall not leave materials outside of containers when attendant is not present;

     8.     They shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day;

     9.     They shall not exceed noise levels of sixty dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, otherwise noise shall not exceed seventy dBA;

     10.   Attended facilities located within one hundred feet of a zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between nine a.m. and seven p.m.;

     11.   Containers for the twenty-four-hour donation of materials shall be at least thirty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is a driveway or similar service corridor and acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use;

     12.   Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited; the facility shall be clearly marked to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers;

     13.   Signs may be displayed as follows:

     a.     One identification sign with an area not to exceed fifteen percent of the area of one face of a rectangular facility and one identification sign for each of the remaining faces not exceeding seven and one-half percent of the area of each face in addition to a single sign providing the information required in subsection(C)(12) of this section in the case of a multisided, irregularly-shaped or circular facility, the community development director shall, using the sign area criteria for rectangular facilities as a guide, determine the permitted sign area; except as otherwise stated in this section, signs will generally conform to the city’s sign ordinance, Chapter 18.12 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code,

     b.     Signs shall be consistent with the character of the location,

     c.     Directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be approved by the community development director if necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

     14.   The facility shall not impair the landscaping required by local ordinances for any other permitted use;

     15.   No additional parking spaces will be required for customers of a small collection facility located at the established parking lot of a host use. One space will be provided for the attendant, if needed;

     16.   Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during the hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present;

     17.   Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and by the attendant may not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary host use unless all of the following conditions exist:

     a.     The facility is located in a convenience zone or a potential convenience zone as designated by the California Department of Conservation,

     b.     A parking study, by a person qualified to perform such study, shows that existing parking capacity is not already fully utilized during the time the recycling facility will be on the site. The permit will be reconsidered at the end of eighteen months,

     c.     If, at the end of the eighteen-month period, the community development director determines that the use of a portion of the existing parking area by the recycling facility and its attendant has not adversely affected the host use or the users or owners of adjacent businesses or properties, a reduction in available parking spaces in an established facility may then be allowed as follows:

For a commercial use:

 

Number of Available Parking Spaces
Maximum Reduction

Maximum Reduction

0 – 25

0

26 – 35

2

36 – 49

3

50 – 99

4

100 +

5

 

     For a community facility host use:

     A maximum five spaces reduction will be allowed when not in conflict with parking needs of the host use;

     18.   If the permit expires without renewal, the collection facility shall be removed from the site on the day following permit expiration.

     D.    Large Collection Facilities A large collection facility is one that is larger than five hundred square feet, or is on a separate property not appurtenant to a host use, and which may have a permanent building. A large collection facility is permitted in the general commercial, heavy commercial, and light industrial zones with a conditional use permit, provided the facility meets the following standards:

     1.     The facility does not abut a property zoned or planned for residential use;

     2.     The facility will be screened from the public right-of-way by operating in an enclosed building or:

     a.     Within an area enclosed by an opaque fence at least six feet in height with landscaping,

     b.     At least one hundred and fifty feet from property zoned or planned for residential use, and

     c.     Meets noise standards of Chapter 9.24 of the city of Lemon Grove Municipal Code effective on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter and as thereafter amended;

     3.     Minimum setback and landscape requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located;

     4.     If exterior storage of material is permitted, such material shall be in sturdy containers which are covered, secured, and maintained in good conditions. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be in containers approved by the fire chief. Generally, no storage will be visible above the height of the fencing or other approved screening;

     5.     The site shall be maintained free of odors, dust, litter and any other undesirable materials, and will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis;

     6.     Full-size parking spaces will be provided on site for a minimum of six customer vehicles or the anticipated peak customer load, which ever is higher, to circulate and deposit recyclable materials;

     7.     One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the recycling facility. Parking requirements will be as provided for in the zone, except that parking requirements for employees may be reduced when it can be shown that parking spaces are not necessary such as when employees are transported in a company vehicle to a work facility;

     8.     Noise levels shall conform to city standards;

     9.     If the facility is located within five hundred feet of property zoned, planned or occupied for residential use, it shall not be in operation between seven p.m. and seven a.m.;

     10.   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials will be at least fifty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use, shall be of sturdy rustproof construction, shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials;

     11.   Donation areas will be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material, and the containers will be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited; the facility shall display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside of recycling containers;

     12.   The facility will be clearly marked with the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation; identification and informational signs will meet the standards of the zone; and directional signs, bearing no advertising message, may be installed if approved by the planning commission or city council, if necessary, to facilitate traffic circulation of the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way;

     13.   Power-driven processing, including aluminum foil and can compacting, baling, plastic shredding, or other light processing activities necessary for efficient temporary storage and shipment of material, may be approved by the planning commission if noise and other conditions are met.

     E.     Processing Facilities. Processing facilities are permitted in the light industrial zone with a conditional use permit subject to the following conditions:

     1.     The facility shall not abut a property zoned for or planned for residential use.

     2.     Processors shall operate in a wholly enclosed building except for incidental accessory storage which shall be within an area enclosed on all sides by an opaque fence or wall not less than eight feet in height and landscaped on all street frontages.

     3.     Power-driven processing will be permitted, provided all city noise level requirements are met, light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, crushing, compacting, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials.

     4.     A light processing facility shall be no larger than forty-five thousand square feet and shall have no more than an average of two outbound truck shipments of material per day and may not shred, compact or bale ferrous metal other than food and beverage containers.

     5.     A processing facility may accept used motor oil for recycling from the generator in accordance with Section 25250.11 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     6.     Setbacks and landscaping shall conform to the standards which are generally applied to uses which are established in the light industrial zone.

     7.     If any outdoor storage is approved, such storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures which are covered, secured, and maintained in good condition. Storage containers for flammable material shall be constructed of nonflammable material. Oil storage must be approved by the fire chief. Generally, no storage, excluding vehicles, will be visible above the height of the fencing.

     8.     The site shall be maintained free of litter and any other undesirable materials, will be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis and will be cleaned from unauthorized entry and removal of materials when attendants are not present.

     9.     Space shall be provided on site for the anticipated peak load of vehicles, employees aid customers to circulate, park and deposit recyclable materials. If the facility is open to the public space will be provided for a minimum of ten customers or the peak load, whichever is greater.

     10.   One parking space will be provided for each commercial vehicle operated by the processing facility. Parking requirements will otherwise be as mandated by the parking regulations which are set forth in the city’s zoning ordinance.

     11.   Noise levels shall not exceed 60 dBA as measured at the property line of residentially zoned or occupied property, or otherwise shall not exceed 70 dBA.

     12.   The facility shall not be in operation between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. The facility will be administered by on-site personnel during the hours the facility is open.

     13.   Any containers provided for after-hours donation of recyclable materials shall be at least fifty feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use; shall be of sturdy, rustproof construction; shall have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected; and shall be secure from unauthorized entry or removal of materials.

     14.   Donation areas shall be kept free of litter and any other undesirable material. The containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material that may be deposited. The facility shall display a notice stating that no materials shall be left outside the recycling containers.

     15.   Sign requirements shall be those provided for the zoning district in which the facility is located. In addition, the facility will be clearly marked with the name and phone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation.

     16.   No dust, fumes, smoke, vibration or odor above ambient level may be detectable on neighboring properties and the facility shall conform to the performance standards set forth in Section 17.24.080 of the city’s zoning ordinance.

 

18.14.050 Enforcement and revocation of permits.
     A.    Public Nuisance. Any recycling facility which is operated in a manner other than as approved by the city may be declared a public nuisance.

     B.     Notice of Violation. When the operator of a recycling facility has received written notice that such facility fails to comply with all appropriate city codes and ordinances, and with any specific conditions attached to the approval of such facility, the operator shall comply fully with the city’s requirements within a period of time to be determined by the community development director.

     C.     Time of Compliance. When the community development director determines that a recycling facility’s failure to comply with the city’s requirements results in an immediate threat to the public health and safety, the director shall issue a written order requiring compliance forthwith. In no case shall the operator be given more than thirty days to comply.

     D.    Public Hearing. If the operator of a recycling facility has not complied with the community development director’s order to cease a violation of city requirements within the prescribed time period, a public hearing will be held at the next regular meeting of the planning commission to consider the revocation of the permit which authorized the establishment of the recycling facility.

     E.     Action of the Planning Commission. If, after a public hearing, the planning commission determines that a recycling facility is being operated in a manner which constitutes a violation of this chapter, it may either revoke the permit which provided for the establishment of such facility or it may grant an extension of the time period within which the operator must fully comply with all city requirements.

 

18.14.060 Appeals.
     Any order, requirement, decision or other determination made according to this chapter may be appealed pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in Section 17.28.020 of the city of Lemon Grove zoning ordinance. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 18.16 ANIMAL KEEPING
18.16.010 Animal keeping.
     These regulations are intended to establish standards and conditions regarding the permitted number, type, and location of animals to be kept on individual properties to ensure the preservation of a safe, sanitary, healthy and pleasant living environment, the compatibility of animal keeping with other permitted land uses, and the protection of property values. (Note: Animal control regulations are established in Title 6 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.)

 

18.16.020 General provisions.
     A.    All animals, including chickens and other fowl, with the exception of dogs and cats shall be properly caged or housed and must be kept in their corrals, barns, pens or other enclosures.

     B.     Dogs shall be kept on a leash or confined on private property at all times and shall not be allowed to run at large.

     C.     Cats need not be kept under restraint unless their liability constitutes a public nuisance or a hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare.

     D.    Proper sanitation shall be maintained at all times. All animal or poultry food shall be stored in metal or other rodent-proof containers.

     E.     Location of Enclosures for Animals. No pen, coup, stable, barn, kennel, corral, or other similar enclosure for the keeping of animals or poultry shall be erected, placed or maintained:

     1. a. Within forty feet of any dwelling other than that occupied by the owner of the animals.

     b.     Exception. Dog shelters or dog houses and other cages, coops, or pens which do not exceed six feet in height and which contain no more than three small farm animals such as rabbits, doves, bantam chickens, or household animals as specified in Section 18.16.030(B) may be located anywhere behind a dwelling but may be no closer than twenty feet from any dwelling other than that occupied by the owner of the animals.

     2. a. Within five feet of any side or rear lot line.

     b.     Exception. Household animals as specified in Section 18.16.030(B) and small farm animals as specified in Section 18.16.040 may be located anywhere behind a dwelling if:

     i.      They are at least twenty feet from any dwelling other than that occupied by the owner of the animals;

     ii.     They are separated from other dwellings and adjacent properties by a solid six-foot-high fence or wall.

     3.     Within twenty-five feet of any side street lot line and fifty feet of any front lot line. In no case shall any such animal enclosure be placed between the front lot line and a primary building.

     F.     Any animal not specifically classified within this chapter shall be classified by the planning director, based upon a determination as to the probable impact of the proposed animal keeping.

     G.    As classified in this chapter, only domestic animals may be permitted in nonresidential zoning districts.

     H.    Dogs, cats, other household animals, small and large farm animals which are made nonconforming as a consequence of this chapter, whether through excessive numbers or ineligible district, may remain on the property for the life of the animal, so long as such animals do not constitute a nuisance. Such nonconforming animals shall not be increased in numbers, replaced or substituted at any time. Violation of these conditions may be cause for immediate abatement.

     I.      Animal Raising Projects. Conditional use permits may be issued to youths involved in animal raising projects sponsored by 4-H, FFA, or similar youth organizations involved in animal raising. Subject to the conditions imposed to permit the findings required by Section 17.28.050(B), minor exceptions to the restrictions of this chapter may be granted.

     J.      On any property which is zoned for residential use or which is primarily used for residential purposes, only animals which are owned by the resident of such property may be kept.

     K.    Public nuisance provisions within Section 6.04.430 shall be applicable to animals and insects referenced in this chapter. (Ord. 439 § 2, 2016)

 

18.16.030 Dogs, cats and other household animals.
     A.    Dogs and Cats.

     1.     Commonly kept cats and dogs are permitted to be kept upon lots used primarily for residential purposes. Not more than one dog and two cats are permitted to be kept upon any lot developed with an office, business or other commercial or industrial uses for the primary purpose of protecting the premises from varmints and trespassers. On commercial or industrial properties with an area greater than fifteen thousand square feet, one additional dog may be kept.

     2.     Within the residential low and low/medium zoning districts, dogs and cats may be kept as follows:

     a.     On lots less than or equal to twelve thousand five hundred full square feet of lot area: either two dogs; or four cats; or a combination of four such animals, provided that there shall be no more than two dogs per lot.

     b.     On lots over twelve thousand five hundred full square feet of lot area: either four dogs; or six cats; or a combination of seven such animals, provided that there shall be no more than four dogs per lot.

     3.     Within the residential medium and medium/high districts, one dog, and two cats may be kept per dwelling unit.

     4.     The offspring born of such animals which increase the total number upon the premises beyond the numbers permitted shall be removed from the lot not later than sixteen weeks from birth.

     B.     Other Household Animals. Other animals which are neither farm animals, exotic animals or cats and dogs such as domestic mice, domestic rats, guinea pigs, hamsters, turtles, tropical fish, canaries, parakeets and similar birds, may be kept upon any lot in any district where the principal use upon such lot is a residential use, so long as such animals are not maintained for commercial purposes, do not constitute a nuisance, and are afforded food, care and sanitary facilities. Such household animals shall not exceed fifteen upon any one lot (excluding fish). Not more than three parrots, macaws, mynah birds, or similar large or noisy birds may be kept. (Refer to Section 18.16.040(B) concerning keeping of small farm animals such as rabbits and doves as household pets.)

     C.     Commercial Activities. Dogs, cats and other household pets are permitted as primary uses within commercial businesses such as retail pet shops, animal hospitals, and kennels, according to the appropriate city ordinances regulating these businesses.

 

18.16.040 Small farm animals.
     A.    For the purpose of this chapter, “small farm animals” means and includes rabbits, chickens, geese, ducks, pigeons, doves, other fowl and poultry and other similar animals.

     B.     Within the residential medium and medium/high zoning districts up to three rabbits or doves considered as pets, and kept in small enclosures, are permitted per dwelling unit.

     C.     Within the residential low and residential low/medium districts, small farm animals are permitted as follows:

     1.     One rabbit, pigeon, dove, quail, or chicken per full one thousand square feet of lot area, not to exceed a total of twenty-five such animals in combination per lot; or

     2.     Not more than two geese, ducks, turkeys, or other similar permitted fowl or poultry per full fifteen thousand square feet of lot area, same or in combination. No ducks, geese, or turkeys are permitted on a lot with an area less than fifteen thousand square feet.

     3.     Not more than one rooster per full ten thousand square feet of lot area.

     4.     A maximum of one hundred racing or homing pigeons may be kept and exercised on a lot or building site of not less than one-half acre in area, provided than when racing or homing pigeons are kept in combination with other small animals as permitted by this chapter, and subject to the maximum numbers specified in this chapter, such combination of racing or homing pigeons and other small animals shall not exceed one hundred.

     D.    The offspring born of such animals which increases the total number upon the premises beyond the numbers permitted shall be removed from the lot no later than sixteen weeks after birth or hatching.

 

18.16.050 Large farm animals.
     A.    For the purpose of this chapter, “large farm animals” means and shall include horses, cows, mules, swine, sheep and goats over the age of four months, and other similar animals.

     B.     Large farm animals shall be permitted only in the residential low and low/medium zoning districts.

     C.     Within the residential low and low/medium zoning districts, one horse or one cow, or one swine, or two goats, or two sheep, or one goat and one sheep shall be permitted on a lot with an area of at least fifteen thousand square feet. One additional horse, or cow or swine, or two additional goats or sheep, or one additional goat and one additional sheep shall be permitted if the lot has an area of at least twenty thousand square feet. No more than four large farm animals may be kept on any lot or building site.

     D.    Large farm animals which are being kept in residential districts at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and which are made nonconforming as a consequence of this chapter, may remain on the lot for the life of the animal, provided that each such nonconforming animal shall be registered with the planning director. Such registration shall be made within one hundred twenty days of the effective date of said ordinance on forms available in the office of the planning department (Refer to Section 18.16.020(H)).

     E.     In addition to the conditions of Section 18.16.020(H), such nonconforming animals shall not be transferred to any other lot within the city, unless that lot meets the lot size requirements set forth in subsection C of this section and the enclosure setback restriction in Section 18.16.020(E) are followed.

     F.     Notwithstanding these regulations, any commercial dairy in operation at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter may continue to operate, and to replace dairy cattle as necessary to maintain its herd at the size existing on the effective date of said ordinance.

     G.    The offspring of large farm animals which increase the total number upon the premises beyond the numbers permitted shall be removed from the lot not later than four weeks after being weaned.

 

18.16.060 Exotic animals and beekeeping.
     A.    The keeping of animals considered to be members of a rare and endangered species, exotic or wild animals, including dangerous or poisonous reptiles, shall not be permitted within the city, except as provided in Section 6.04.420 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     B.     Beehives may be kept within the residential low and low/medium zoning districts subject to the following:

     1.     The beekeeper shall apply for a beekeeping permit. The permit application shall be filed on a form available from the development services department and shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable fee as established by resolution of the city council.

     2.     Up to four beehives may be permitted. Beehives shall be placed at least twenty-five feet from the exterior line of the traveled way of any public streets, at least twenty-five feet from the exterior line of any private access easement, at least fifteen feet from any side or rear lot line, and at least twenty-five feet from neighboring dwellings. For three to four hives, a one-hundred-foot separation from neighboring dwellings is required.

     3.     Beekeepers shall keep sufficient open water available near the beehives during hot and dry weather in compliance with vector control regulations.

     4.     Beehives shall be well maintained at all times.

     5.     A beehive shall be no larger than  fifteen cubic feet in volume.

     6.     Only docile bee species may be permitted.

     7.     Registration with the county of San Diego Department of Agriculture, Weights, and Measures is required prior to beekeeping activities.

     8.     The following firefighting materials shall be maintained, in good working condition, at all times when the beehive is attended by the keeper, sufficiently near the beehive so as immediately to be available in case of fire:

     a.     A shovel; and

     b.     Either a fire extinguisher of the two and one-half-gallon water-under-pressure type or the five-gallon back-pump type or its equivalent; or a garden hose connected to a source of water.

     9.     Beehives shall be placed at least one hundred feet from the border of sensitive areas. Sensitive areas include areas where people, such as the elderly, small children, individuals with medical conditions or confined animals inhabit or frequent that are more at risk if stinging incidents were to occur. Sensitive areas are characterized by a demonstrated need for a greater safety buffer. These areas include, but are not limited to, schools, playgrounds, picnic areas, outdoor sports facilities, daycare centers, senior care facilities, medical facilities, and animal-boarding facilities.

     10.   Property operators, owners, or residents who have medical reasons may apply to have their locations designated as sensitive sites. Businesses and facilities with employees who have medical reasons or where bees could cause a nuisance during normal work activities may also apply to have their locations designated as sensitive sites. The development services director may approve sites or remove sites previously approved or designated as sensitive sites upon request. Upon appeal, the city council has final discretion to approve designation of locations as sensitive sites upon review of supportive documentation. (Ord. 439 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 18.20 HOME OCCUPATION
18.20.010 Purpose.
     These regulations are intended to prescribe conditions under which limited nonresidential activities may be conducted in residential districts when incidental to residential uses.

 

18.20.020 Definition.
     “Home occupation” means an occupation customarily conducted as a secondary use entirely within a dwelling by the occupant of the dwelling; and gives no indication of other than residential use, and which is not detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood by virtue of traffic flow, noise, odor or other adverse conditions.

 

18.20.030 General provisions.
     A.    No employees shall be employed on the premises.

     B.     All home occupation activities shall be conducted entirely within the residential structures, except for permitted agricultural or horticultural uses.

     C.     Home occupations may not utilize an area greater than twenty percent of the total floor area of the residential structure. Garage and other detached accessory buildings shall not be included in making floor area computations but are available areas for the conduct of the home occupation.

     D.    Storage of inventory or supplies shall not occupy more than one-half of the floor area upon which the home occupation is permitted.

     E.     No storage of materials or display of any kind shall be permitted where visible from the exterior of the property.

     F.     Home occupations shall not generate noise or sounds which exceed the noise level limits established in Chapter 9.24. Furthermore, home occupations shall not create any sounds which disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of neighboring residents or persons of normal sensitivity residing in the area.

     G.    Home occupations utilizing mechanical or other sound-producing equipment which can be heard outside the boundaries of the premises shall not be conducted between the hours of eight p.m. and eight a.m.

     H.    Home occupations shall not cause electrical interference which disrupts or otherwise adversely affects radio and television reception within the neighborhood.

     I.      No signs shall be used to identify or advertise home occupations.

     J.      All sales of products, including those produced or grown on the premises, and the performance of all services shall take place off the premises. However, the planning director may permit on-premises sales or the performance of services as a condition of a home occupation permit when he does find that such sales or services will comply with all other provisions of this chapter.

     K.    No equipment rental of any kind shall be permitted as a home occupation.

     L.     Mechanical equipment utilized in the conduct of the home occupation shall not exceed two horsepower combined capacity in operation at any one time.

     M.    Ceramic kilns shall not exceed six kilowatts or gas fired equivalent.

     N.    No trucks or other vehicles exceeding one ton manufacturer’s rated capacity shall be used in connection with a home occupation.

     O.    Home occupations shall not create a need or demand for municipal or utility services or community facilities in excess of those customarily provided for residential uses.

     P.     All aspects of home occupation shall comply with all applicable codes and ordinances including, but not limited to, the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Housing Code, and the Uniform Fire Code.

     Q.    Property addresses, other than post office box numbers, shall not be used in any advertising, i.e., telephone directory, newspaper advertisements, bulletin boards, signs on vehicles and all other methods of advertising. Business cards and telephone white page listing are excepted from the above requirements.

     R.     No more than an average of six clients per day shall be permitted on the premises (home occupations involving music or academic instruction are excepted from this requirement).

     S.     Group meetings as a part of service or sales activity shall not be permitted unless the applicant provides the planning commission with evidence that such activity is not detrimental to the residential character of the neighborhood.

     T.     Deliveries made by commercial carrier shall be limited to an average of one per week.

     U.    No more than an average of two clients shall be permitted on the premises at any one time.

 

18.20.040 Home occupation permit.
     No occupation, trade, business or profession shall be conducted in any residential zone unless a home occupation permit has been duly issued for such use. The planning director may, upon written application without fee, issue a home occupation permit which shall state the home occupation permitted, the locations, and all conditions of approval. The permit may be issued only if the director is satisfied that the applicant’s operation will fulfill all conditions and the applicant has agreed, in writing, to continue to fulfill such conditions. In addition to the conditions listed in Section 18.20.030, in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, the planning director may establish any special conditions or limitations on the home occupation as is determined to be necessary.

 

18.20.050 Revocation of home occupation permit.
     Home occupation permits are subject to revocation by the planning director after a hearing by the director, following reasonable notice to the permittee, in the event that zoning regulations applicable to the premises are amended to prohibit such use, or when evidence has been produced that one or more of the conditions of the permit are not being fulfilled, or that any other violation of this chapter exists. After receiving written notification of violation, holders of home occupation permits shall, within ten days of such notification, comply with all applicable city regulations or the home occupation permit will be subject to revocation after hearing.

 

18.20.060 Appeal.
     In the event of denial of any home occupation permit or the revocation thereof, or if the applicant objects to the limitations placed thereon, a written appeal may be made to the planning commission, whose decision shall be final. Appeals shall be considered by the planning commission in a public hearing which shall be scheduled within sixty days from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as set forth in Section 17.28.090 of the city zoning ordinance. A fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid at the time of application to cover the expense of appeal procedures. When a home occupation permit has been denied or revoked, no application for the same business shall be accepted for a period of one year from the date of the denial or revocation.

 

18.20.070 Business license.
     A home occupation permit is not a business license and the granting of a home occupation permit shall not relieve the holder of any other requirements of the law or of ordinances of the city pertaining to business licenses and business taxes.

 

18.20.080 Enforcement—Penalty.
     It shall be the duty of the planning director to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and violators shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in Section 17.04.070 of the city zoning ordinance.

Chapter 18.24 COMMUNITY HOUSING CONVERSION
18.24.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations and criteria for the conversion of existing multiple-family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, and stock cooperative apartments in a manner which is consistent with the following objectives:

     A.    To reduce the impact of conversions on residents in the rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of rental housing to community housing;

     B.     To assure that the purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase;

     C.     To insure that converted housing is safe, of quality appearance, and consistent with the goals of the general plan. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the conversion of an existing structure, that has received final occupancy clearance, to community housing. “Community housing” shall include the following types of residential subdivisions:

     A.    Any condominium project containing two or more condominium dwelling units;

     B.     Any community apartment project containing two or more apartment dwelling units;

     C.     Any stock cooperative having or intended to have two or more shareholders. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Apartment” means as defined in the California Building Code.

     “Community housing” means a condominium project, a community apartment project, or a stock cooperative.

     “Community apartment project” means an undivided interest in the land together with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon.

     “Condominium” means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential building on such real property, such as an apartment. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property.

     Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either (1) an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate; (2) an estate for life; or (3) an estate for years, such as a leasehold or a subleasehold.

     “Condominium project” means the entire parcel of real property divided, or to be divided, into condominiums, including all structures thereon.

     “Homeowners association” means the association of (1) owners of individual units within a condominium; (2) the owners of the undivided interest in a community apartment project; and (3) the shareholders in a stock cooperative each of which shall assume full responsibility for the maintenance of common areas and all portions of buildings not owned or exclusively occupied by a partner or shareholder.

     “Project” means the entire parcel of real property, including all structures thereon, all or part of which is rented or leased for residential purposes and is proposed to be divided, as land or air space, into two or more lots, parcels, units, or rights of exclusive occupancy.

     “Stock cooperative” means a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.040 General requirements for community housing conversions.
     Prior to the approval and recordation of a final map or parcel map for a community housing conversion, the proposed project shall be in compliance with the following:

     A.    No community housing conversion is permissible which is inconsistent with the land use designation, goals and policies of the General Plan.

     B.     Except as noted herein and unless determined infeasible or impractical by either the building official or deputy fire chief, existing buildings involving community housing conversions shall comply with current California Building and Fire Codes.

     C.     Except as noted herein, community housing conversions shall comply with applicable standards of Title 16 (Subdivision Ordinance), Title 17 (Zoning Ordinance), Chapter 18.24 (Community Housing Conversion), and Chapter 18.44 (Water Efficient Landscape Regulations).

     D.    Subject to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, approval of a tentative map and final map, subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 16.12, shall be required for community housing conversions converting five or more residential dwelling units and approval of a tentative parcel map and parcel map, subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 16.16, shall be required for community housing conversions converting four or less residential dwelling units. Hearing and noticing requirements shall be per Title 16 and in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act.

     E.     Waivers, modifications, or deviations of development standards are permissible provided the community housing conversion includes equivalent benefits referenced in Section 17.28.030 (Planned development permit).

     F.     Final approval of a building and landscape permit shall be required for all improvements on the subject property where applicable.

     G.    All applicable conditions of approval shall be complied with such as installation of street improvements and recording of conditions, covenants, and restrictions. Applicable street dedication and improvements shall be required in accordance with the General Plan Circulation Element and community housing conversions shall not be exempt from requirements within Chapter 12.10. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.050 Standards for community housing conversions.
     In addition to the requirements set forth in Section 18.24.040, the following standards shall be required for community housing conversions.

     A.    Utility Metering. Gas and electricity consumption in each dwelling unit shall be separately metered. Each unit shall have its own disconnect device for all electrical circuits which serve the unit. Water shut-off and gas shut-off valves shall be provided for each unit. If water consumption in each dwelling unit is not separately metered, then a plan for equitable sharing of communal water metering shall be developed prior to parcel map or final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions and restrictions.

     B.     Noise Mitigation and Energy Conservation.

     1.     All window assemblies shall conform to current California Building Codes, interior noise standards of Chapter 9.24, and the Noise Element of the General Plan and shall be dual paned within residential dwelling units.

     2.     Energy conservation insulation shall be installed in all heated or cooled buildings, including common ownership structures used for assembly purposes, in accordance with current California Building Codes.

     C.     Fire Protection.

     1.     Smoke Detectors. Each dwelling unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion which meet the requirements of the California Building and Fire Codes and which shall be located as required by the Department of Fire and Building Safety.

     2.     Fire Sprinkler System. All buildings shall have a fire sprinkler system that meets the requirements of the current California Fire Code.

     3.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All on-site fire hydrants, alarms, fire extinguishers and other fire-protective appliances shall be maintained in an operative condition at all times and maintenance of such appliances shall be the responsibility of the homeowner’s association. This responsibility shall be clearly stated in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

     4.     Building Construction Requirements. All dwelling unit one-hour fire-resistive separation walls, floors and ceilings, attic draft stops, bedroom egress windows, ground fault circuit interrupters, external combustion air venting, and water heater strapping shall be provided in compliance with the applicable provisions of the California Building Code and Fire Code. For any building of sixteen units or more, the building shall have a supervised alarm system.

     5.     Fire Apparatus Turnarounds and Access Drives. Fire apparatus turnarounds and access drives shall be enhanced to the satisfaction of the deputy fire chief, but compliance with current access and turnaround requirements is not required except as provided in the California Fire Code as it relates to upgrades to existing built sites.

     D.    Private Storage Space. Each dwelling unit shall have exclusive use of at least one hundred twenty-five cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed, and lockable private storage space in addition to the linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided in a residential unit to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     E.     Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each dwelling unit or common laundry areas shall be provided. Such facilities shall consist of at least one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fractions thereof.

     F.     Refurbishing and Restoration. All main and accessory buildings, fences, patio enclosures, carports, driveways, parking lots, sidewalks, irrigation systems, recreational facilities, and other elements shall be restored and refurbished as required by the development services director to achieve and maintain a high quality of safety and a quality of appearance comparable to that of similar structures built at the time of the application for the community housing conversion project.

     G.    Street Dedication and Improvements. Street dedication and improvements within public-right-of-way fronting the property shall be required in accordance with Chapter 12.10. Private street dedication and improvements shall be required as applicable to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     H.    Landscaping. Prior to parcel map or final map approval, all proposed landscaped areas shall be installed in accordance with an approved landscape and irrigation plan subject to provisions in Chapter 18.44 and Section 17.24.050(B).

     I.      Development Standards. Development regulations relating to off-street parking, minimum lot area, minimum lot width and depth, minimum yards, maximum building height, and minimum usable open space for the subject property shall be based on the applicable regulations in effect at the time the buildings being converted received its building permit.

     J.      Accessibility. Unless required otherwise, the terms and conditions of accessibility standards in effect at the time the buildings being converted received its building permit shall apply.

     K.    Trash Collection. A will-serve letter shall be provided from the trash collection provider. Appropriate trash and recycling receptacles shall be provided and enclosures shall comply with Section 17.24.050.

     L.     Drainage and Stormwater. The project shall comply with all applicable requirements established in Chapters 8.48 and 8.52, inclusive, related to urban pollution runoff controls. All drainage shall drain into landscape areas with appropriate erosion control prior to exiting the site. Conditions shall include necessary best management practices for high priority residential areas as required. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.060 Application requirements.
     Applications for the conversion of rental dwelling units to community housing will be accepted for review and processing when the application includes, but is not limited to, the following material:

     A.    Development plan packet including detailed site, lighting, street improvement, floor, elevation, landscape and irrigation plans to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     B.     Physical Elements Report. The physical elements report shall be approved by the building division and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     A report detailing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each element of the project proposed for conversion or to remain: roofs, foundations (including a soils report showing soil stability), framing, insulation, attic draft stops, windows, exterior paint, paved surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, natural gas piping and appliance venting, plumbing systems, including sewage systems, swimming pools, pool equipment (filter, pumps, chlorinator, etc.), dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, air conditioners, heating units, irrigation systems, drainage systems, utility delivery systems, alarm systems, or standpipe systems, and structural elements. An inventory with product description and stock keeping unit identification and model numbers shall be provided where applicable. Such report shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed architect and/or by a registered civil or structural engineer as applicable. A certified home inspector may prepare portions of the physical elements report to the satisfaction of the development services director. An applicant may not prepare his or her own physical elements report. The physical elements report shall include a detailed evaluation of the existing physical elements, recommendations on their status (including any necessary repairs or replacement, either immediate or in the future) and a signed certification of the findings. For any element whose useful life is estimated to be less than five years, a replacement cost estimate shall be provided. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed.

     2.     A structural pest control report to be prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the Business and Professions Code.

     3.     A building history report to include the following:

     a.     The date of construction of all elements of the project.

     b.     A statement of the major uses of said project since construction.

     c.     The date and description of each major repair or renovation of any structure or structural element since the date of construction. For the purposes of this subsection, a “major repair” shall mean any repair valued by the building official at more than one thousand dollars.

     d.     A statement regarding current ownership of all improvements, appliances, equipment and underlying land.

     e.     If unable to provide all information required by subsections (B)(3)(a) through (d) inclusive, the applicant shall submit an affidavit under the penalty of perjury, setting forth reasonable efforts to discover such information and reasons why said information cannot be obtained.

     4.     A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the subdivider necessary to replace, refurbish and restore the improvements on the property to achieve a high degree of appearance and safety.

     5.     A geotechnical report prepared by a professional engineer analyzing known soil and geological conditions regarding soil deposits, rock formations, faults, groundwater, and landslides in the vicinity of the project and a statement regarding any known evidence of soil problems relating to the structures.

     C.     Organization Documents Report.

     1.     A summary of proposed management, occupancy, and maintenance policies.

     2.     A maintenance plan which clearly specifies methods and standards for performance of common responsibilities and maintenance for all common areas, including any common refuse collection responsibilities or assurances that the premises will be kept free from trash and debris, and the equipment and fees to be assessed for such purposes. The maintenance plan shall include the establishment of a contingency fund for major repairs and extraordinary expenses.

     3.     A copy of the Declaration of Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions. The Declaration shall name the city of Lemon Grove as a party to said Declaration and shall authorize, but not require, the city to enforce the terms and conditions of said Declaration in the same manner as any owner subject to said Declaration.

     D.    A Provision Regarding Owner Responsibilities and Liabilities. This provision shall state that an individual owner cannot avoid liability for his prorated share of the expense for the maintenance of the common area by renouncing his or her rights to said common area.

     E.     Additional Specific Information.

     1.     Rental rate history for each type of dwelling unit for previous five years.

     2.     Monthly vacancy rate for each month during preceding two years.

     3.     A complete list of the number of tenants and tenant households in the project, including the following information:

     a.     The family size of households, including a breakdown of households with children five years and younger; and between five and eighteen years;

     b.     The length of residency;

     c.     The age of tenants; and

     d.     The designations of low and moderate income households and whether any are receiving rent subsidies.

     When the applicant can demonstrate that information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the development services director.

     4.     The proposed price range of the dwelling units.

     5.     The proposed homeowner’s association monthly fee.

     6.     A statement of intent as to the types of financing programs to be made available, with lenders specified, including incentive programs for existing residents.

     7.     Names and addresses of all tenants.

     8.     If the applicant is unable to provide all information required by subsections (E)(1) through (7) inclusive, the applicant shall submit an affidavit, under penalty of perjury, setting forth reasonable efforts to provide such information and reasons why said information cannot be obtained.

     F.     Subdivision Public Report Application. The applicant shall submit a copy of the proposed application to the Department of Real Estate of the State of California for Subdivision Public Report, as required in Section 11018 of the Business and Professions Code. This application shall be submitted to the city on the current forms required by the Department of Real Estate and need not contain exhibits regarding the availability of utility services or the organizational documents of the project.

     G.    Evidence of Notice to Convert. At least sixty days prior to filing an application for a community housing conversion and at least one hundred twenty days prior to termination of tenancy due to conversion or proposed conversion, a notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant’s dwelling unit. Evidence of the receipt of such notice shall be submitted with the community housing conversion application. The aforementioned evidence shall include, but may not be limited to, a copy of the notice of intent to convert, with original signature by the tenant(s), to the satisfaction of the development services director. In the event the tenant(s) does not possess the ability to read and understand English, a professional translator qualified to read and understand both English and the language most familiar to the tenant(s) may translate the notice for the tenant(s) to the satisfaction of the development services director. The form of the notice shall be in the form outlined by Section 66452.8 of the California Government Code and shall contain not less than the following:

     1.     Name and address of current owner.

     2.     Name and address of proposed subdivider.

     3.     Name, address and telephone number of the city employee assigned to the community housing conversion project.

     4.     Approximate date on which the application is proposed to be filed.

     5.     Approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed.

     6.     Approximate date on which the dwelling unit is to be vacated by non-purchasing tenants.

     7.     Tenant’s right to purchase.

     8.     Tenant’s right of notification to vacate.

     9.     Tenant’s right of termination of lease.

     10.   Provision of tenant relocation assistance.

     11.   Anticipated price range of the units.

     12.   Proposed homeowner’s association monthly fees.

     13.   Statement of the types of financing programs to be made available, including any incentive programs for existing residents.

     14.   A copy of the city’s community housing conversion regulations.

     15.   Other information as deemed necessary by the development services director.

     H.    Tentative Map and/or Tentative Parcel Map. A tentative map, subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 16.12, shall be required for community housing conversions converting five or more residential dwelling units and a tentative parcel map, subject to the regulations set forth in Chapter 16.16, shall be required for community housing conversions converting four or less residential dwelling units.

     I.      Conditions of Approval. Other reasonable items and/or conditions of approval may be required that achieve the purpose of this chapter including, but not limited to, stormwater mitigation plans and/or drainage, noise studies, traffic, parking, and/or line of sight studies. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.070 Report to prospective buyers.
     A.    Every prospective buyer shall be given a copy of all information required in Section 18.24.060(A) through (D).

     B.     Prior to the close of escrow on the initial sale of each converted dwelling unit, the applicant shall provide written certification to the buyer that dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks, and air conditioners that are provided are in good repair and working condition. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.080 Replacement or repair of substandard physical elements.
     Any physical element identified in the Physical Elements Report as having a useful life of less than two years shall be replaced prior to recordation of the parcel map or final map. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

18.24.090 Guarantee of performance.
     Any required structural repair work or any required replacement or repair of other substandard physical elements shall be completed or funds for the completion of said work shall be bonded or otherwise guaranteed to the satisfaction of the development services director to assure completion of said work prior to recordation of the parcel map or final map. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.100 Tenant provisions.
     A.    Tenant’s Right to Purchase. As provided in the Government Code Section 66437.1(b), any tenant shall be given an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of his or her respective dwelling unit upon the same terms and conditions that such dwelling unit will be initially offered to the general public, preferably on terms more favorable to the tenant. The right shall run for a period of not less than ninety days from the issuance of the subdivision public report pursuant to Section 11018.2 of the Business and Professions Code, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right.

     B.     Vacation of Units. Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which the subject unit is occupied, shall have not less than one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of notification from the subdivider of his or her intent to convert, to find substitute housing and to relocate.

     C.     Tenant Relocation Assistance.

     1.     Each eligible tenant of a dwelling unit in an existing residential development being converted to a common interest subdivision shall be paid by the applicant the equivalent of one and one-half times monthly rent as relocation assistance. Each eligible tenant shall also receive a refund of their security deposit after appropriate deductions are made for damages done to the dwelling unit occupied that will not be renovated as part of the conversion process. The security deposit shall be paid at the end of the tenancy in the manner provided by law.

     2.     For the purpose of this section, the term, “eligible tenant,” shall be defined as a tenant in good standing of the existing residential development at the time that the owner of the development gives notice to existing tenants of owner’s intent to file a tentative map pursuant to Section 66452.9, as amended, of the Subdivision Map Act.

     3.     The payment of relocation assistance by the applicant shall occur on or before: (a) the date of termination of tenancy provided in the notice described in this subsection; or (b) the date that the eligible tenant vacates the dwelling unit, whichever shall first occur, but in either event without regard to the date that the conversion occurs.

     4.     No conversion shall be completed until such time that the applicant has provided proof to the city of the payment of all relocation assistance security deposit refunds as required in this subsection to the satisfaction of the development services director.

     5.     The applicant shall give each eligible tenant notice of his or her right to relocation assistance at the same time that the initial notice required by subsection D is given to tenants of the existing residential development. Such notice shall include a copy of this section and shall provide the name and telephone number of the applicant’s representative, which will allow for messages outside of normal business hours, for the tenants to obtain further information relative to the relocation assistance available to them, and the timing of the payment of relocation assistance for their project.

     D.    Notice to Tenants. The conversion of an existing residential development to a common interest subdivision shall include all tenant notifications required by Section 66427.1, as amended, of the Subdivision Map Act.

     E.     Notice to Prospective Tenants. Commencing at a date not less than sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative parcel map or tentative map pursuant to Section 66452 of the Government Code, the subdivider or his or her agent

shall give notice of such filing in the form outlined in Government Code Section 66452.8(b) to each person filing after such date for rental of a dwelling unit of the subject property. The notice shall be given immediately prior to the acceptance of any rent or deposit from the prospective tenant by the subdivider. If the tentative parcel map or tentative map has been approved, the notice shall be accompanied with the notice of decision or resolution of approval.

     F.     Right to Terminate Rental Agreement. The subdivider shall permit a tenant to terminate any lease or rental agreement without any penalty whatsoever after the notice of intent to convert to community housing has been given if such tenant notifies the developer in writing thirty days in advance of such termination. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.110 Required findings.
     A community housing conversion may be conditionally approved if all of the findings required in Government Code Section 66427.1 are made in addition to the following findings of fact:

     A.    That all provisions of the Subdivision Map Act, and provisions of this chapter are met and the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety, and general welfare of the community.

     B.     That the proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan of the city of Lemon Grove.

     C.     The overall design and physical condition of the community housing conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, quality, and safety.

     D.    The applicant has not engaged in coercive action regarding the tenants after the submittal of the first application for city review through the date of approval. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.120 Appeals.
     Any decision of the development services director may be appealed to the city council. Appeals shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within fifteen days after the action being appealed. Fees for appeal applications by tenants within the property to be converted shall be borne by the project applicant. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.130 Fees for processing community housing conversions.
     Community housing conversion processing fees shall be in an amount established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

 

18.24.140 Severability.
     If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other chapter provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application, and to this end, the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 18.27 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
18.27.010 Statement of necessity.
     A.    The city council finds and determines that the sale and use of alcoholic beverages contributes to problems encountered by residents, businesses, property owners, visitors and workers of the city of Lemon Grove. Documented problems include: (1) debilitating and life-threatening medical conditions such as those related to the dysfunction of the heart and circulatory system, stroke and diseases of the liver; (2) social problems such as child and family neglect and abuse, public drunkenness, and lost productivity; (3) public safety issues relating to drunk driving and related automobile traffic and pedestrian accidents, violence and crime.

     B.     The city council finds and determines that, without the appropriate regulation, the sale, service and use of alcoholic beverages may adversely and seriously affect the peace, health, safety and welfare of residents of the community and may specifically affect the safety of children and of visitors to the city, may contribute to the deterioration of neighborhoods, cause devaluation of property, erode community values and lower the quality of life.

     C.     The city council finds that relatively high densities of alcohol outlets are associated with relatively higher rates of related medical disorders, relatively higher rates of social problems and alcohol-related traffic casualties. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.020 Purpose.
     A.    To deal with and ameliorate problems and adverse conditions associated with establishments which sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages by restricting the location of such uses in relation to one another, and their proximity to facilities primarily devoted to use by children and families and the general public, and through the denial of a conditional use permit or through the imposition of conditions on a case-by-case basis, thereby preventing undue concentration and undesirable community impact of such uses, and by the imposition of reasonable conditions upon the operation of all such uses both existing and in the future.

     B.     To implement the purposes, policies, and programs of the general plan. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.030 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases are specifically defined to apply to the regulations of this chapter. Where words are not defined here or elsewhere in this municipal code, their common meaning shall apply.

     A.    “Alcoholic beverage” means and includes alcohol, spirits, liquor, wine, beer, and every liquid or solid containing alcohol, spirits, wine, or beer and which contains one-half of one percent or more of alcohol by volume and which is fit for beverage purposes either alone or when diluted, mixed, or combined with other substances.

     B.     Alcoholic Beverage Sales, Incidental.

     1.     Alcoholic beverage sales in restaurants shall be considered incidental if all of the following conditions exist:

     a.     Alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises only;

     b.     The primary purpose of the establishment is sit-down dining with table service;

     c.     The restaurant contains a fully equipped kitchen, which is utilized each day of business operation for preparation of meals to be served to patrons;

     d.     Full food service is available in the restaurant for all hours that the facility, including the bar or cocktail lounge, is open;

     e.     Take-out food service, if any, is only incidental to the primary use, sit-down food service;

     f.      The restaurant offers no drive-up or drive-through service and does not have a take-out window;

     g.     A separate bar or cocktail lounge may be located on the premises;

     h.     No alcoholic beverage is served in conjunction with any form of adult entertainment in accordance with Chapter 18.28.

     2.     Alcoholic beverage sales in food stores other than convenience markets shall be considered incidental when the shelving or display area allocated to alcoholic beverages does not exceed more than ten percent of the total shelf and display area within the store.

     3.     Alcoholic beverage sales in drug stores with a floor area greater than ten thousand square feet, with or without the sale of household merchandise, beauty supplies, toiletries, and packaged food products, shall be considered incidental when the shelving or display area allocated to alcoholic beverages does not exceed six percent of the total shelf and display area within the store.

     4.     Brewpubs, wine bars, rectifiers, and alcoholic beverage manufacturers with accessory on- and off-sale alcoholic beverage sales, including, but not limited to, tasting rooms and off-sale alcoholic beverages that are manufactured on-site with catering permitted on-site shall be considered incidental provided performance standards in Section 17.24.080(E) are adhered to.

     5.     Accessory indoor music and outdoor consumption of alcoholic beverages within a private fenced area shall be considered incidental provided noise regulations within Section 9.24.080(B) are adhered to during the hours between seven p.m. to seven a.m.

     C.     “Brewpub” means a small primary or accessory beer manufacturer, which may include a restaurant, where the alcohol is produced exclusively at its own premises and sold for on- and/or off-site consumption. This operation allows the sale of other supplier’s alcohol for consumption on its own premises.

     D.    “Convenience markets” means, for purposes of this chapter, any store selling food and household merchandise to the public, which has a floor area less than ten thousand square feet.

     E.     “Establishment” means a place of business with its furnishings and staff which may be regarded as the smallest unit conveyable by sale, rent or lease.

     F.     “Notice and order” means the community development director’s written notice and order to a business or facility owner or operator which directs such owner or operator to comply with city regulations and the specific requirements of the conditional use permit or zoning clearance authorizing the operation of the business or facility which sells, serves or gives away alcoholic beverages.

     G.    “Off-sale liquor establishment” means any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or given away for consumption off the premises, including, but not limited to, any establishment which is applying for or has obtained a liquor license from the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, including types 20 and 21.

     H.    “On-sale liquor establishment” means any establishment wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for consumption on the premises, including, but not limited to, any establishment which is applying for or has obtained a California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control license types 41, 42, 47, 48, 51, 52 and 63.

     I.      “Rectifier” means to cut, blend, rectify, mix, flavor and color distilled spirits and wine upon which excise tax has been paid and, whether rectified by the licensee or another person, to package, label, export and sell the products to persons holding licenses authorizing the sale of distilled spirits.

     J.      “Tasting room” means an area used for accessory alcoholic beverage retail consumption on the premises where the alcoholic beverages are produced.

     K.    “Wine bar” means a small primary or accessory wine beverage manufacturer, which may include a restaurant, where the wine is produced exclusively at its own premises and sold for on- and/or off-site consumption. This operation allows the sale of other supplier’s alcohol for consumption on its own premises.

     L.     Substantial Change in Mode or Character of Operation. Any of the following actions or situations will constitute a “substantial change in mode or character of operation” for purposes of this chapter:

     1.     The establishment changes its type of retail liquor license within a license classification; or

     2.     The establishment ceases operation for a period of thirty-one days. The suspension of business during the diligent prosecution of building repairs or remodeling undertaken under the authority of a valid building permit shall not be considered a substantial change in the mode or character of operation if the repairs or remodeling do not change the nature of the licensed premises and do not increase the square footage of the area which constitutes the establishment;

     3.     Any addition exceeding ten percent of the existing floor area is made to the building or portion of a building occupied exclusively by a business which sells or serves alcoholic beverages and which would be subject to approval by conditional use permit, if being established as a new use;

     4.     Any modification, remodeling or renovation of an existing building, or portion thereof, occupied exclusively by a business or facility which sells or serves alcoholic beverages, when the value of such modification, remodeling, or renovation exceeds fifty percent of the replacement value of the subject premises as determined by the building official;

     5.     The establishment is found to be a public nuisance by the city council;

     6.     The California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control has held a formal hearing regarding accusations of violations, by the establishment, of ABC rules and has determined that such violations have occurred.

     M.    Timely Compliance.

     1.     For all violations involving the unauthorized enlargement or physical modification to the existing building, facility or outdoor service area, timely compliance means complete removal of the physical modifications which constitute the violation or submittal of detailed working drawings sufficient for an application for building permit and a complete application for modification of the conditional use permit or zoning clearance which authorizes the business or facility. Evidence of the complete removal of unauthorized work, or the working drawings and complete application shall be filed in the office of the development services department within fifteen calendar days following the receipt of the development services director’s notice and order by the owner, operator or employee-in-charge of the business or facility.

     2.     For all violations, other than those described in subsection L of this section, such as, but not limited to, the sale or display of unauthorized fortified wines, the display of unauthorized advertising signs, exceeding shelf area limitations; “timely compliance” means full compliance within twenty-four hours following receipt of the development services director’s notice and order by the owner, operator or employee-in-charge of the business or facility. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.040 General provisions.
     A.    Alcoholic Beverage Sales or Service, New and Substantial Changes. Except as otherwise stated herein, on and after the effective date of the ordinance creating this chapter, no place, facility or business wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served or given away for on-site or off-site consumption, shall be established or shall affect a “substantial change” in mode or character of operation as defined in Section 18.27.030(G) without first obtaining a conditional use permit, or modification of an existing conditional use permit, pursuant to Section 17.28.050 of the zoning ordinance. A zoning clearance shall be required if alcoholic beverage sales or services are “incidental” as defined in Section 18.27.030(B).

     B.     Alcoholic Beverage Sales or Service, Not Authorized by CUP or zoning clearance. Except for those places, businesses and facilities described in subsection A of this section as an establishment having a conditional use permit or zoning clearance and being in full or substantial compliance with current requirements, on and after the effective date of the ordinance creating this chapter, all existing places wherein alcoholic beverages are sold, served, or given away for on-site or off-site consumption shall be considered nonconforming uses. Elimination of nonconforming status may be achieved by filing the appropriate application, receiving a conditional use permit or zoning clearance as required by this chapter, and complying with conditions of approval which shall be limited to the minimum conditions of approval as set forth in Section 18.27.060(A) and (B). These requirements shall be enforced according to the provisions of subsection C of this section. For existing businesses selling alcoholic beverages, the requirements of this chapter relating to minimum separations between the existing business, similar establishments and other specific land uses shall be waived.

     C.     Alcoholic Beverage Sales or Service—Enforcement. The alcoholic beverage sales ordinance shall be enforced according to the provisions of Section 18.27.120 of the development code and Section 17.28.020 of the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.27.050 Findings.
     In addition to the findings required for the granting of conditional use permits by Section 17.28.050 of the zoning ordinance, the decision making authority shall consider the following:

     A.    Whether the proposed use will result in an undue concentration of establishments selling alcoholic beverages as defined by the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Department (ABC) or by city ordinance, resolution, or policy.

     B.     Whether the approval of the proposed use will violate the minimum requirements, set forth in this chapter, for distance separations between establishments which sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages; and separations between establishments which sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages and other specific land uses.

     C.     Whether the proposed use will be located in an area which, based on the most recent yearly compilation by the San Diego County sheriff’s department or other appropriate law enforcement agency, has experienced a greater than average number of reported crimes and arrests, including those reported as alcohol-related, as well as, criminal homicide, forcible rape, robbery, aggravated assault, burglary, larceny, theft, motor vehicle theft combined with all arrests for other crimes, felonies and misdemeanors, except traffic citations. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.27.060 Minimum conditions of approval.
     A.    Businesses or facilities providing alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption shall comply with the following minimum conditions of approval. However, the city council may impose such additional conditions and restrictions as found necessary or desirable to achieve the purposes of this chapter.

     1.     No alcoholic beverages shall be consumed on the premises under the control of the business owner or the property owner, excepting when alcoholic beverages are manufactured on the premises.

     2.     Adequate litter receptacles shall be provided.

     3.     All display of alcoholic beverages shall be located a minimum of five feet from the store entrance.

     4.     For establishments which sell or give away alcoholic beverages and also sell gasoline, no signs advertising alcoholic beverages may be visible from the exterior of the building. Except for liquor stores, the signage for which shall be governed by conditional use permit and the city sign ordinance, signage advertising alcoholic beverages for all other establishments selling alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall be limited to no more than fifty percent of the temporary window display permitted by the sign ordinance (twelve and one-half percent of total window area). Not more than two neon signs which hang on the inside of a window may be permitted subject to, and deducted from, the area limitations established in this subsection. No reference to liquor, any alcoholic beverage or product, or alcoholic beverage brand name may be included in any permanent signage for any establishment selling alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption other than that displayed by liquor stores or alcoholic beverage manufacturers when they are on the premises.

     5.     No wine shall be displayed, sold or given away in containers of less than seven hundred ml, except multipack containers of wine and wine coolers containing no more than fifteen percent alcohol by volume.

     6.     No distilled spirits shall be displayed, sold or given away in containers of less than two hundred fifty ml, except two hundred ml pre-mixed cocktails.

     7.     The display, sale or distribution of fifty ml “airport bottles” and three hundred seventy-five ml “hip flask” containers is prohibited.

     8.     No single serve beer, ale or malt liquor shall be offered for sale in a container with a volume equal to or greater than thirty-two ounces, excepting off-sale alcoholic beverages from manufacturers on the premises. This restriction is not intended to prohibit the sale of such beverages in kegs or other types of containers, with a volume of two or more gallons, which are clearly designed to dispense multiple servings.

     9.     No wine with an alcoholic content greater than fifteen percent by volume shall be displayed, sold or given away unless the following conditions are met:

     a.     The alcohol content is solely the result of the natural fermentation process; or

     b.     If the alcohol content resulting from natural fermentation has been increased by the addition of wine spirits, brandy, or other alcohol, the wine must be sealed and capped by cork closure and aged for two or more years.

     10.   All litter shall be removed from the exterior areas around the building as required and no less frequently than once each day this business is open.

     11.   The operation of the business shall comply fully with all the rules, regulations and orders of the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit or zoning clearance.

     12.   The business shall comply with all of the conditions of the conditional use permit or zoning clearance which authorizes its operation.

     13.   For all businesses other than liquor stores, brewpubs, wine bars, rectifiers and manufacturing, warehouse, and distribution facilities, the display, sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be accessory to other permitted activities. Except where Section 18.27.030(B)(3) requires a greater limitation, shelving or other display area allocated to the display of alcoholic beverages shall not exceed ten percent of the total shelf or display area within the premises.

     14.   No sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be made from a drive-up or walk-up window.

     15.   No display, sale or distribution of beer or wine, wine coolers or similar alcoholic beverages shall be made from an ice tub or similar container.

     16.   Employees engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages shall be at least twenty-one years old, or at least one salesperson twenty-one years old or older must be on the premises during all times when alcoholic beverages are sold.

     17.   Businesses engaged in the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption shall maintain a minimum separation of five hundred feet from any other business required to have a conditional use permit for the sale of alcoholic beverages. This subdivision shall not apply to incidental alcoholic beverage sales and warehouses, and distribution facilities.

     B.     Businesses providing the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption shall comply with the following minimum conditions of approval. However, the city council may impose such additional conditions and restrictions as are found necessary or desirable to achieve the purposes of this chapter.

     1.     Except within city-approved outdoor places which are adequately separated from direct public access via a fence or other means, no alcoholic beverages shall be consumed outside of an enclosed building.

     2.     For restaurants, bars, taverns and cocktail lounges, signs advertising alcoholic beverages shall be limited to no more than fifty percent of the temporary window display permitted by the sign ordinance (twelve and one-half percent of total window area). Not more than two neon signs which hang on the inside of a window may be permitted subject to, and deducted from, the area limitations established in this subsection.

     3.     Except for manufacturers, brewpubs, wine bars and rectifiers, no reference to liquor, any alcoholic beverage or product, or alcoholic beverage brand name may be included in any permanent signage for any establishment selling alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption other than that displayed by bars, taverns and cocktail lounges.

     No wine with an alcoholic content greater than fifteen percent by volume shall be displayed, sold or served unless the following conditions are met:

     a.     The alcohol content is solely the result of the natural fermentation process; or

     b.     If the alcohol content resulting from natural fermentation has been increased by the addition of wine spirits, brandy, or other alcohol, the wine must be sealed and capped by cork closure and aged for two or more years.

     4.     All litter shall be removed from the exterior of the building as required and no less frequently than once each day the business is open.

     5.     The operation of the business or facility shall comply fully with all the rules, regulations and orders of the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. Failure to comply with these requirements shall constitute grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit or zoning clearance.

     6.     For all businesses and other facilities engaged in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption other than bars and taverns, the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be incidental and accessory to other permitted activities.

     7.     Employees engaged in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption shall be at least twenty-one years old.

     8.     Except for incidental alcoholic beverage sales businesses, businesses engaged in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption shall maintain a minimum separation of one thousand feet from another business selling or serving alcoholic beverages for on-site consumption and a minimum of five hundred feet from any other business requiring a conditional use permit for the on-site or off-site sale or service of alcoholic beverages; any church or other place of worship; any public or private preschool, elementary school or high school; any public park or playground; any hospital, clinic, or other health care facility; any residential unit other than a caretaker’s dwelling on a commercial or industrial property; and any property zoned for residential use. Except that existing businesses that serve alcohol and that were located closer than five hundred feet or one thousand feet from another business serving alcohol prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be allowed to expand their business as long as the expansion does not violate the distance requirements from any of the designated sensitive uses identified in this section above. Based upon the particular circumstances involved, the city council shall determine the appropriate separation between private clubs and lodges operated by recognized national, state or regional religious or fraternal order and appropriate distances between such clubs and lodges and other types of land use. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.070 Measurement of distance.
     A.    Types of Uses.

     1.     “Regulated uses” are those businesses and facilities which sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages and which have been identified in Sections 18.27.060(A)(16) and 18.27.060(B)(8).

     2.     “Protected uses” are churches or other places of worship; any public or private preschool, elementary school or high school; any park or playground; any hospital, clinic, or other health care facility; any residential unit other than a caretaker’s dwelling on a commercial or industrial property; and any property zoned for residential use.

     B.     Distance Computation.

     1.     When a physical separation is required between two regulated uses, the distance of such separation is measured along a straight line extending between the closest exterior structural walls of each use.

     2.     When a physical separation is required between a regulated use and a protected use, the distance of such separation is measured along a straight line extending between the closest exterior structural wall of the regulated use and the closest property line of the protected use. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.080 Notification to alcoholic beverage control department.
     A.    Within five days following the city’s approval of a conditional use permit or zoning clearance for a business proposing to sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages, the city will send a written notice of such approval to the local office of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Department.

     1.     The notice shall include a copy of the resolution or notice of approval and will state that city approval of the business or other facility proposing to sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages has been granted subject to compliance, by the business or facility, with certain specific conditions.

     2.     The notice shall indicate the final date for the filing of any appeals from the decision or conditions of approval.

     3.     The notice shall state clearly in its heading and text that formal city approval of the business or facility which proposes to sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages will be withheld until the business has complied with all appropriate conditions of approval.

     B.     Within three working days of the city’s determination that a business proposing to sell alcoholic beverages has fully complied with all appropriate conditions of approval of a conditional use permit or zoning clearance, a notice regarding such full compliance will be sent to the local ABC office. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.090 Notification regarding violations.
     Each time the development services director determines that a business or other facility which sells, serves or gives away alcoholic beverages has violated any provision or condition of its conditional use permit, zoning clearance, other city law or regulation, or any requirement of the state Alcoholic Beverage Control Department, it shall issue a written notice and order to the owner of the business or facility. The notice and order shall include the following:

     A.    A requirement that the business owner or facility operator correct all violations immediately.

     B.     A statement that a violation of the alcoholic beverage sales ordinance constitutes a misdemeanor subject to the general penalty provisions of this code, that conviction of a misdemeanor shall be punishable by fine or imprisonment or both such fine and imprisonment, and that each day a violation is committed or continued constitutes a separate offense.

     C.     A statement that, in addition to the penalties stated in Section 18.27.080, failure to comply in a timely manner or repeated violations may result in a revocation of the conditional use permit or zoning clearance which authorizes the maintenance of an establishment selling, serving or giving away alcoholic beverages.

     D.    A notification that a written report of such violation or violations has been transmitted to both the owner of the property where the business or facility is being conducted or operated and to the local office of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.100 Justification for revocation of approvals.
     Any business establishment which has been authorized by the city to sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages shall comply fully with all city zoning and sign regulations, with all conditions attached to the approval of its conditional use permit or zoning clearance, and with all rules, regulations and orders of the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Department. Failure to comply with any of these requirements shall constitute grounds for revocation of a conditional use permit or zoning clearance. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

 

18.27.110 Hearing regarding alleged violations.
     If a business or other facility which sells, serves or gives away alcoholic beverages has been declared a public nuisance; if it has been found, by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, to be in violation of ABC rules; if its owner or operator fails to comply or refuses to comply with a notice and order to correct a violation in a timely manner; or if the development services director, on three separate occasions within any twelve-month period has issued a written notice and order to the owner of said business or operator of the facility, pursuant to Section 18.27.080, requiring the correction of specific violations of its conditional use permit or zoning clearance, the city council will schedule a public hearing, consistent with the requirements of Section 17.28.020 of the zoning ordinance to consider these matters. Following such public hearing, the city council may make any findings which it believes to be supported by the facts presented in the hearing, including the following:

     A.    It may find that the alleged violation(s) did not occur, were beyond the control of the business owner or facility operator, or were insignificant.

     B.     It may find that the alleged violation(s) did occur, that they were the responsibility of the business owner or facility operator, and were significant. As part of its determination regarding the appropriate action to be taken, the city council may consider whether the violations were corrected immediately after being brought to the owner’s or facility operator’s attention, whether such violations constitute a minor or major violation of this chapter and its purpose and intent, and whether such violations appear to constitute a pattern of disregard for the city’s laws and the standards of the community. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017; Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

 

18.27.120 City actions in response to violations.
     If, after a public hearing and full examination of the evidence regarding alleged violations of the city’s regulations governing the sale, service or distribution of alcoholic beverages, the city council makes findings similar to those stated in Section 18.27.110(A) it may choose to take no action against the owner of the subject business or operator of the subject facility. However, if the evidence submitted in the public hearing convinces the city council that a significant violation has occurred, it may take one or more of the following actions:

     A.    Imposition of additional conditions governing the physical design of the building or property where the business is conducted or the facility is operated.

     B.     Attachment of additional conditions or limitations affecting the operations of the business or facility.

     C.     The city council may determine that the business or facility, and its manner of operation, constitutes a serious threat to the preservation of the public health, safety and welfare and may take one or both of the following actions:

     1.     It may revoke the conditional use permit or zoning clearance which authorizes the business or facility to sell, serve or give away alcoholic beverages.

     2.     It may recommend that the city council declare that the business or facility is a public nuisance subject to abatement or enjoinment in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 446 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 18.28 ADULT ENTERTAINMENT
18.28.010 Purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult entertainment establishments, as defined in this chapter, within the city of Lemon Grove. These regulations are intended to prevent problems of blight and deterioration which accompany and are brought about by the concentration of adult entertainment establishments.

 

18.28.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases are specifically defined to apply to the regulations of this chapter. Where words are not defined here or elsewhere in the municipal code, their common meanings shall apply.

     A.    “Adult bookstore” means an establishment that devotes more than fifteen percent of the total floor area utilized for the display of books and periodicals to the display and sale of the following:

     1.     Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, tapes, records, or other forms of visual or audio representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specific sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or

     2.     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.

     An adult bookstore does not include an establishment that sells books or periodicals as an incidental or accessory part of its principal stock-in-trade and does not devote more than fifteen percent of the total floor area of the establishment to the sale of books and periodicals.

     B.     “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, theater, restaurant or similar establishment which regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or by exposure of specified anatomical areas and/or which regularly features films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

     C.     “Adult drive-in theater” means an open lot or part thereof, with appurtenant facilities, devoted primarily to the presentation of motion pictures, films, theatrical productions and other forms of visual productions, for any form of consideration, to persons in motor vehicles or on outdoor seats, and presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

     D.    “Adult hotel or motel” means a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations for any form of consideration which provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmission, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

     E.     “Adult mini-motion picture theater” means an establishment, with a capacity of more than five but less than fifty persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons.

     F.     “Adult model studio” means any establishment open to the public where, for any form of consideration or gratuity, figure models who display specified anatomical areas are provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by persons, other than the proprietor, paying such consideration or gratuity. This provision shall not apply to any school of art which is operated by an individual, firm, association, partnership, corporation or institution which meets the requirements established in the Education Code of the state of California for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma.

     G.    “Adult motion picture arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     H.    “Adult motion picture theater” means an establishment, with a capacity of fifty or more persons, where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are shown, and in which a substantial portion of the total presentation time is devoted to the showing of material which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area for observation by patrons.

     I.      “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment, either indoor or outdoor in nature, which, for any form of consideration, regularly features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area for observation by patrons.

     J.      Anatomical areas. See “Specified anatomical areas” (Section 18.28.030(A)).

     K.    “Body painting studio” means any establishment or business which provides the services of applying paint or other substances, whether transparent or nontransparent to or on the human body when such body is wholly or partially nude in terms of specified anatomical areas.

     L.     Bookstore. See “Adult bookstore” and “General bookstore.”

     M.    Cabaret. See “Adult cabaret.”

     N.    “Church” means an institution which people regularly attend to participate in or hold religious services, meetings and other activities. The term “church” shall not carry a secular connotation, and shall include buildings in which the religious services of any denomination are held.

     O.    Drive-In Theater. See “Adult drive-in theater.”

     P.     “General bookstore” means an establishment engaged in the buying, selling and/or trading of new and/or used books, manuscripts and periodicals of general interest. A general bookstore does not include an establishment that is encompassed by the definition of adult bookstore.

     Q.    “General motion picture theater” means a building or part of a building intended to be used for the specific purposes of presenting entertainment as defined herein, or displaying motion pictures, slides, or closed circuit television pictures before an individual or assemblage of persons, whether such assemblage be of a public, restricted or private nature, except a home or private dwelling; where no fee, by way of an admission charge, is charged; provided, however, that any such presentations are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the plot or story line. A general motion picture theater does not include any establishment that is defined by adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult motion picture arcade, or adult drive-in theater.

     R.     “Legitimate or live theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar establishment which, for any fee or consideration, regularly features live performances which are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas in that any such depiction or description is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance.

     S.     “Massage parlor” means an establishment where, for any form of consideration, massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, electric or magnetic treatment, or similar treatment or manipulation of the human body is administered, unless such treatment or manipulation is administered by a medical practitioner, chiropractor, acupuncturist, physical therapist or similar professional person licensed by the state of California. This definition does not include an athletic club, health club, school, gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or accessory service.

     T.     Motion Picture Theater. See “General motion picture theater.”

     U.    Parlor. See “Massage parlor.”

     V.    “Public playground/park/recreational area” means an area to which the public and particularly children, come to participate in athletic or recreational activities whether or not such activities are supervised or organized. Such areas include, but are not limited to, publicly owned and maintained parks, community gardens, athletic fields, playgrounds, and picnic areas.

     W.    Rap parlor. See “Massage parlor.”

     X.    “School” means an institution of learning for minors, whether public or private, which offers instruction in those courses of study required by the California Education Code or which is maintained pursuant to standards set by the State Board of Education. This definition includes a nursery school, kindergarten, elementary school, junior high school, senior high school, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but it does not include a vocational or professional institution or an institution of higher education, including a community or junior college, college or university.

     Y.    “Sexual encounter establishment” means an establishment, other than a hotel, motel or similar establishment offering public accommodations, which, for any form of consideration, provides a place where two or persons may congregate, associate or consort in connection with specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified anatomical areas. This definition does not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist or similar professional person licensed by the state of California engages in sexual therapy. For the purposes of these regulations, sexual encounter establishment shall include massage or rap parlor or other similar establishments.

     Z.     Sexual activities. See “Specified sexual activities” (Section 18.28.030(B)). (Ord. 422, 2014)

 

18.28.030 Special phrases.
     The following expressions shall be interpreted according to the specific and detailed meanings provided.

     A.    “Specified anatomical areas” means:

     1.     Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the aureole; or

     2.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

     B.     “Specified sexual activities” means:

     1.     The fondling or other touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breasts; or

     2.     Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; or

     3.     Masturbation, actual or simulated; or

     4.     Excretory function as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (B)(1) through (3) of this section.

     C.     “Establishing an adult entertainment establishment” means:

     1.     The opening or commencement of any such establishment as a new establishment; or

     2.     The conversion of an existing establishment, whether or not an adult entertainment establishment, to any of the adult entertainment establishments defined herein; or

     3.     The addition of any of the adult entertainment establishments defined herein to any other existing adult entertainment establishment; or

     4.     The relocation of any such establishment.

     D.    “Transfer of ownership or control” means:

     1.     The sale, lease or sublease of such establishment; or

     2.     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in such establishment, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

     3.     The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of such establishment, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing such ownership or control.

 

18.28.040 Activities regulated.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following activities as defined in this chapter shall be deemed adult entertainment: adult arcade; adult bookstore; adult cabaret; adult drive-in theater; adult mini-motion picture theater; adult model studio; adult motel; adult motion picture theater; adult theater; body painting studio; massage parlor; sexual encounter establishment; plus any other business which involves specified sexual activities or the display of specified anatomical areas.

 

18.28.050 Permitted locations.
     A.    Zone. Adult entertainment establishments which are enumerated in Section 18.28.040 may be established only within the general commercial zone.

     B.     Site. No adult entertainment establishment shall be permitted within one thousand feet of another such business, within five hundred feet of any area zoned for residential use, or within six hundred feet of any church, school, public playground, park or recreational area.

 

18.28.060 Measure of distance.
     Distance without regard to intervening structures, shall be:

     A.    A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of any two adult entertainment establishments.

     B.     A straight line measured from the closest exterior structural wall of the adult entertainment establishment to the closest property line of a church, school, public playground, park, recreational area, or residential zone.

 

18.28.070 Permit.
     No person shall cause or permit the establishment, substantial enlargement or transfer of ownership or control of any adult entertainment establishment without first obtaining an administrative permit therefor pursuant to the administrative permit procedure from the chief of police for the city of Lemon Grove or other person or agency designated by the Lemon Grove city council as the administering agency. An application for such permit may be made where authorized by the applicable use regulations and shall be acted upon in accordance with the standards for location as specified in Section 18.28.050.

 

18.28.080 Development and maintenance standards.
     The premises of all adult entertainment businesses hereafter commenced shall, in addition to compliance with all other applicable requirements of the city of Lemon Grove zoning ordinance, be required to comply with the following specific requirements.

     A.    Signs. Except for theater marquee signs, changeable copy signs, temporary signs and small permanent signs are not permitted. All signs shall be subject to review and approval by the planning commission.

     B.     Exterior Painting. Buildings and structures shall not be painted or surfaced with garish colors or textures or any design that would simulate a sign or advertising message.

     C.     Advertisements, displays of merchandise, signs, or any other exhibit depicting adult entertainment activities placed within the interior of buildings or premises shall be arranged or screened to prevent public viewing from outside such buildings or premises.

     D.    No outdoor loudspeakers or other outdoor sound equipment advertising or directing attention to an adult entertainment use is allowed.

     E.     Upon order of the city manager, graffiti appearing on any exterior surface of a building or premises, which graffiti is in public view, shall be removed and the surface shall be restored within seventy-two hours of notification to the owner or person in charge of the premises.

 

18.28.090 Exceptions.
     A.    A person possessing ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment which does not comply with the standards for location pursuant to Section 18.28.050 on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall be permitted to transfer such ownership or control before January 1, 1983. The person acquiring such ownership or control, however, shall be required to discontinue the adult entertainment business within five years from the date of the transfer of ownership or control if such establishment does not comply with Section 18.28.050, Permitted locations.

     B.     A person possessing ownership or control of an adult entertainment establishment which meets the standards for location as specified in Section 18.28.050, shall be subject to the provisions of subsection A of this section when a church, school, public playground, park or recreation area, as defined by this chapter is established within six hundred feet of such adult entertainment establishment. Two years shall be permitted to utilize the transfer provisions of subsection A of this section, beginning on the date on which the church, school, public playground, park or recreational area begins operation.

Chapter 18.32 ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
18.32.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to set forth guidelines, principles and procedures for insuring that adequate environmental review is provided for all development proposals in the city of Lemon Grove.

 

18.32.020 Compliance with state guidelines.
     These procedures are intended to be consistent with and to implement the most current edition of the Guidelines for Implementation of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) of 1970, as amended, adopted by the State Resources Agency. The state guidelines are incorporated in this chapter, and made a part hereof as if set forth in full. If there is any inconsistency between this chapter and those guidelines, the state guidelines shall rule. Detailed requirements of the state law and guidelines concerning processing, timing, content and other aspects of project environmental review shall apply.

 

18.32.030 Project status determination.
     Upon the submission of a project or a proposal for an action, the planning director shall make a determination as to the status of the application, according to the following classifications:

     A.    The proposal is not a project under CEQA.

     B.     The proposal is ministerial by nature and, therefore, is not subject to further environmental review.

     C.     The proposal is categorically exempt and, therefore, is not subject to further review.

     D.    The proposal is not categorically exempt, and might have a significant impact on the environment and is subject to further review.

 

18.32.040 Initial study.
     A.    A proposed project or action which is classified according to Section 18.32.030(D) shall undergo an initial study, prepared by the planning department in the form as prescribed by the planning director.

     B.     The initial study will evaluate each subject area on which the proposal might have an environmental effect, and will state one of the following determinations concerning the proposed action:

     1.     There will be no significant adverse environmental effect and a negative declaration may be filed; or

     2.     There may be an adverse environmental effect, necessitating preparation of an environmental impact report (EIR).

     C.     In event that a proposed action is classified according to subsection (B)(2) of this section, the initial study may also suggest modifications to the proposal which, if incorporated, may reduce the level of environmental reporting required.

 

18.32.050 Negative declaration.
     A.    In the event that a proposed action is classified according to Section 18.32.040(B)(1), then the planning director shall release a statement that, although the proposal under consideration is not otherwise exempt, the initial study has established that the proposed action as designed or applied will not have a significant effect on the environment.

     B.     In cases where project modification as suggested by the initial study would make the identified environmental effect insignificant, then a provisional negative declaration may be issued based upon project modification as required to so reduce the environmental effects.

18.32.060 Draft environmental impact report (draft EIR).
     A.    If, on the basis of the initial study and other analysis, it is determined that the proposal may result in a significant adverse effect on the environment, or that the proposed action is expected to generate public controversy, then a draft environmental impact report shall be prepared to analyze the significant potential impacts.

     B.     The draft EIR shall be prepared in the form prescribed by the planning director, and shall contain data and analyses in sufficient detail to enable the planning commission and/or city council to evaluate the environmental consequences of project approval.

     C.     All EIRs prepared for projects proposed in the city of Lemon Grove shall be prepared by city staff or environmental consultants under contract to the city. In either case, the planning director shall determine the cost of preparing such a report, and the applicant shall deposit with the city adequate funds prior to any work being commenced thereon.

 

18.32.070 Environmental impact report review.
     A.    Following submission of the draft EIR to the city, a minimum thirty-day public review period shall commence prior to public hearing before the planning commission for consideration of the project.

     B.     Following completion of the public review period, during which time comments may be submitted on the draft EIR by citizens, city officials or other public or private agencies, responses to any comments received shall be prepared, which shall address the concerns expressed regarding the project and the draft EIR, and which may involve additional analysis. The comments and their responses shall be compiled as an addendum to the draft EIR, and together with other required materials, will comprise the final EIR.

     C.     The planning commission or city council may refer a draft EIR back to the planning director for preparation of a supplementary report in any case in which it is deemed to be necessary in order to consider the project. In cases where a proposal has changed substantially since the time of initial review, a supplementary EIR might be required.

 

18.32.080 Environmental impact report certification.
     Following submission of the final EIR, a public hearing shall be held by the planning commission or city council, whichever has jurisdiction over the proposed project. If all conditions and requirements concerning preparation and consideration of the EIR have been satisfied, then the final EIR shall be certified as complete and adequate. No proposed project for which an EIR has been judged to be necessary shall be approved until that EIR has been certified.

 

18.32.090 Fees.
     In addition to the costs of preparing an environmental impact report, the city may assess the applicant additional fees for filing and processing activities and for any special studies which might be necessary. Such fees shall be as established by resolution of the city council.

 

18.32.100 Appeals.
     All determinations, rulings, and other actions of the planning director or planning commission may be appealed, in accordance with the provisions of Section 17.28.020. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 18.36 PARK LANDS DEDICATION
18.36.010 Citation.
     This chapter shall be known and cited as the “parks lands dedication ordinance.”

 

18.36.020 Purpose.
     As a condition of approval of any residential development, this chapter requires that the applicants dedicate land, pay fees in lieu thereof, or do a combination of both, for the purpose of providing park or recreational facilities to serve future residents of such development.

 

18.36.030 Definitions.
     Words used in this chapter that are not specifically defined in this section shall have the same meaning as may be given to them in Chapter 16.08, or Chapter 17.04, or elsewhere in the municipal code.

     “Development” means a subdivision, mobilehome park, or construction or installation of a dwelling; not to include subdivisions created for industrial or commercial purposes.

     “Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.

     “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended as separate living quarters, with private sanitary and kitchen facilities, for the exclusive use of one household.

     “Family” means one or more individuals occupying a dwelling unit and living as a single household. The term “family” shall not be construed to include a fraternity, sorority, club, or other group of persons occupying a hotel, boarding house, or institution of any kind.

 

18.36.040 Filing procedure.
     At the time of filing a tentative subdivision map or other application for development approval, the applicant shall, as a part of such filing, indicate whether the applicant prefers to dedicate land for park or recreation purposes, or to pay a fee in lieu thereof, or do a combination of these. If the applicant prefers to dedicate land, the applicant shall specify the land proposed to be dedicated. In order to facilitate decisions regarding dedication of land, the developer shall furnish a tabulation showing the number of dwelling units proposed to be constructed in each portion of the development. The tabulation may be waived by the planning director if, in his or her judgment, the information is not necessary.

 

18.36.050 Land dedication calculation.
     The amount of land to be dedicated or in lieu fee to be paid shall be based upon a schedule as adopted by resolution of the city council.

 

18.36.060 Dedication versus fee determination.
     A.    For developments containing more than fifty parcels or dwelling units, whichever is larger, the planning commission or, upon appeal, the city council, shall determine whether to require a combination of both, and in making such determination, shall consider the following factors:

     1.     Conformity of lands offered for dedication with the recreation element of the Lemon Grove general plan;

     2.     The topography, soils, soil stability, drainage, access, location and general utility of land in the development available for dedication;

     3.     The size and shape of the development and land available for dedication;

     4.     The amount, usability and location of publicly owned property available for combination with dedicated lands in the formation of local park and recreation facilities;

     5.     The recreation facilities to be privately owned and maintained by future residents of the development.

     B.     For developments containing fifty or fewer parcels or dwelling units, whichever is larger, only the payment of fees shall be required, unless the applicant offers to dedicate land in lieu of paying the fees, in which event the planning commission, or, on appeal, the city council, may elect to accept the land or require the payment of fees or a combination of both, and in making such election, shall consider the factors enumerated in subsection A of this section.

 

18.36.070 Timing of dedication or payment.
     A.    If the development in question is a subdivision and land is to be dedicated, approval of the tentative map shall be subject to the condition that the land be offered for dedication prior to approval of the final map.

     B.     If the development in question is a subdivision and fees alone are to be paid, or fees are to be paid in combination with the dedication of land, approval of the tentative map shall be subject to the condition that the subdivider shall, prior to approval of the final map, either deposit the fees with the city clerk or execute a secured agreement guaranteeing payment of the fees prior to the issuance of any building permit, or prior to the date upon which all subdivision improvements are to be completed, whichever occurs first.

     C.     If the development in question is other than a subdivision, the land shall be offered for dedication or the fee in lieu thereof deposited with the office of building inspection prior to the issuance of any building permit or other permit for development under the jurisdiction of that office, or a written statement shall be presented from the planning director certifying that the requirements of this chapter have otherwise been satisfied with respect to the development for which permits are sought.

 

18.36.080 Exceptions.
     A.    In the event that subsequent development occurs with respect to property for which fees have been paid or land dedicated, additional fees for dedication shall be required only for additional lots or dwellings units which were not included in computing the prior fee or dedication requirement.

     B.     The requirements of this chapter shall not apply to the replacement on the same parcel by the owner of a dwelling or dwellings destroyed by fire or other calamity, provided that the application for a building permit to replace such dwelling is filed with the office of building inspection within six months after destruction of the dwelling.

 

18.36.090 Refunds.
     Any fee paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter may be refunded or partially refunded under either of the following circumstances:

     A.    Upon written application for refund following the withdrawal of the application for approval of the development, provided that, for subdivision such withdrawal must occur prior to recordation of the final map and for all other developments, such withdrawal must occur prior to the commencement of actual construction.

     B.     In the event that an applicant for building permits deposits the full amount of the fees required by this chapter to obtain building permits to construct dwellings within a planned residential development or other subdivision, and upon written request of the applicant, the planning director subsequently determines, pursuant to Section 18.36.060, to allow credit to the applicant for private parks, or the planning commission subsequently selects, pursuant to Section 18.36.060, to accept land in lieu of fees, the office of building inspection shall refund to the applicant the dollar amount, not to exceed the amount originally deposited, specified in a verification copy of the action taken by the planning director or planning commission or, on appeal, the city council authorizing such credit or accepting such land.

 

18.36.100 Credit for private parks.
     Where private area for park and recreational purposes is provided in a development and such area is to be privately owned and maintained by the future owner(s) of the development, such area may be credited against up to fifty percent of the requirement of land dedication or fee payment, if the planning director determines that it is in the public interest to do so and that all of the following standards either have been, or will be, met prior to approval of the final subdivision map:

     A.    Yards, court areas, setbacks, and other open areas, required to be maintained by the zoning and building ordinances and other regulations, shall not be included in the computation of such private areas;

     B.     Evidence is provided that the private ownership and maintenance of the area will be adequately provided for by recorded written agreement, covenants or restrictions;

     C.     The use of the private area is restricted for park and recreational purposes by an open space easement or other instrument approved by the city attorney;

     D.    The proposed private area is reasonably adaptable for use for park or recreational purposes, taking into consideration such factors as size, shape, topography, geology, access, and location;

     E.     The facilities proposed meet the following requirements:

     1.     They are in substantial accordance with the provisions of the recreation element of the general plan,

     2.     They are appropriate to the recreation needs of the future residents of the development,

     3.     They will substitute for the park lands otherwise required to be dedicated in meeting the recreational needs of the residents.

 

18.36.110 Credit for public parks.
     In the event that an applicant has dedicated a park to the public to serve a subdivision, the planning commission, or on appeal, the city council may, pursuant to Sections 18.36.050 and 18.36.060, allow a credit therefor against up to one hundred percent of the requirement for land dedication or fee payment required by this chapter for building permits to construct dwellings on the subdivision lots served by the dedicated public park. Credit may also be granted against fees required for such building permits for the value of improvements to such park installed or constructed by the applicant, provided that such credit shall not exceed the value of improvements normally authorized by the city for similar parks.

 

18.36.120 Limitations on use.
     The land, fees or combination thereof required for development approval pursuant to this chapter are to be used only for the purpose of providing park or recreation facilities which are in accordance with the principles and standards contained in the recreation element of the general plan, and which will serve residents of the local neighborhood which includes the development from which the fees were derived.

 

18.36.130 Commencement of park development.
     Development of park or recreational facilities for which land has been dedicated or for which fees have been paid in lieu thereof will begin when the city council determines that enough resources are available to conduct a sufficient proportion of the improvements needed to make the facilities usable and safe.

18.36.140 Transfer of lands or funds.
     The city may transfer land or funds acquired pursuant to this chapter to another governmental agency only on condition that such land or funds shall be used in the manner prescribed by this chapter.

 

18.36.150 Regulations.
     The city council may, from time to time, approve such regulations as it deems necessary to implement the provisions of this chapter.

 

18.36.160 Appeal.
     An appeal from a decision of the office of building inspection or other administrative official in the administration or enforcement of this chapter may be taken in the manner prescribed by Section 17.28.020. An appeal from a decision of the planning commission in the administration or enforcement of this chapter may be taken in the manner prescribed in Chapter 16.20 if the subject development is a subdivision, or in the manner prescribed for variances in the zoning ordinance if the development is other than a subdivision. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 18.37 SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATION
18.37.010 Citation.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “school facilities dedication and fee ordinance.”

 

18.37.020 Authority.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code.

 

18.37.030 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to implement the schools facilities dedication and fees legislation in the city of Lemon Grove and to provide authority whereby the city, the Lemon Grove School District, and applicants for land development approvals may undertake such reasonable steps as are necessary to provide interim classroom facilities as defined herein to alleviate school overcrowding.

 

18.37.040 Operative date of chapter.
     This chapter shall become operative thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

 

18.37.050 Definitions.
     “Decision-making body” means the city council, planning commission or the community development director.

     “Dwelling” means a building, or portion thereof, designed for or occupied exclusively for residential purposes, but not including hotels, motels, boarding or lodging houses.

     “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended as separate living quarters, with private sanitary and kitchen facilities, for the exclusive use of one household.

     “Household” means one or more individuals living together in a single dwelling unit, with common access to and common use of all living and kitchen areas and facilities within the dwelling unit.

     “Interim classroom facilities” means the following as defined in Government Code Section 65980:

     1.     Temporary classrooms not constructed with permanent foundation and defined as a structure containing one or more rooms, each of which is designed, intended, and equipped for use as a place for formal instruction of pupils by a teacher in a school;

     2.     Temporary classroom toilet facilities not constructed with permanent foundations;

     3.     Reasonable site preparation and installation of temporary classrooms.

     “Residential development” means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobilehomes, of one or more units or a subdivision of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units.

 

18.37.060 Exemptions.
     A residential development shall be exempt from the requirements of this section when it consists of any of the following:

     A.    Any modification or remodel of an existing legally established dwelling unit where no additional dwelling units are created;

     B.     A condominium project converting an existing apartment building into a condominium where no new dwelling units are created;

     C.     Any rebuilding of a legally established dwelling unit destroyed or damaged by fire, flood, explosion, act of God, or other accident or catastrophe;

     D.    Any rebuilding of a historical building recognized, acknowledged, and designated as such by the city;

     E.     Development comprised of one or more dwelling units from which children are specifically and permanently excluded by lawful means.

     F.     A development comprised of one or more dwelling units from which children are currently excluded by lawful means and which is bound by a covenant, running with the land, requiring the payment of school facility fees in effect at the time of conversion of the development to any use which permits residential occupancy by children.

 

18.37.070 General plan.
     The city of Lemon Grove general plan provides for the location of public schools. Interim school facilities to be constructed from fees paid or land required to be dedicated by this chapter, or both, shall be consistent with the city’s general plan.

 

18.37.080 Restriction on approval of residential development/city council findings.
     No decision-making body shall approve an application for a residential development unless it makes one of the following findings:

     A.    That action will be taken pursuant to this chapter to provide dedications of land and/or fees to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within the Lemon Grove School District, or

     B.     That the city council has found that there are specific overriding fiscal, economic, social, or environmental factors which in its judgment would benefit the city, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter.

 

18.37.090 Filing application for residential development.
     At the time of filing an application for approval of a residential development of fifty parcels or more, the applicant may indicate whether he or she would prefer to dedicate land for school facilities in a manner consistent with the city’s general plan or whether he or she would prefer to pay a fee in lieu thereof, or directly provide interim facilities, or do a combination of these. If the applicant prefers to dedicate land, he or she shall suggest the specific property.

 

18.37.100 Notification to school district.
     Upon receipt of an application for a residential development, the community development director shall notify the Lemon Grove School District. With the exception of applications for building permits, such notification shall be made no later than twenty days prior to consideration of the application by the decision-making body.

 

18.37.110 School district response to notification.
     Upon receipt of notification required by Section 18.37.100, the governing board of the Lemon Grove School District shall determine whether to request a dedication of land within the development, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both. The school district shall then transmit the determination to the community development director for submission to the appropriate decision-making body for concurrence. If the decision-making body concurs in such determination, it may, at the time of its consideration of a residential development application, impose such requirements.

 

18.37.120 Dedication versus fee determination.
     A.    For developments containing more than fifty parcels, the decision-making body shall determine whether to require dedication of land or payment of fees or a combination of both to mitigate conditions of school overcrowding, and in making such determination, shall consider the following factors:

     1.     The recommendation of the governing board of the Lemon Grove School District;

     2.     Whether any lands offered for dedication will be consistent with the general plan;

     3.     Whether the lands offered for dedication meet the criteria established in Education Code Section 39000, et seq.;

     4.     The topography, soils, soil stability, drainage access, location and general utility of land in the development available for dedication.

     B.     For developments containing fifty parcels or less, only payment of fees shall be required.

     C.     In lieu of required fees, the builder of a residential development may, at his or her option, and at his or her expense, provide interim facilities, owned or controlled by the builder, at the place designated by the school district, and at the conclusion of the fifth school year, the builder shall, at the builder’s expense, remove the interim facilities from that place.

     D.    If the decision-making body is unable to concur in the school district’s determination, it may impose requirements other than those transmitted by the district.

 

18.37.130 School district schedule.
     Following the action by a decision-making body to require the dedication of land or the payment of fees, or both, the community development director shall notify the Lemon Grove School District. The governing body of the school district shall then submit a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the times when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for modification.

 

18.30.140 Land dedication.
     When land is to be dedicated, it shall be offered for dedication to the affected school district in substantially the same manner as prescribed in Title 16 of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code (city subdivision ordinance) for streets and public easements. Dedicated land which subsequently is determined by the school district to be unsuitable for school purposes may be sold at the option of the school district. The funds derived therefrom must be used in accordance with this division.

 

18.37.150 Land dedication/fee calculation.
     The amount of land to be dedicated or in-lieu fee to be paid shall be based upon a schedule as adopted by resolution of the city council.

 

18.37.160 Fee payment.
     If the payment of a fee is required, such payment or the pro rata amount thereof shall be made to the community development director at the time a building permit within the residential development is approved and issued.

 

18.37.170 Fees held in trust.
     Fees paid under this division shall be held in trust by the city. Such fees plus accrued interest less a reasonable service and handling charge of no more than the accrued interest shall be transferred within thirty days of payment to the Lemon Grove School District.

 

18.37.180 Refunds of paid fees.
     If a residential development approval is vacated or voided, and if the city or the affected school district still retains the land and/or fees collected therefor, and if the applicant so requests, the city council or the governing board of the school district shall order the land or fees returned to the applicant.

 

18.37.190 Use of land and fees.
     All land or fees, or both, collected pursuant to this division and transferred to the school district shall be used only by the district for the purpose of providing interim elementary or junior high school classroom and related facilities.

 

18.37.200 Fee fund records and reports.
     The Lemon Grove School District receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall maintain a separate account for any fees paid and shall file a report with the city council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by October 15th of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the city council.

 

18.37.210 Termination of dedication and fee requirements.
     When it is determined by the city council that conditions of overcrowding no longer exist in attendance areas within the Lemon Grove School District, decision-making bodies shall cease levying any fee or requiring the dedication of any land pursuant to this chapter. Action under this section shall not affect the validity of conditions already imposed for levy of fees and dedications of land and such conditions shall remain binding.

Chapter 18.40 GENERAL PLAN CONFORMITY
18.40.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to set forth guidelines and principles for ensuring that the Lemon Grove zoning ordinances, including the designation of zoning districts, is compatible with the Lemon Grove general plan, as required by state law.

 

18.40.020 General principles.
     The following principles shall be applied when making determinations as to the consistency of the various zoning districts with the general plan land use categories:

     A.    To the greatest degree possible, zoning districts shall be established in areas with corresponding general plan land use designations. For example, the residential low density or RL district should be applied in those area designated by the general plan as low density residential and the heavy commercial or HC district should be applied to those areas designated by the general plan for heavy commercial use.

     B.     No zoning district shall be applied where the district’s permitted uses would be more intensive than those indicated by the general plan. High density residential development is more intensive than low density residential development, and commercial and industrial development are more intensive than residential development.

     C.     Zoning districts which permit lower intensity use shall not be applied in area designated by the general plan for higher intensity use if the lower intensity use would generally preclude the establishment of a higher intensity use. For example, the residential low density or RL district should not be applied in those areas where the general plan has indicated that higher density development would be desirable and indeed should be encouraged; the construction of single-family dwelling in these areas would most probably eliminate the possibility of constructing higher density development on the same site.

 

18.40.030 General plan amendment.
     Any amendment to the Lemon Grove general plan shall be adopted in the manner provided in this chapter, in accordance with the state-mandated procedure.

 

18.40.040 Amendments of mandatory elements.
     No mandatory element of the general plan may be amended more frequently than four times during any calendar year, which amendment or amendments may occur at any time as determined by the city council. This section shall not apply to the adoption of any element of the general plan. This limitation on the frequency of amendment shall not apply to amendments requested and necessary for single development of residential units, at least twenty-five percent of which will be occupied by or available to persons for families of low or moderate income, as defined by Section 50093 of the Health and Safety Code. All general plan amendments shall be consistent with Section 65358 et seq. of the Government Code.

 

18.40.050 City council initiation of amendment procedures.
     When it deems it to be in the public interest the city council may change or add to all or part of the adopted general plan. Any interested individual or the planning commission may request consideration of an amendment to the general plan. Such requests shall be presented to the city council and the council shall determine if the amendment procedures should be initiated on the request. Upon initiating the amendment process, the city council shall first refer the proposed change or addition to the planning commission for a report. Before making such report the planning commission shall hold at least one hearing on the proposed change or addition. The planning commission’s report shall be completed not later than ninety days after the referral.

 

18.40.060 Planning commission public hearing.
     The planning commission shall hold at least one public hearing before approving a general plan amendment. Notice of the time and place of such hearing shall be given in a manner specified in Section 17.28.020. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.40.070 Planning commission approval by resolution.
     The approval by the planning commission of the general plan amendment shall be by resolution of the commission carried by the affirmative votes of not less than a majority of its total voting members. Upon approval by the planning commission of the general plan amendment, it shall be transmitted to the city council.

 

18.40.080 City council hearing.
     Before adopting the general plan amendment, the city council shall hold at least one public hearing. Notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be given in the time and manner provided for the giving of notice of the hearing by the planning commission as specified in Section 17.28.020. Any hearing may be continued from time to time. (Ord. 386 § 3, 2009)

 

18.40.090 City council action.
     In adopting a general plan amendment which has been approved by the planning commission, the city council shall not make any change or addition until the proposed change or addition has been referred to the planning commission for a full report and a copy of the report has been filed with the city council. Failure of the planning commission to report within forty days after the reference, or such longer period as may be designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed change or addition. It shall not be necessary for the planning commission to hold a public hearing on such proposed change or addition.

 

18.40.100 Approval by resolution of the city council.
     The adoption of the general plan amendment shall be by resolution of the city council.

Chapter 18.44 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPE REGULATIONS
18.44.010 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish landscaping water use standards consistent with the development landscape design requirements established by the Water Conservation in Landscaping Act (the “California Landscaping Act”), Government Code Section 65591 et seq. In that legislation, the State Legislature determined that the state’s water resources are in limited supply and recognized that while landscaping is essential to the quality of life in California, landscape design, installation, maintenance and management must be water efficient. Consistent with the legislature’s findings, this chapter:

     1.     Promotes the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to utilize water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

     2.     Establishes a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction;

     3.     Promotes the use, when available, of tertiary treated recycled water to irrigate landscaping;

     4.     Provides regulations that are at least as effective in conserving water as the state’s Model Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance (MWELO);

     5.     Encourages water users of existing landscapes to use water efficiently and eliminate waste;

     6.     Provides minimum planting requirements to ensure new landscape has sufficient plant materials in order reduce gas emissions and heat island effect, create shady and pleasant outdoor spaces, and beautify the city;

     7.     Encourages edible plants and enhances community agriculture. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.020 Findings.
     This chapter implements the Efficiency Regulations in Landscaping Act. The requirements of this chapter reduce water use associated with irrigation of outdoor landscaping by designing, installing and maintaining water efficient landscapes consistent with the water allowance. The provisions of this chapter are equivalent to and at least as effective as the provisions of the state Model Landscape Ordinance because the calculation of maximum applied water allowance.

     The requirements herein are intended to reduce water usage in Lemon Grove to the same extent as the Model Landscape Ordinance prepared by the state of California. In implementing this law, the city shall endeavor to apply the law in a manner, which will result in long-term water savings to the citizens of the state as required, by law. The water savings shall be achieved through permanent landscape rules using irrigation management, greater use of drought-tolerant plantings and improved design criteria.

     In adopting this chapter, the city council finds and determines that this chapter will be as effective as the state Model Landscape Ordinance. The threshold regulations are based on those in the state Model Landscape Ordinance. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.030 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:

     “Automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers shall schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (ETo) (weather-based) or moisture sensor data.

     “Application package” means a set of materials, established by the director, filed by an applicant to officially request a permit subject to this title, or other titles as may be appropriate.

     “Building permit” means a permit to engage in a certain type of construction on a specific location.

     “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

     “Developer” means a person who seeks or receives permits for or who undertakes land development activities who is not a single-family homeowner. Developer includes a developer’s partner, associate, employee, consultant, trustee, or agent.

     “Director” means the community development director or anyone whom the director has designated or hired to administer or enforce this chapter.

     “Discretionary permit” means any permit requiring a decision making body to exercise judgment prior to its approval, conditional approval or denial.

     “Evapotranspiration” means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time period.

     “Graywater” means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination, by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. Graywater includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Graywater is not “recycled water.”

     “Grading” means any excavating or filling or combination thereof.

     “Hardscape” means any durable surface material, pervious or nonpervious.

     “Homeowner-provided landscaping” means landscaping for a single-family residence installed either by a private individual or a licensed contractor.

     “Invasive species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and may damage environmental or economic resources.

     “Landscaped area” means an area with outdoor plants, turf, other vegetation, and natural no water use ground cover such as crushed rock and wood trimmings. A landscaped area includes a water feature either in an area with vegetation or that stands alone. A landscaped area may also include design features adjacent to an area with vegetation. A landscaped area does not include the footprint of a building, decks, patio, sidewalk, driveway, parking lot or other hardscape. A landscaped area also does not include an area without irrigation designated for nondevelopment such as designated open space or area with existing native vegetation.

     “Landscape documentation package” means those supplemental landscape-specific attachments required by Section 18.44.070 to be submitted as part of an application package, as required elsewhere in the Municipal Code.

     “Low head drainage” means a sprinkler head or other irrigation device that continues to emit water after the water to the zone in which the device is located has shut off.

     “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low volume emitters such as drip lines or bubblers.

     “Mulch” means an organic material such as leaves, bark, straw or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel or decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface to reduce evaporation, suppress weeds, moderate soil temperature, or prevent soil erosion.

     “Overspray” means the water from irrigation that is delivered outside an area targeted for the irrigation and makes contact with a surface not intended to be irrigated.

     “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into underlying soil.

     “Public water purveyor” means a public utility, municipal water district, municipal irrigation district, or municipality that delivers water to customers.

     “Recycled water” means waste water that has been treated at the highest level required by the California Department of Health Services for water not intended for human consumption.

     “Runoff” means water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscaped area.

     “Subsurface irrigation” means an irrigation device with a delivery line and water emitters installed below the soil surface that slowly and frequently emit small amounts of water into the soil to irrigate plant roots.

     “Tertiary treated recycled water” means water that has been through three levels of treatment including filtration and disinfection.

     “Turf” means a groundcover surface of mowed grass.

     “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. A water feature includes a pond, lake, waterfall, fountain, artificial streams, spa and swimming pool. Constructed water containment elements used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices are not water features.

     “WUCOLS” means WUCOLS Region Number 4 (South Inland) of the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension and the Department of Water Resources 2014, as amended. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.040 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to all new and renovated landscape areas.

     B.     This chapter shall not apply to the following:

     1.     A registered local, state, or federal historical site.

     2.     An ecological restoration project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

     3.     A mined land reclamation project that does not require a permanent irrigation system.

     4.     A botanical garden or arboretum, open to the public.

     5.     Any single-family residence that is being rebuilt after it was destroyed due to a natural disaster, such as a fire, earthquake, hurricane, or tornado. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.050 Landscape approval.
     A.    No person shall install landscaping for a project subject to this chapter without the review and approval required by this chapter.

     B.     A person constructing a project subject to the requirements of this chapter shall obtain approval for the landscaped area as follows:

     1.     A person applying for a building permit for a new single-family residence shall obtain an approval of the landscaping as part of the permitting process.

     2.     A person applying for a discretionary permit described in Section 18.44.040:

     a.     Shall submit a landscape concept plan required by the discretionary permit application package and which demonstrates conformance to

Title 17 and this chapter. The concept plan shall include representation of the site features, proposed planting areas and the proposed method and type of irrigation.

     b.     Shall obtain approval for landscaping as part of the permitting process for each building permit for each project segment that requires installation of a water meter or connection to an existing water meter.

     c.     May use “typical” plans for developer-installed landscaping for new single-family homes. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.060 Administration.
     The director shall administer and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.070 Landscape documentation package.
     A.    Applications for projects subject to Section 18.44.040 shall include a landscape documentation package that complies with the provisions of this chapter. The landscape documentation package shall contain the following elements:

     1.     Planting and irrigation plans that describe the landscaping (size, type, water use classification, and location) and irrigation (type and location) for the project.

     2.     A grading plan that complies with Sections 18.08.130 and 18.08.070 if grading is proposed.

     3.     When a project involves grading of a site, the applicant shall submit a soil management report that provides the analysis of the soil within each landscaped area of the project and makes recommendations regarding soil additives.

     B.     The landscape documentation package shall demonstrate conformance to Lemon Grove Municipal Code Chapter 17 and the following minimum design standards:

     1.     Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall be irrigated with an irrigation system with a precipitation rate of 0.75 inches per hour or less to prevent runoff and erosion. An applicant may employ an alternative design if the plan demonstrates that no runoff or erosion will occur.

     2.     All wiring and piping under a paved area that a vehicle may use, such as a parking area, driveway or roadway, shall be installed inside a PVC conduit.

     3.     Irrigation piping and irrigation devices within twenty-four inches of a vehicle or pedestrian use area and that deliver water, such as sprinkler heads, shall be installed below grade. The director may allow on-grade piping where landform constraints make below grade piping infeasible.

     4.     Low volume or subsurface irrigation shall be used to irrigate any vegetation within twenty-four inches of an impermeable surface unless the adjacent impermeable surfaces are designed and constructed to cause water to drain entirely into a landscaped area.

     5.     A manual shutoff valve shall be installed as close as possible to the water supply. Additional manual shutoff valves shall be installed between each zone of the irrigation system and the water supply.

     6.     Minimum plantings per landscape area are required as follows:

     a.     Landscape areas may consist of very low and low water use plant materials per WUCOLS.

     b.     Landscape areas consisting of moderate and high water use plant materials per WUCOLS shall not exceed a ratio of one part planting area (one-third) per two parts of no water use natural nonvegetated ground cover (two-thirds). Alternative landscapes not in compliance with this regulation are allowed provided they comply fully with the state MWELO.

     c.     A minimum of twenty-five percent of the landscape area shall consist of vegetated plant materials.

     d.     A minimum of one fifteen-gallon tree shall be provided per one thousand square feet of landscape area (existing trees included).

     e.     A minimum of one hundred square feet of edible planting area or one fifteen-gallon fruit or nut tree shall be planted for each dwelling unit, but for no more than five dwelling units on a single lot.

     7.     Nonvegetated natural ground cover shall be a minimum of three inches deep and shall be one inch below surrounding paved surfaces.

     8.     New irrigations systems shall include an automatic irrigation controller and consist of drip or microspray systems.

     9.     High-efficiency, matched-precipitation rate sprinkler nozzles shall be required at all homes (residential landscapes), common areas, parks, and commercial/industrial landscapes.

     10.   Dedicated meters for outdoor water use shall be required as follows:

     a.     In single-family residences with one or more acre(s) of irrigated landscape;

     b.     In all parks and common areas;

     c.     In commercial, industrial, government, and multi-family sites with five thousand square feet or more of irrigated landscape.

     11.   Enroll all new irrigation meters (except those at single-family residences) in the Helix Water Budget Program and provide documentation of irrigated landscape area at the time of meter purchase.

     12.   New impervious surfaces shall direct storm water drainage to landscape areas.

     13.   Pervious and porous surfaces that minimize runoff shall be encouraged.

     14.   New roofs shall be encouraged to direct storm water to landscape areas or to water capture and reuse containers. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.080 Recycled water.
     A.    A person who obtains a permit for a project that is subject to this chapter shall use recycled water for irrigation when tertiary treated recycled water is available from the water purveyor who supplies water to the property for which the city issues a permit.

     B.     A person using recycled water shall install a dual distribution system for water received from a public water purveyor. Pipes carrying recycled water shall be purple.

     C.     This section does not excuse a person using recycled water from complying with all state and local laws and regulations related to recycled water use. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.090 Graywater.
     A.    A person who obtains a permit for a residential project that is subject to this chapter may use graywater for subsurface irrigation provided the installation and operation of the graywater system conforms to all applicable state and local laws and regulations.

     B.     A person using a graywater irrigation system shall design and construct the system consistent with the California Plumbing Code. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.100 Landscaping and irrigation installation and soil preparation.
     A person issued a landscape approval for a project shall install the approved irrigation system and landscaping before final inspection of the project. A pre-inspection prior to installation is required to inspect: (1) the irrigation, root barrier, ground cover, and planting excavations; (2) the compost and soil materials prior to blending; and (3) the irrigation, root barrier, ground cover, and planting materials. A final inspection is required after installation to inspect: (1) irrigation locations, types and flows; (2) planting locations, types and sizes; (3) ground cover depth; and (4) root barrier and tree staking installations. Installations shall be per San Diego Regional Standard Drawings and the following:

     A.    Holes for plantings shall be excavated slightly shallower and a minimum of two times the width of the root ball or container. Set the root ball so that the top of the root ball will sit slightly higher than the final grade.

     B.     Uniformly blend compost and excavated soil at a ratio of one part compost (one-third) per two parts soil (two-thirds).

     C.     Backfill and firm the compost-soil blend around the root ball within the planting hole.

     D.    Turf and shallow planting areas shall include compost at a minimum depth of one inch and the area shall be tilled to a minimum five inches in depth.

     E.     Water thoroughly during and after planting.

     F.     Best management practices shall be implemented at all times. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.110 Maintenance.
     After approval of a landscape and irrigation plan, the owner is required to:

     A.    Maintain and operate the landscaping and irrigation system on the property.

     B.     Replace broken or malfunctioning irrigation system components with components of the same materials and specifications, their equivalent or better.

     C.     Ensure that when vegetation is replaced, replacement plantings are consistent with regulations in this chapter. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.120 Certificate of completion.
     Each person issued a landscape approval shall submit a signed certificate of completion, under penalty of perjury, on a form provided by the city. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.130 Waste water prevention and maximum applied water allowance (MAWA).
     A.    No person shall allow water to flow onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, structures, walkways, roadways, or other paved areas, whether due to runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar condition.

     B.     No person whose landscape is subject to a landscape approval pursuant to this chapter shall apply water to the landscape in excess of the maximum applied water allowance (MAWA) established by the state MWELO which is estimated at fourteen gallons of water annually per square foot of landscape area. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.140 Reporting.
     A.    Reporting on the implementation and enforcement of this chapter shall be submitted to the Department of Water Resources by January 31st of each year. The report shall address the following:

     1.     State this is a single agency ordinance using a locally modified water efficient landscape ordinance (WELO) which is as effective in conserving water as the state MWELO and applicable to all new and renovated landscape areas. Note the date of adoption of the WELO.

     2.     Define the reporting period as for the calendar year.

     3.     State that the city of Lemon Grove is the entity responsible for implementing the ordinance.

     4.     State the total area (in square feet) subject to the ordinance over the reporting period, if available.

     5.     Provide the number of new housing starts, new commercial projects, and landscape retrofits during the reporting period.

     6.     Describe the procedure for review of projects subject to the ordinance.

     7.     Describe actions taken to verify compliance.

     8.     Describe enforcement measures. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016)

 

18.44.150 Enforcement.
     A.    The director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any city authorized personnel or enforcement officer may exercise any enforcement powers as set forth in the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     B.     The director may delegate to or enter into a contract with a local agency or other person to implement and administer any of the provisions of this chapter on behalf of the city. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.160 Fees.
     The city council shall establish and modify, by resolution, a schedule of fees and deposits for matters subject to this title. All applicable fees and deposits shall be paid in full prior to processing any application, appeal, or other matter for which a fee is required. (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

 

18.44.170 Appeals.
     Any applicant or other interested person who is dissatisfied with the denial, approval, conditional approval, or other landscape approval decision made in the administration of this title may appeal the decision. Appeals will be processed according to the procedures found in LGMC Section 17.28.020(I). (Ord. 436 § 1, 2016; Ord. 387 § 3, 2010)

Chapter 18.48 HOME-SHARING
18.48.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish regulations and criteria for home-sharing in a manner which is consistent with the following objectives:

     A.    To help ensure that suitable, safe housing is available at a cost that is affordable to current and future residents of the city consistent with the goal, objectives, and policies of the city’s housing element.

     B.     To minimize the adverse impacts relating to the state’s declared housing crisis, on the city’s housing supply, and on persons and households of all income levels resulting from the potential loss of residential units through their conversion to exclusive transient use.

     C.     To prevent adverse impacts on residential neighborhoods that can occur when residential units are converted to exclusive transient use and are operated by agents and/or absentee owners/lessees who exercise little or no supervision or control of occupants. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.020 Applicability.
     No person or entity shall undertake, authorize, offer, facilitate an offer, maintain, advertise, book, or provide a dwelling unit or any portion thereof, in a residential zone or dwelling unit as provided for in Section 17.24.060(D) or as provided for in any specific plan, for rent for thirty consecutive calendar days or less to any transient, except as provided for in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Booking service” means any reservation or payment service provided by a person or entity who facilitates a home-sharing transaction between a host and a prospective transient occupant.

     “Exclusive transient use” means that none of the dwelling unit’s primary residents resides on site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the transient occupant’s stay.

     “Home-sharing” means an accessory use of a dwelling unit whereby the host rents his or her primary residence to one or more transient occupants, for compensation, for periods of thirty consecutive days or less, while the host resides on site, in the dwelling unit, throughout the transient occupant’s stay. Rental of units located within city-approved hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, and boarding houses, single-room occupancy buildings, and dwelling units for which a tenant has a month-to-month rental agreement and the rental payments are paid on a monthly basis shall not be considered home-sharing. An approved accessory rental dwelling unit, as defined by the zoning ordinance, constitutes a separate dwelling unit for the purpose of defining a home-sharing use. An approved guest house, as defined by the zoning ordinance, shall not constitute a separate dwelling unit for the purpose of defining a home-sharing use. The term “home-share” may be used interchangeably with the term “home-sharing.”

     “Host” means any person who offers his or her primary residence to a transient occupant(s) for home-sharing. A host may be an owner, lessee, or sub-lessee. “Host” shall have the same meaning as “operator” in Chapter 3.20 (Transient Occupancy Tax).

     “Hosting platform” means a person or entity who participates in the home-sharing business by collecting or receiving a fee, directly or indirectly, through an agent or intermediary, for conducting a booking service using any means of facilitation. Hosting platforms usually, although not necessarily, provide booking services through an on-line platform that allows a host to advertise the residential unit through a website provided by the hosting platform and hosting platform conducts a transaction by which potential transient occupants arrange home-sharing use and payment, whether the transient occupant pays rent directly to the host or to the hosting platform.

     “Primary residence” means a dwelling unit that is a host’s permanent residence or usual place of return for housing as documented by at least two of the following and in the host’s name: motor vehicle registration; driver’s license; voter registration; tax documents showing the dwelling unit as the host’s primary residence; or a utility or phone bill dated within the last thirty days. A host shall have only one primary residence and must reside there no less than two hundred seventy-five days per calendar year in which the residential unit is used for home-sharing.

     “Reside” means is present in the location for at least five hours within every twenty-four-hour period during which the dwelling unit is being used for home-sharing.

     “Transient” shall have the same definition as provided in Title 3, Chapter 3.20, Section 3.20.020(G). As provided in this chapter, “transient occupant” shall mean the same thing as “transient.”

     “Vacation rental” means rental of any dwelling unit, in whole or in part, to any transient occupant(s) for exclusive transient use for periods of thirty consecutive days or less. Rental of units located within city-approved hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, boarding houses, single-room occupancy buildings, and dwelling units for which a tenant has a month-to-month rental agreement and the rental payments are paid on a monthly basis shall not be considered vacation rentals. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.040 General provisions.
     A.    Home-Sharing—New. Except as otherwise stated herein, on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, no home-sharing use shall be established without first obtaining a home-sharing permit and business license pursuant to this chapter and being in compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

     B.     Home-Sharing—Not Authorized by Home-Sharing Permit. Except as provided for in subsection A of this section, on and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all existing dwelling units operating as home-sharing uses shall be considered an unlawful use in accordance with Section 17.04.050. Elimination of unlawful status may be achieved by filing the appropriate application, receiving a home-sharing permit and business license as required by this chapter, and complying with all requirements of this chapter.

     C.     Home-sharing shall be prohibited in any inclusionary housing or other income-restricted housing unit.

     D.    Vacation Rentals.

     1.     Vacation rentals shall be a prohibited use in every zoning district and dwelling unit in the city.

     2.     On and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all existing dwelling units operating as vacation rentals shall be prohibited and shall be considered an unlawful use in accordance with Section 17.04.050 and shall cease operation immediately.

     3.     Advertisement of vacation rentals shall be prohibited.

     E.     All hosts and their respective properties, authorized by the city for home-sharing purposes pursuant to this section, shall be listed on a registry created by the city and updated periodically by the city. The registry shall include the home-sharing permit number assigned to each home-sharing activity in accordance with Section 18.48.050(A). The city shall publish the registry on the city’s website. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.050 Home-sharing permit required.
     A.    No home-sharing use shall be conducted in any residential zone or dwelling unit as provided for in Section 17.24.060(D)(8) unless a home-sharing permit has been issued by the city for such use prior to conducting the home-share use. A home-sharing permit number shall be assigned to each home-sharing application that is approved in accordance with this chapter.

     B.     An application for a home-sharing permit shall be in a form and contain the information required by the planning department, in addition to documentation required pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     The host shall be the applicant named on the home-sharing permit. If the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application shall be signed by the property owner consenting to the use of the property for home-sharing.

     D.    Only one home-sharing permit shall be issued to any one dwelling unit as provided for in Section 18.48.030.

     E.     If the property is part of a common interest development, the application shall include a letter of authorization from the homeowner’s association indicating that use of the property for home-sharing is permitted under the homeowner’s association’s covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs).

     F.     The planning department (the department) may issue a home-sharing permit only if the department is satisfied that the applicant’s operation of the home sharing use will comply with all provisions of this chapter and the applicant has agreed, in writing, to comply with such provisions.

     G.    A home-sharing permit must be renewed annually to remain valid. Failure to renew a home-sharing permit within thirty calendar days of the expiration date will result in the home-sharing permit being terminated.

     H.    A home-sharing permit shall be subject to applicable inspections by the city, including inspections by the fire department. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.060 Performance standards and operational requirements.
     Notwithstanding any provisions of this code to the contrary, a home-sharing host shall operate the home-sharing use in compliance with the following performance standards and operational requirements:

     A.    Home-sharing shall not adversely affect the residential character of the neighborhood nor shall the use generate noise, traffic, parking, trash, or other effects that unreasonably interfere with any person’s reasonable enjoyment of his or her residence.

     B.     A host shall obtain and maintain at all times a current city business license.

     C.     The host shall collect and remit transient occupancy tax (TOT), in coordination with any hosting platform if utilized in accordance with Section 18.48.070(A), to the city and shall comply with all city TOT requirements as set forth in Chapter 3.20 (Transient Occupancy Tax) of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code.

     D.    No person shall advertise any home-sharing without a city-issued home-sharing permit number depicted in a visible location on the advertisement, including any listing on a hosting platform.

     E.     The host shall be responsible for any nuisance violations arising at the property at all times during home-sharing activities.

     F.     The host shall respond in person or telephonically within thirty minutes of being contacted by any law enforcement, fire department, or other city official.

     G.    The host and transient occupants shall comply with all home-sharing permit and city business license conditions and requirements, and all applicable local, state, and federal laws, including, but not limited to, health, safety, fire, and building codes.

     H.    The dwelling unit used for a home-sharing use shall not be subject to any outstanding enforcement of the Lemon Grove Municipal Code and all other relevant laws and ordinances, including but not limited to any notices of violations, orders of abatement, cease and desist orders, or correction notices. If any such violation occurs once a dwelling unit has been approved for home-sharing in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the planning department shall suspend the home-sharing permit until the violation has been corrected.

     I.      The host shall post a clearly printed sign inside his or her dwelling unit on the inside of the front door that provides the following information: the location of all fire extinguishers, carbon monoxide detectors, gas shut-off valves, emergency exit routes, fire alarms, and emergency contact information for the host for periods when the host is off site as provided for in Section 18.48.030.

     J.      Home-sharing shall not be used by more than two transient occupants per bedroom, excluding the host’s bedroom, plus one additional transient occupant at one time. The transient occupant limit does not include minor children under the age of eighteen who are accompanied by an adult. Rental to unaccompanied minors under the age of eighteen is prohibited.

     K.    The minimum duration of a home-share is three days, two nights.

     L.     All parking for the home-sharing use shall be provided on site, and shall not be located within a required front or side yard setback. The host shall limit the number of vehicles associated with the overnight occupancy of the home-share to a specific number of vehicles, with the maximum number of vehicles being the number of off-street parking spaces available at the property, in addition to the off-street parking required for the primary use in accordance with Section 17.24.010 (Off-street parking) of the LGMC.

     M.    No signs shall be posted on the exterior of the residential unit advertising the home-sharing use.

     N.    Events, parties, group gatherings that exceed the maximum number of allowed transients as provided for in this chapter, and other special events, including, but not limited to, weddings, banquets, and corporate retreats, are prohibited from occurring on site in association with the home-sharing use.

     O.    No host shall offer or engage in home-sharing any part of the property not approved for residential use, including, but not limited to, a vehicle parked on the property, storage shed, trailer, recreational vehicle, garage, tree house, or any temporary structure such as a tent.

     P.     The host shall maintain records for three years demonstrating compliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to: information demonstrating primary residency; the number of days per calendar year he or she has occupied the residential unit; the number of days per calendar year the residential unit has been rented as a home-sharing use; and compliance with the insurance requirement in subsection Q. These records shall be made available to the planning department upon request.

     Q.    The host shall maintain liability insurance appropriate to cover the home-sharing use in the aggregate of not less than five hundred thousand dollars, or the host shall conduct each home-sharing transaction through a hosting platform that provides equal or greater coverage. Such coverage shall defend and indemnify the host(s), as named additional insured, and any tenant(s) in the building or dwelling unit for their bodily injury and property damage arising from the home-sharing use.

     R.     The host shall sign an indemnification and hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the city attorney, agreeing to indemnify, save, protect, hold harmless, and defend the city of Lemon Grove, the city council of the city of Lemon Grove, individually and collectively, and the city of Lemon Grove representatives, officers, officials, employees, agents, and volunteers from any and all claims, demands, damages, fines, obligations, suits, judgments, penalties, causes of action, losses, liabilities, or costs at any time received, incurred, or accrued as a result of, or arising out of host’s actions or inaction in the operation, occupancy, use, and/or maintenance of the property. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.070 Hosting platform responsibilities.
     A.    Hosting platforms shall be responsible for collecting all applicable TOTs and remitting the same to the city. The hosting platform shall be considered an agent of the host for purposes of TOT collections and remittance responsibilities as set forth in Chapter 3.20 (Transient Occupancy Tax).

     B.     Subject to applicable laws, hosting platforms shall disclose to the city on an annual basis each home-sharing listing located in the city, the names of the person(s) responsible for each such listing, the address of each such listing, the length of stay for each such listing, and the price paid for each stay.

     C.     Hosting platforms shall not complete any booking transaction for any residential property or unit unless it is listed on the city’s registry created under Section 18.48.040(E), at the time the hosting platform receives a fee for the booking transaction.

     D.    Hosting platforms shall not collect or receive a fee, directly or indirectly through an agent or intermediary, for facilitating or providing services ancillary to a vacation rental or unpermitted home-share, including, but not limited to, insurance, concierge services, catering, restaurant bookings, tours, guide services, entertainment, cleaning, property management, or maintenance of the residential property or unit.

     E.     Safe Harbor. A hosting platform operating exclusively on the Internet, which operates in compliance with subsections A, B, C, and D of this section, shall be presumed to be in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.080 Appeal.
     In the event of denial of any home-sharing permit or the suspension or revocation thereof, a written appeal may be made to the planning commission, whose decision shall be final. Appeals shall be considered by the planning commission in a public hearing which shall be scheduled within sixty days from the filing of the application. Notice of the hearing shall be given as set forth in Section 17.28.090 of the city zoning ordinance. A fee of twenty-five dollars shall be paid at the time of application to cover the expense of appeal procedures. When a home-sharing permit application has been denied, no application for the same business at the same property and/or by the same applicant shall be accepted for a period of one year from the date of the denial. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.090 Revocation of home-sharing permit.
     Home-sharing permits are subject to revocation by the planning department after a hearing by the department, following reasonable notice to the permittee, in the event that zoning regulations applicable to the premises are amended to prohibit such use, or when evidence has been produced that one or more of the conditions of the permit are not being fulfilled, or that any other violation of this chapter exists or any other applicable local, state or federal laws. After receiving written notification of violation, the holder of the home-sharing permit shall, within ten days of such notification, comply with all applicable city regulations or the home-sharing permit will be subject to revocation after hearing. If a home-sharing permit is revoked, the host must wait at a minimum of one year from the date of revocation before he or she can reapply for a home-sharing permit. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.100 Enforcement—Penalties for violations.
     It shall be the duty of planning department to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be considered a misdemeanor and violators shall, upon conviction, be punishable by a fine or imprisonment as set forth in Section 17.04.070 of the city’s zoning ordinance. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

 

18.48.110 Fees.
     The fee for a home-sharing permit shall be as established and modified from time to time by resolution of the city council. All applicable fees and deposits shall be paid in full prior to processing any application. (Ord. 452 § 3, 2019)

