LODI, CALIFORNIA - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Lodi, California 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 21, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 
  
PREFACE 
The Lodi, California Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company in 1985, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 21, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company under the direction of Ms. Alice Reimche, city clerk. 
The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the Title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing by number all ordinances, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 21, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance 1960, passed November 7, 2018. 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this Code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by number, section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ord. 272 § 1, 1992).) 
Beginning with Supplement No. 21, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
As of Supplement No. 21, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by ordinance number and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
Beginning with Supplement No. 21, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Beginning with Supplement No. 21, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the ordinance number, adoption date, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 21, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2., 33). Backs of pages that are blank (in codes that are printed double-sided) will be left unnumbered but the number will be "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send two copies of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310  
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 
 
1.01.010 - Adoption. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code, there is adopted the "Lodi Municipal Code" as published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington, together with those secondary codes adopted by reference as authorized by the California State Legislature, save and except those portions of the secondary codes as are deleted or modified by the provisions of the "Lodi Municipal Code." 
(Ord. 1357 § 1, 1985)  
1.01.020 - Title—Citation—Reference. 
This code shall be known as the "Lodi Municipal Code" and it shall be sufficient to refer to this code as the "Lodi Municipal Code" in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Lodi Municipal Code. Further, reference may be had to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Lodi Municipal Code and such reference shall apply to that numbered title, chapter, section or subsection as it appears in the code. 
(Ord. 1357 § 2, 1985)  
1.01.030 - Codification authority. 
This code consists of all the regulatory and penal ordinances and certain of the administrative ordinances of the city of Lodi, California, codified pursuant to the provisions of Sections 50022.1 through 50022.8 and 50022.10 of the Government Code. 
(Ord. 1357 § 3, 1985)  
1.01.040 - Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code. 
The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance 1340, passed November 21, 1984. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance 1340, but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: 
A.  Ordinance 1341, introduced December 19, 1984, adopted January 2, 1985. An ordinance redesignating a 3.17 acre parcel at 2430 West Turner Road from commercial to medium density residential. 
B.  Ordinance 1342, introduced December 19, 1984, adopted January 2, 1985. An ordinance amending P-D(1), Planned Development District No. 1 so that the 3.17 acre parcel at 2430 West Turner Road conforms to the requirement of the R-GA Garden Apartment Residential District rather than the C-S, Commercial Shopping District. 
C.  Ordinance 1343, introduced January 2, 1985, adopted January 16, 1985. An ordinance adopting a specific plan for the future development of West Tokay Street. 
D.  Ordinance 1344, introduced January 16, 1985, adopted February 6, 1985. An ordinance adopting Capital Improvement Program — 1985. 
E.  Ordinance 1345, introduced February 6, 1985, adopted February 20, 1985. An ordinance establishing and providing for the regulation of burglary and robbery alarm systems. 
F.  Ordinance 1346, introduced February 20, 1985, adopted March 6, 1985. An ordinance rezoning a six-acre parcel at 1510 West Century Boulevard, Lodi, California. 
G.  Ordinance 1347, introduced February 20, 1985, adopted March 6, 1985. An ordinance repealing Ordinance No. 1306 and reenacting a new ordinance regulating the use and operation of ambulances upon the public streets. 
H.  Ordinance 1348, introduced February 20, 1985, adopted February 20, 1985. An urgency ordinance approving electric rate increases effective March 1, 1985. 
I.  Ordinance 1349, introduced March 20, 1985, adopted March 20, 1985. An urgency ordinance amending city code, Chapter 14, Section 43, relating to removal of parked vehicles. 
J.  Ordinance 1350, introduced April 3, 1985, adopted April 3, 1985. An urgency ordinance adjusting the mobile home park utility discount. 
K.  Ordinance 1351, introduced April 3, 1985, adopted April 27, 1985. An ordinance amending Lodi City Code Article V. 
L.  Ordinance 1352, introduced April 3, 1985, adopted April 17, 1985. An ordinance amending Chapter 15 to add a new section regarding solicitors and peddlers. 
(Ord. 1357 § 4, 1985)  
1.01.050 - Reference applies to all amendments. 
Whenever a reference is made to this code as the Lodi Municipal Code or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Lodi, California, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. 
(Ord. 1357 § 5, 1985)  
1.01.060 - Title, chapter and section headings. 
Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section of this code. 
(Ord. 1357 § 6, 1985)  
1.01.070 - Reference to specific ordinances. 
The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. 
(Ord. 1357 § 7, 1985)  
1.01.080 - Effect of code on past actions and obligations. 
Neither the adoption of this code nor the repeal or amendment of any ordinance or part or portion of any ordinance of the code shall in any manner affect the prosecution for violations of ordinances, which violations were committed prior to the effective date of the code, nor be construed as a waiver of any license, fee or penalty at such effective date due and unpaid under such ordinances, nor be construed as affecting any of the provisions of such ordinances relating to the collection of any such license, fee or penalty, or the penal validity of any bond or cash deposit in lieu thereof required to be posted, filed or deposited pursuant to any ordinance and all rights and obligations thereunder appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1357 § 8, 1985)  
1.01.090 - Effective date. 
This code became effective on the date Ordinance 1357 passed adopting this code as the "Lodi Municipal Code". 
(Ord. 1357 § 9, 1985)  
1.01.100 - Constitutionality. 
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. The council declares that it would have passed this code, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional, and if for any reason this code should be declared invalid or unconstitutional, then the original ordinance or ordinances shall be in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1357 § 10, 1985)  
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.04.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this code or the ordinances of the city of Lodi, California, shall be construed as defined in this section, unless from the context a different meaning is intended or unless a different meaning is specifically defined and more particularly directed to the use of such words or phrases: 
A.  "City" means the city of Lodi, California, or the area within the territorial limits of the city of Lodi, California, and such territory outside of the city over which the city has jurisdiction or control by virtue of any constitutional or statutory provision. 
B.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Lodi. "All its members" or "all council members" means the total number of council members holding office. 
C.  "County" means the county of San Joaquin. 
D.  "Law" denotes applicable federal law, the Constitution and statutes of the state of California, the ordinances of the city of Lodi, and, when appropriate, any and all rules and regulations which may be promulgated thereunder. 
E.  "May" is permissive. 
F.  "Month" means a calendar month. 
G.  "Must" and "shall" are each mandatory. 
H.  "Oath" includes an affirmation or declaration in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
I.  "Owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant, tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
J.  "Person" includes a natural person, joint venture, joint stock company, partnership, association, club, company, corporation, business, trust, organization, or the manager, lessee, agent, servant, officer or employee of any of them. 
K.  "Personal property" includes money, goods, chattels, things in action and evidences of debt. 
L.  "Preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
M.  "Property" includes real and personal property. 
N.  "Real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
O.  "Sidewalk" means that portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians. 
P.  "State" means the state of California. 
Q.  "Street" includes all streets, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, courts, places, squares, curbs or other public ways in this city which have been or may hereafter be dedicated and open to public use, or such other public property so designated in any law of this state. 
R.  "Tenant" and "occupant," applied to a building or land, include any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
S.  "Written" includes printed, typewritten, mimeographed, multigraphed or otherwise reproduced in permanent visible form. 
T.  "Year" means a calendar year. 
(Ord. 1334 § 1, 1984)  
1.04.020 - Title of office. 
Use of the title of any officer, employee, department, board or commission means that officer, employee, department, board or commission of the city. 
(Ord. 1334 § 2, 1984)  
1.04.030 - Interpretation of language. 
All words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in the law shall be construed and understood according to such peculiar and appropriate meaning. 
(Ord. 1334 § 3, 1984)  
1.04.040 - Grammatical interpretation. 
The following grammatical rules shall apply in this code and the ordinances of the city of Lodi, unless it is apparent from the context that a different construction is intended: 
A.  Gender. Each gender includes the masculine, feminine and neuter genders. 
B.  Singular and Plural. The singular number includes the plural and the plural includes the singular. 
C.  Tenses. Words used in the present tense include the past and the future tenses and vice versa, unless manifestly inapplicable. 
(Ord. 1334 § 4, 1984)  
1.04.050 - Acts by agents. 
When an act is required by this code or an ordinance, the same being such that it may be done as well by an agent as by the principal, such requirement shall be construed to include all such acts performed by an authorized agent. 
(Ord. 1334 § 5, 1984)  
1.04.060 - Prohibited acts include causing and permitting. 
Whenever in this code or the ordinances of the city of Lodi, any act or omission is made unlawful, it shall include causing, allowing, permitting, aiding, abetting, suffering or concealing the fact of such act or omission. 
(Ord. 1334 § 6, 1984)  
1.04.070 - Computation of time. 
Except when otherwise provided, the time within which an act is required to be done shall be computed by excluding the first day and including the last day, unless the last day is Sunday or a holiday, in which case it shall also be excluded. 
(Ord. 1334 § 7, 1984)  
1.04.080 - Construction. 
The provisions of this code and the ordinances of the city of Lodi, and all proceedings under them, are to be construed with a view to effect their objects and to promote justice. 
(Ord. 1334 § 8, 1984)  
1.04.090 - References to certain officers, etc., apply to San Joaquin local health district. 
A.  Wherever in this code or any city ordinance, resolution, order or law, the terms "housing department," "board of health," "health officer" or similar names are used designating the enforcing authority of any such ordinance, resolution, order or law relating to public health and sanitation in the city, the designations "housing department," "board of health," "health officer" or similar titles shall apply also to and include the San Joaquin local health district and its duly appointed officers and employees. 
B.  None of the provisions of this section shall be construed as limiting, subtracting from or releasing the police department of the city or any other department or officer of this city from the performance of his duties in the enforcement of the laws, orders and ordinances mentioned in this section, the provisions of this section being permissive. 
(Ord. 1334 § 13, 1984)  
Chapter 1.08 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 
 
1.08.010 - General penalty. 
A.  Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code or the ordinances of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless the violation is made an infraction by ordinance, or at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney. 
B.  Except in cases where a different punishment is prescribed by this code or any ordinance of the city, any person convicted of a misdemeanor for violation of this code or an ordinance of the city is punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. 
C.  Any person convicted of an infraction for violation of this code or an ordinance of the city is punishable by: 
1.  A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
2.  A fine not exceeding two hundred dollars for a second violation of the same provision of this code or ordinance within one year; 
3.  A fine not exceeding five hundred dollars for each additional violation of the same code provision or ordinance within one year. 
D.  Each such person is guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this code or the ordinances of the city is committed, continued or permitted by any such person, and he is punishable accordingly. 
(Ord. 1334 § 9, 1984) 
(Ord. 1921, § 1, 6-1-2016)  
1.08.020 - Notice to appear—Preparation by arresting officer. 
If any person is arrested for the violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance of the city, and such person is not immediately taken before a magistrate as prescribed in the California Penal Code, the arresting officer shall prepare in duplicate a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the offense charged and the time and place where and when such person shall appear in court. 
(Ord. 1334 § 10, 1984)  
1.08.030 - Notice to appear—Failure to appear—Misdemeanor. 
Any person violating his written promise to appear in court is guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of the charge upon which he was originally arrested. 
(Ord. 1334 § 11, 1984)  
1.08.040 - Notice to appear—Failure to appear—Warrant for arrest. 
When a person signs a written promise to appear at the time and place specified in the written promise to appear and has not posted bail as provided in Section 853-6 of the California Penal Code, the magistrate shall issue and have delivered for execution a warrant for his arrest within twenty days after his failure to appear as promised, or if such person promises to appear before an officer authorized to accept bail other than a magistrate and fails to do so on or before the date which he promised to appear, then, within twenty days after the delivery of such written promise to appear by the officer to a magistrate having jurisdiction over the offense. 
(Ord. 1334 § 12, 1984)  
Chapter 1.10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Code Enforcement—Administrative Provisions 
 
1.10.010 - Declaration of purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that the enforcement of the Lodi Municipal Code and applicable state codes throughout the city is an important public service. Code enforcement is vital to the protection of the public's health, safety, and quality of life. The city council recognizes that enforcement starts with the drafting of precise regulations that can be effectively applied in administrative enforcement hearings and judicial proceedings. After consideration of the recommendations of the community improvement division, the city council further finds that a comprehensive code enforcement system requires a variety of judicial remedies and administrative remedies to enforce violations of this code and applicable state codes. The city council also finds that there is a need to establish uniform procedures for administrative enforcement hearings conducted pursuant to this code. It is the purpose and intent of the city council to afford due process of law to any person who is directly affected by an administrative action. Due process of law includes: adequate notice, an opportunity to participate in the administrative hearing process and an adequate explanation of the reasons justifying the administrative action. These procedures are also intended to establish a forum to efficiently, expeditiously, and fairly resolve issues raised in any administrative enforcement action. The city attorney is authorized to develop policies and procedures relating to the qualifications, appointment, and compensation of hearing officers, hearing officer powers, hearing procedures, scope of the hearing, subpoena powers, and other matters relating to administrative enforcement hearings. 
B.  The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or other legal remedies established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes and the use of this chapter shall be at the sole discretion of the city. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.020 - Definitions. 
"Administrative citation" means a document issued by a community improvement officer to a person violating the provisions of this code or applicable state code. 
"Administrative order" means an order issued by an administrative hearing officer after a hearing requiring a responsible person to correct violations, abate a public nuisance, pay administrative fines, civil penalties, administrative costs, authorize the city to abate a public nuisance, assess a code enforcement lien, or take any other action as authorized or required by this code and applicable state codes. 
"Assessment lien" means a lien recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder's office for the purposes of collecting outstanding administrative citation fines, civil penalties, and administrative costs imposed as part of a cost recovery, administrative or judicial code enforcement action. It shall also mean the same as a code enforcement lien. 
Code Enforcement Lien. See definition of "assessment lien." 
"Code enforcement officer" means a person authorized to enforce violations of the Lodi Municipal Code, adopted uniform codes, and applicable state codes within their city department's jurisdiction. 
"Director" shall include each of the directors of the following city departments: planning and community development, public works, parks, recreation and facilities, municipal utilities, finance, and the department of public safety and any of their designated agents or representatives within their jurisdiction. 
"Hearing officer (or administrative hearing officer)" means any person appointed by the city attorney to preside over administrative hearings. 
"Notice and order" means a document used in abatement actions and assessment of civil penalties involving serious code violations, which provide notice of municipal code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code violations and orders a responsible person to take certain steps to correct the violations within a definitive period of time. Civil penalties may also be imposed in conjunction with this notice. 
"Notice of compliance" means a document issued by a director, which represents that a property has been brought into compliance with the criteria set forth under this code. 
"Notice of satisfaction" means a document or form, which indicates that all outstanding civil penalties and costs have either been paid in full, or that the city has negotiated an agreed amount, or that a subsequent administrative or judicial decision has resolved the outstanding debt. 
"Notice of violation" means a written notice, which informs a responsible person of code violations present on the subject property, lists the required compliance actions, and contains specific information as required by this code. The notice of violation may be recorded with the San Joaquin County recorder's office. 
"Owner" applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant, tenant in common, joint tenant, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
"Person," unless it otherwise appears from the context as used, includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, company, corporation, public agency, school district, the state of California, its political subdivisions and/or instrumentalities thereof or any other entity which is recognized by law as the subject of rights or duties. 
"Property owner" means the record owner of real property as listed on the last equalized assessment roll maintained by the San Joaquin County assessor. 
"Responsible person" means a person who a director determines is responsible for causing, permitting, or maintaining a public nuisance or a violation of the Lodi Municipal Code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. The term "responsible person" includes, but is not limited to, a property owner, tenant, person with a legal interest in the subject property, person in possession of the subject property, or person that exercises custody and control over the subject property. 
"Shall" is mandatory and "may" is permissive. However, the use of the word "shall" in this chapter is not intended and shall not impose any mandatory duty to third parties by the city, its commissions, boards, officers, agents, or employees and is not intended and shall not impose any liability on the city, its commissions, boards, officers, agents, or employees. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.030 - Administrative enforcement authority. 
The community development director, designated community improvement officers, the fire chief, and other city directors and/or their designated agents have the authority and powers necessary to determine whether a violation of this code or applicable state codes exists and the authority to take appropriate action to gain compliance with the provisions of this code or applicable state codes. These powers include the power to issue notices of violation, administrative citations, notices and orders, and civil penalties, the power to inspect public and private property, and use the administrative remedies which are available under this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.040 - Authority to inspect. 
A director, a community improvement officer, or other duly authorized agent are authorized to enter upon any property or premises within the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this code or applicable state codes are being obeyed, and to make any examinations and surveys as may be necessary in the performance of their enforcement duties. These may include the taking of photographs, samples, or other physical evidence such as the use of a sound level measurement device to measure noise disturbances. All inspections, entries, examinations, and surveys shall be done in a reasonable manner. If an owner, occupant, or agent or other responsible person refuses permission to enter or inspect, the community improvement officer may seek an administrative inspection warrant pursuant to the procedures provided for in the California Code of Civil Procedure. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.050 - Code enforcement fees—Purpose. 
A.  The city council finds there is a need to recover costs incurred by the city in its code enforcement efforts including time spent by city personnel inspecting and reinspecting properties throughout the city, preparing and posting the various notices that are required under this code whenever a property is found to be in violation of a mandatory provision, processing a case file, towing inoperative vehicles, obtaining inspection warrants, and preparing for and appearing at administrative hearings, which procedures all become necessary when a responsible person fails to voluntarily correct code violations on his or her property. These additional code enforcement efforts are not usually undertaken or employed until after a responsible person has failed to respond on a voluntary basis to notices and/or warnings from the city or volunteers. 
B.  The city council further finds the assessment of fees for the services listed in subsection A of this section, are an appropriate method to recover costs incurred for the additional work that is undertaken by city staff when a responsible person fails to voluntarily correct code violations on his or her property in a timely manner. The assessment and collection of these code enforcement fees shall not preclude the imposition of, and shall be in addition to, any administrative or judicial civil penalties or fines for violations of this code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.060 - Assessment of reinspection fees. 
Whenever a community improvement officer and/or designated staff inspects, reinspects, processes a case file, prepares and posts a notice of intent to abate, a notice of violation, notice to vacate, notice and order of demolition, abandoned vehicle abatement notice, seeks and obtains an inspection warrant, prepares for and appears at an administrative hearing, or any other action as may be hereinafter designated by resolution of the city council, for which an action has been initiated to obtain compliance with this code or applicable state code, a director shall assess the appropriate code enforcement fee against the responsible person. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.070 - Amount of reinspection fees. 
A code enforcement fee schedule shall be established and revised as necessary by the city council to reflect current costs. The code enforcement fee schedule shall be filed in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.080 - Code enforcement fees exemption. 
No fee shall be charged if any of the following circumstances exist: 
A.  A notice of compliance has been issued; 
B.  It is determined that the previously identified responsible person has not caused the code violation; or 
C.  The responsible person fully complies with any notice of violation or warning before the compliance reinspection deadline set by code enforcement staff. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.090 - Notification of assessment of reinspection fees. 
A.  Where the assessment of code enforcement fees is authorized under this chapter, the director shall provide the responsible person with a written notice assessing code enforcement fees. The written assessment shall contain the following information: (1) the amount of fees charged; (2) the corresponding dates when code enforcement action took place; and (3) a deadline by which the code enforcement fee must be paid. 
B.  Notification of the code enforcement fee assessment shall be provided to the responsible person by any of the means outlined in this chapter. 
C.  Code enforcement fees may be assessed as part of any judicial or administrative enforcement action as provided for in this chapter. 
D.  Code enforcement fees collected pursuant to this chapter shall not be duplicated in any other action to recover these identical costs. 
E.  The failure of any responsible person to receive notice of the code enforcement fees shall not affect the validity of any fees imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.100 - Collection of reinspection fee. 
The city shall collect the assessed code enforcement and late fees by the use of all appropriate legal means, including but not limited to: referral to the finance department for collection or assessment against the property. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Article II. - Notice of Violation 
 
1.10.110 - Notice of violation—Procedures. 
Whenever it is determined that a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes exists, the director, the community improvement officer, or other duly authorized agent may issue a notice of violation to the responsible person(s). The notice of violation shall include the following information: 
A.  The name of the responsible party; 
B.  The name of the owner, if different from the responsible person; 
C.  Street address of the property at issue; 
D.  The code sections in violation; 
E.  A description of the conditions which violates the applicable codes; 
F.  A list of necessary corrections to bring the property into compliance; 
G.  A deadline or specific date to correct the violations listed in the notice of violation; and 
H.  A list of the potential consequences for failure to comply with the notice including, but not limited to: criminal prosecution, civil injunction, administrative abatement, administrative citations, civil penalties, revocation of permits, recordation of the notice of violation, and withholding of future municipal permits. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.120 - Service of notices. 
Whenever any notice is required to be given under this code, the notice shall be served in the following manner unless a different procedure is specifically stated to apply: 
A.  Personal service or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested. Simultaneously, the same notice shall be sent by regular mail to the responsible person. If a notice that is sent by certified mail is returned unsigned, then service shall be deemed effective pursuant to regular mail. 
B.  Posting the notice conspicuously on or in front of the subject property. 
C.  Mailings to the property owner shall be sent to the address listed in the last equalized assessment roll of the San Joaquin County assessor. 
D.  In the event the responsible person is someone other than the property owner, a copy of the notice shall also be mailed to the property owner. 
Service by certified or regular mail in the manner described above shall be effective on the date of mailing. 
The failure of any person with an interest in the subject property to receive any notice served in accordance with this section shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
The notice requirements in this section do not apply to initial notices of violation, courtesy notices, which may be sent by regular mail. Service of a courtesy notice by regular mail is effective on the date of mailing. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.130 - Proof of notice. 
Proof of giving any notice may be made by the certificate of any officer or employee of the city, or by affidavit of any person over the age of eighteen years, which shows service in conformity with this chapter, or other provisions of law applicable to the subject matter concerned. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.140 - Recordation of notices of violation—Purpose. 
The city council finds that there is a need to give notice of pending enforcement actions to persons who may subsequently acquire the property as a means by which to ensure the violations will be corrected. An appropriate method to accomplish this is through the issuance and recordation of notices of violation. The procedures established in this chapter shall be in addition to criminal, civil, or any other remedy established by law, which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.150 - Procedures for recordation. 
A.  Once a director has issued a notice of violation to a responsible person and the property remains in violation after the deadline established in the notice of violation, the director may record the notice of violation with the San Joaquin County recorder's office. 
B.  Before recordation, a director shall provide to the responsible person a notice of intent to record stating that a notice of violation will be recorded unless a written request to appeal this action is received pursuant to the procedures outlined in this chapter. The letter shall be served in accordance with the methods set forth in this chapter. 
C.  If a written request to appeal is not received within the time frame specified, the director may thereafter cause the notice of violation to be recorded, if the violations remain. 
D.  The recorded notice of violation shall include the name of the property owner, the assessor's parcel number, the street address, the parcel's legal description, and a copy of the latest notice of violation. 
E.  Any costs associated with recording or removal of the notice of violation may be assessed against the property as provided for in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.160 - Service of notice of violation. 
A copy of the recorded notice of violation shall be mailed to the responsible person and to the property owner and/or any other persons who have requested copies of such notices pursuant to any of the methods of service set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.170 - Procedures to appeal recordation. 
A.  An appeal of the director's notice of intent to record the notice of violation shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Upon receiving a written appeal, the director shall schedule a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. The purpose of the hearing is for the responsible person or property owner to state any reasons why a notice of violation should not be recorded. 
C.  The failure of any person to file an appeal in accordance with these provisions shall constitute a waiver of the right to an administrative hearing and shall not affect the validity of the recorded notice of violation. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.180 - Appeal hearing—Recordation of notice. 
A.  At the appeal hearing, the hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is consistent with the city attorney's rules and procedures for administrative hearings, and that is relevant to the following issues: 
1.  Whether the conditions listed in the notice of violation violate the this code or applicable state codes; and 
2.  Whether the director afforded the responsible person with due process by adhering to the notification procedures specified in this chapter. 
B.  If the hearing officer affirms the director's decision, the director may proceed to record the notice of violation. 
C.  If the hearing officer determines that recordation is improper, the hearing officer shall invalidate the director's decision to record the notice of violation. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.190 - Notice of compliance—Removal procedures. 
A.  When the violations listed on the notice of violation have been corrected, the responsible person or property owner may file with the director a written request for a notice of compliance on a form provided by the city. 
B.  Once the director receives this request, the director shall reinspect the property within ten days from receipt of the request to determine whether the violations listed in the notice of violation have been corrected and whether all necessary permits have been issued and final inspections have been performed. 
C.  The director shall provide a notice of compliance to the responsible person or property owner if the director determines that: 
1.  All violations listed in the recorded notice of violation have been corrected; 
2.  All necessary permits have been issued and finalized; 
3.  All administrative fines or civil penalties have been paid; and 
4.  The party requesting the issuance of the notice of compliance has paid an administrative fee to reimburse the city for all administrative costs. 
D.  Administrative costs may include costs incurred in the investigation, inspection, reinspection, title search, appeal hearing, and any other processing costs associated with the violations specified on the notice of violation. 
E.  If the director denies a request to issue a notice of compliance, the director shall serve the requesting party, the responsible person, and the property owner with a written explanation within five days from the inspection setting forth the reasons for the denial. The written explanation shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter 
F.  The director's decision denying a request to issue a notice of compliance constitutes the final decision in the matter and is not appealable. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.200 - Prohibition against issuance of municipal permits. 
For properties where a notice of violation has been recorded, the city may withhold permits for repair, construction, and/or alteration on the affected property until a notice of compliance has been issued by the director. The city may not withhold permits, which are necessary to obtain a notice of compliance or which are necessary to correct serious health and safety violations. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.210 - Cancellation of recorded notice of violation. 
The director shall record or cause to be recorded the notice of compliance with the San Joaquin County recorder's office. The recordation of the notice of compliance shall have the effect of canceling the recorded notice of violation. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Article III. - Administrative Citations 
 
1.10.220 - Administrative citations—Authority. 
A.  Any person violating any provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code may be issued an administrative citation by a community improvement officer as provided in this chapter. 
B.  Each and every day a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense. 
C.  An administrative fine shall be assessed by means of an administrative citation issued by the community improvement officer and shall be payable directly to the city unless otherwise noted on the citation. 
D.  Fines assessed by means of an administrative citation shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.230 - Administrative citations—Procedures. 
A.  Upon discovering any violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes, a community improvement officer may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter. The administrative citation shall be issued on a form approved by the city attorney. 
B.  If the responsible person is a commercial business, the community improvement officer shall attempt to locate the business owner and issue the business owner an administrative citation. If the code enforcement officer can only locate the manager of the commercial business, the administrative citation may be given to the manager of the business. A copy of the administrative citation shall also be mailed to the business owner or responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  The administrative citation shall be signed by the issuing code enforcement officer. 
D.  Method of Service. 
1.  Signature. Once the responsible person is located, the code enforcement officer shall attempt to obtain the signature of that person on the administrative citation. However, if the responsible person refuses or fails to sign the administrative citation, it shall not affect the validity of the citation and subsequent proceedings. 
2.  If the community improvement officer is unable to locate the responsible person, then the administrative citation shall be mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed in this chapter. 
3.  Posting. If no one can be located at the property, then the administrative citation shall be posted in a conspicuous place on or near the property and a copy subsequently mailed to the responsible person in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
E.  A copy of the administrative citation shall thereafter be mailed to the responsible person and to the owner of the property if different from the responsible person in the manner prescribed by this chapter. The failure of any person with an interest in the property to receive notice shall not affect the validity of any proceedings taken under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.240 - Contents of administrative citation. 
Any administrative citation that is issued shall contain all of the following information: 
A.  The date and location of the violations and the approximate time the violations were observed; 
B.  The code sections violated and a brief description of how the sections are violated; 
C.  Where appropriate, the action required to correct the violations; 
D.  Set forth a deadline by which the violations must be corrected and the consequences of failing to comply; 
E.  The amount of fine imposed for the violations, if any; 
F.  An explanation as to how the fine shall be paid and the time period by which it shall be paid, and the consequences of failure to pay the fine; and 
G.  Identify all rights and procedures of appeal. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.250 - Appeal of administrative citation. 
An appeal from the issuance of an administrative citation shall follow the procedures set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.260 - Fines for administrative citations. 
A.  If the responsible person fails to correct the violation, subsequent administrative citations may be issued for the same violations. The amount of the fine shall increase at a rate specified in subsection B of this section. 
B.  The fines assessed for each administrative citation issued for the same violations shall be as follows: 
1. First administrative citation 	$100.00 
2. Second administrative citation 	$250.00 
3. Third and subsequent administrative citation(s) 	$500.00 
 
C.  Payment of the fine shall not excuse the failure to correct the violations nor shall it bar further enforcement action by the city. 
D.  All fines assessed shall be payable to the city, unless otherwise directed on the citation. 
E.  The community development director is authorized, under direction and upon approval of the city attorney, to establish policies and procedures for the certification, decertification, and conduct of the community awareness and responsibility education classes, to establish that persons receiving a fine under an administrative citation have the option of attending a certified community awareness and responsibility education class prior to the citation becoming delinquent in lieu of paying the fine. A person may not use this option more than once in any twelve-month period. 
F.  For all delinquent, unpaid administrative citation fines, there shall be a penalty imposed in the amount of ten percent of the citation fine amount and an additional one percent per month of the total amount of such fine for each month during the time that said fine remains unpaid after its delinquency date. The delinquency date for an administrative citation fine shall be sixty days following the imposition of the fine, or the appeal determination of the administrative hearing officer, whichever is later. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.270 - Failure to pay administrative citation fine. 
The failure of any person to pay the fines assessed by an administrative citation within the time specified on the citation may result in the director referring the matter to the finance department or other designated agent for collection. Alternatively, the director shall pursue any other legal remedy to collect the fines including, but not limited to, those remedies provided in Title 1, Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.280 - Allocation of administrative citation fines. 
Administrative fines collected pursuant to this article shall be deposited into the special revenue fund. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Article IV. - Abatement 
 
1.10.290 - Abatements—Declaration of purpose. 
The city council finds that it is necessary to establish appropriate procedures for the administrative and summary abatement of public nuisances and code violations. The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to any other legal remedy, criminal or civil, established by law which may be pursued to address violations of this code or applicable state codes. This chapter governs all other nuisance abatement procedures established in other chapters of this code unless other procedures are specifically stated to apply. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.300 - Authority. 
Any condition caused, maintained, or permitted to exist in violation of any provisions of this code or an applicable state code, which constitutes a public nuisance, may be abated by the city pursuant to the procedures set forth in this article. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.310 - General procedures. 
A.  Abatement Notice. 
1.  Whenever the director determines that public or private property or any portion of public or private property is a public nuisance as generally defined in Section 15.30.030 or as declared in any other specific section of this code, including adopted uniform codes or applicable state codes, an abatement notice may be issued to the responsible person to abate the public nuisance. 
2.  The abatement notice shall contain a description of the subject property in general terms reasonably sufficient to identify the location of the property. It shall refer to specific sections of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code violations, which render the property a public nuisance. 
3.  The abatement notice shall describe the action required to abate the public nuisance, which may include, but is not limited to: corrections, repairs, demolition, removal, obtaining the necessary permits, vacation of tenants or occupants, or other appropriate action and shall establish time frames by which each action must occur. 
4.  The abatement notice shall explain the consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms of the notice. 
5.  The abatement notice shall identify all applicable hearing and appeal rights. 
B.  Service of Abatement Notice. The abatement notice shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.320 - Abatement of a public nuisance by the city. 
A.  Once the director follows the procedures set forth herein and the time for compliance has lapsed, if the violations remain, the nuisance conditions may be abated by city personnel or by a private contractor. 
B.  City personnel or a private contractor can enter upon private property in a reasonable manner as provided by law to abate the nuisance conditions as specified in the abatement notice or abatement order. 
C.  If the responsible person abates the nuisance conditions before the city performs the actual abatement pursuant to an abatement notice or abatement order, the director may still assess all costs incurred by the city against the responsible person pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. 
D.  When abatement is completed, a report describing the work performed and an itemized account of the total abatement costs shall be prepared by the director. The report shall contain the names and addresses of the responsible persons of each parcel, the name and address of the property owner, if different from the responsible person, the tax assessor's parcel number, and a legal description of the property, if the responsible person is an owner. 
E.  The director shall schedule a confirmation of costs hearing before an administrative hearing officer pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter, unless waived in writing by all responsible persons. 
F.  All administrative and actual costs incurred by the city in abating the violations may be assessed and recovered against the responsible person pursuant to the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.330 - Summary abatement. 
This article governs the procedures relating to summary abatement of public nuisances. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.340 - Authority. 
Whenever the director determines that an imminent health and safety hazard exists that requires immediate correction or elimination, the director may exercise the following powers without prior notice to the responsible person: 
A.  Order the immediate vacation of any tenants and prohibit occupancy of the subject property until all repairs are completed; 
B.  Post the premises as unsafe, substandard, or dangerous; 
C.  Board, fence, or secure the building or site; 
D.  Raze and grade that portion of the premises or site to prevent further collapse and remove any hazard to the general public; 
E.  Make any minimal emergency repairs as necessary to eliminate any imminent health and safety hazard; or 
F.  Take any other action as appropriate under the circumstances. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.350 - Procedures. 
A.  The director shall pursue only the minimum level of correction or abatement as necessary to eliminate the immediacy of the hazard. Costs incurred by the city during the summary abatement process shall be assessed, collected, and recovered against the responsible person through the procedures outlined in this chapter. 
B.  The director may also pursue any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law to abate any remaining public nuisance. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Article V. - Administrative Penalties 
 
1.10.360 - Declaration of purpose. 
The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for enforcing more serious violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, and applicable state codes. The city council further finds that the assessment of civil penalties through an administrative hearing procedure for code violations is a necessary alternative method of code enforcement. The administrative assessment of civil penalties is in addition to any other administrative or judicial remedy established by law, which may be pursued by the city to address serious violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.370 - Authority. 
A.  Any person violating any provision of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state code may be subject to the assessment of civil penalties pursuant to the administrative procedures provided in this chapter. 
B.  Each and every day a violation of any provision of this code or applicable state code exists constitutes a separate and distinct violation. 
C.  Civil penalties may be directly assessed in conjunction with a notice and order issued by the director, or affirmed by a hearing officer. Civil penalties assessed shall be collected in accordance with the procedures specified in this chapter. 
D.  Civil penalties for violations of any provision of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes shall be assessed at a daily rate determined by the director or hearing officer pursuant to the criteria listed in this chapter. Except as authorized pursuant to state and federal laws, the maximum civil penalty shall be one thousand dollars per violation per day with the maximum amount of civil penalties not exceeding one hundred thousand dollars per parcel or structure for any related series of violations occurring within the twelve-month period immediately proceeding the latest violation. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.380 - Procedures—Issuance of notice and order. 
A.  Whenever the director determines that a violation of one or more provisions of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes has occurred or continues to exist, a civil penalty may be issued in conjunction with a notice and order to the responsible person. 
B.  The notice and order shall refer to all code sections violated and describe how each section is or has been violated. 
C.  The notice and order shall refer to the dates and locations of the violations. 
D.  The notice and order shall address the action required to correct the outstanding violations and establish time frames for completion. 
E.  The notice and order shall establish a daily amount of civil penalties. The director shall determine the daily amount of civil penalties pursuant to the criteria in set forth in this article. 
F.  The notice and order shall identify a date when the civil penalties began to accrue and a date when the assessment of civil penalties ended, unless the violation is continuous. In the case of a continuous violation, there shall be an ongoing assessment of penalties at the daily rate established in the notice and order until the violations are corrected. 
G.  If a director determines that the violations are continuing, the notice and order shall demand that the responsible person cease and desist from further action causing the violations, or take affirmative action to cease from maintaining or permitting the violation to exist, and commence and complete all action to correct the outstanding violations under the guidance of the appropriate city departments. 
H.  The notice and order shall enumerate any other consequences should the responsible person fail to comply with the terms and deadlines as prescribed in the notice and order. 
I.  The notice and order shall identify appropriate hearing procedures as required by this chapter. 
J.  The notice and order shall be served upon the responsible person by any one of the methods of service listed in this chapter. 
K.  The notice and order shall identify the factors used by the director in determining the duration and the daily amount of civil penalties. 
L.  More than one notice and order may be issued against the same responsible person if it encompasses either different dates or different violations. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.390 - Determination of civil penalties. 
A.  In determining the date when civil penalties started to accrue, a director may consider the date when the department first discovered the violations as evidenced by the issuance of a notice of violation or any other written correspondence. 
B.  The assessment of civil penalties shall end when all action required by the notice and order has been completed. 
C.  In determining the amount of the civil penalty to be assessed on a daily rate, the director may consider some or all of the following factors: 
1.  The duration of the violation; 
2.  The frequency or recurrence of the violation; 
3.  The seriousness of the violation; 
4.  The history of the violation; 
5.  The responsible person's conduct after issuance of the notice and order; 
6.  The good faith effort by the responsible person to comply; 
7.  The economic impact of the penalty on the responsible person; 
8.  The impact of the violation upon the community; 
9.  Any other factors that justice may require. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.400 - Recovery of civil penalties 
The director may collect all civil penalties and related administrative costs by the use of all appropriate legal means, including, but not limited to, the recordation of a code enforcement lien pursuant to the procedures set forth in this chapter. If unable to collect the obligation, the director may refer the obligation to the city attorney to file a court action to recover these penalties and costs. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.410 - Cancellation of code enforcement lien. 
Once payment in full is received for the outstanding civil penalties and costs or the amount is deemed satisfied pursuant to a subsequent administrative or judicial order, the director shall, within ten days from the date payment is made or decision is final, record a notice of satisfaction with the San Joaquin County recorder's office. The notice of satisfaction shall include the same information as provided for in the original code enforcement lien. Such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the code enforcement lien. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.420 - Administrative costs. 
The director or hearing officer is authorized to assess any reasonable administrative costs. Administrative costs may include scheduling and processing of the hearing and all subsequent actions. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.430 - Failure to comply with notice and order. 
The director shall request the city attorney to appoint a hearing officer and the director shall establish a date, time, and place for the civil penalties hearing in accordance with this chapter when the responsible person fails to comply with the terms of the notice and order. Failure to comply includes failure to pay the assessed civil penalties, failure to commence and complete corrections by the established deadlines, or failure to refrain from continuing violations of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.440 - Civil penalties hearing. 
A.  The procedures for the civil penalties hearing are the same as the hearing procedures set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The hearing officer shall only consider evidence that is relevant to the following issues: (1) whether the responsible person has caused or maintained a violation of this code or applicable state code that existed on the dates specified in the notice and order; and (2) whether the amount of civil penalties assessed by the director pursuant to the procedures and criteria outlined in this chapter was reasonable. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Article VI. - Administrative Hearings 
 
1.10.450 - Administrative hearing procedures. 
These sections establish the procedures for the use of administrative hearing officers and the procedures governing administrative hearings. 
A.  Qualifications of Administrative Hearing Officer. The city attorney shall promulgate rules and procedures as are necessary to establish a list of qualified persons who are capable of acting on behalf of the city as hearing officers. 
B.  Appointment of Administrative Hearing Officer. Hearing officers presiding at administrative hearings shall be appointed by the city attorney and compensated by the city. The city attorney shall develop policies and procedures relating to the appointment and compensation of hearing officers. 
C.  Disqualification of Hearing Officer. Any person designated to serve as a hearing officer is subject to disqualification for bias, prejudice, interest, or for any other reason for which a judge may be disqualified in a court of law. Rules and procedures for the disqualification of a hearing officer shall be promulgated by the city attorney. 
D.  Powers of Hearing Officer. 
1.  The hearing officer may continue a hearing based on good cause shown by one of the parties to the hearing or if the hearing officer independently determines that due process has not been adequately afforded. 
2.  The hearing officer, upon receipt of a written request which is submitted no later than five days before the hearing, shall subpoena witnesses, documents, and other evidence where the attendance of the witness or the admission of evidence is deemed necessary to decide the issues at the hearing. All costs related to the subpoena, including witness and mileage fees shall be borne by the party requesting the subpoena. The city attorney shall develop policies and procedures relating to the issuance of subpoenas in administrative hearings, including the form of the subpoena and related costs. 
3.  The hearing officer has continuing jurisdiction over the subject matter of an administrative hearing for the purposes of granting a continuance, ensuring compliance with an administrative order, modifying an administrative order, or where extraordinary circumstances exist granting a new hearing. 
4.  The hearing officer has the authority to require the responsible person to post a code enforcement performance bond to ensure compliance with an administrative order. 
E.  Failure to Obey Subpoena. It is unlawful for any person to refuse to obey a subpoena issued by a hearing officer. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.460 - Procedures for requesting an appeals hearing. 
A.  A person served with one of the following documents, order or notices may file an appeal within ten calendar days from the service of the notice: 
1.  Any civil penalty notice and order issued; 
2.  An administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter; 
3.  An application for a waiver of fees. 
B.  The appeal shall be made in writing stating the grounds for the appeal and filed with the director on or before the tenth day after service. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.470 - Procedures for notification of administrative hearing. 
A.  Where an administrative remedy or proceeding provides for an appeal procedure, the director shall request the city attorney to appoint a hearing officer and to schedule a day, time, and a place for the hearing. 
B.  Written notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be served at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing to the responsible person. 
C.  The format and contents of the hearing notice shall be in accordance with rules and policies promulgated by the city attorney. 
D.  The notice of hearing shall be served by any of the methods of service listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.480 - Procedures at administrative hearing. 
A.  Administrative hearings are intended to be informal in nature. Formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. The procedure and format of the administrative hearing shall follow the procedures promulgated by the city attorney. 
B.  The city bears the burden of proof at an administrative hearing to establish the existence of a violation of this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes. 
C.  The standard of proof to be used by the hearing officer in deciding the issues at an administrative hearing is by a preponderance of the evidence. 
D.  Each party shall have the opportunity to cross-examine witnesses and present evidence in support of his case. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.490 - Failure to attend administrative hearing. 
Any responsible person who requests a hearing or whose actions are the subject of an administrative hearing and who fails to appear at the hearing is deemed to waive the right to a hearing and the adjudication of the issues related to the hearing, provided that the hearing was properly noticed. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.500 - Administrative order. 
A.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be entitled "Administrative Order" and shall be issued in accordance with this chapter and the rules and procedures promulgated by the city attorney. 
B.  Once all evidence and testimony are completed, the hearing officer shall issue an administrative order, which affirms, modifies, or rejects the director's action. In the case of a notice and order of civil penalty, the administrative order may affirm, modify, or reject the daily rate or duration of the civil penalties depending upon the review of the evidence and may increase or decrease the total amount of civil penalties and costs assessed. 
C.  The hearing officer may issue an administrative order that requires the responsible person to cease from violating this code, adopted uniform codes, or applicable state codes and to make necessary corrections within a specific time frame. 
D.  As part of the administrative order, the hearing officer may establish specific deadlines for the payment of penalties and costs and condition the total or partial assessment of civil penalties on the responsible person's ability to complete compliance by specified deadlines. 
E.  The hearing officer may issue an administrative order, which imposes additional civil penalties that will continue to be assessed until the responsible person complies with the hearing officer's decision and corrects the violation. 
F.  The hearing officer may schedule subsequent review hearings as may be necessary or as requested by a party to the hearing to ensure compliance with the administrative order. 
G.  The administrative order shall become final on the date of service of the order. 
H.  The administrative order shall be served on all parties by any one of the methods listed in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.510 - Judicial review. 
Once an administrative order becomes final as provided in this chapter, the time in which judicial review of the order must be sought shall be governed by California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6 or as may be amended hereafter. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
1.10.520 - Failure to comply with the administrative order misdemeanor. 
A.  After the hearing officer issues an administrative order, the director shall monitor the violations and determine compliance. 
B.  Upon the failure of the responsible person to comply with the terms and deadlines set forth in the administrative order, the director may use all appropriate legal means to recover the civil penalties, administrative costs, and obtain compliance with the administrative order, including seeking an injunction. 
C.  Failure to comply with an administrative order constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1777 § 1 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 1.12 - MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
1.12.010 - Date of municipal election. 
The municipal election heretofore held on the second Tuesday of April in even-numbered years is consolidated with the statewide general election, to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each even-numbered year, pursuant to Government Code § 36503.5. This consolidation shall become operative with the municipal and general statewide elections held in the year 1990. 
(Ord. 1438 § 1, 1988)  
1.12.020 - Extension of existing terms of office. 
Those city officers whose terms would otherwise expire in April, 1990, shall continue in their offices until no later than the fourth Tuesday after the date of the municipal election held in conjunction with the statewide general election in 1990, and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(Ord. 1438 § 2, 1988)  
1.12.030 - Filing fee. 
Pursuant to § 10228 of the Elections Code of the state of California, there is imposed a filing fee proportionate to the costs of processing a candidate's nomination papers in the amount of twenty-five dollars to be paid upon the filing of such nomination papers. 
(Ord. 1712 § 1, 2002)  
1.12.040 - By-district electoral system. 
Pursuant to California Government Code Section 34886 and the schedule established in Section 1.12.060 of this chapter, beginning in November 2018, members of the city council shall be elected on a by-district basis from five single-member council districts. The city's by-district electoral system shall be conducted in accordance with California Government Code Section 34871(c). 
(Ord. No. 1949, § 3, 3-7-2018)  
1.12.050 - Establishment of city council electoral districts. 
A.  Pursuant to Section 1.12.040 of this chapter, members of the city council shall be elected on a by-district basis, as that term is defined in California Government Code Section 34871(c), from the five council districts as established and amended from time to time by ordinance, and numerically designated as District 1, District 2, District 3, District 4, and District 5. 
B.  Members of the city council shall be elected in the electoral districts established by this section and subsequently reapportioned pursuant to applicable state and federal law. 
C.  Except as provided in subdivision D herein and notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, once this ordinance is fully phased in, the member of the city council elected or (in the event of a vacancy filled by the city council) appointed to represent a district must reside in that district and be a registered voter in that district, and any candidate for city council must live in, and be a registered voter in, the district in which he or she seeks election at the time nomination papers are issued, pursuant to California Government Code Section 34882 and Elections Code Section 10227. Termination of residency in a district by a member of the city council shall create an immediate vacancy for that Council district unless a substitute residence within the district is established within thirty days after the termination of residency. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, and consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the city council in office at the time of the ordinance codified in this chapter takes effect shall continue in office until the expiration of the full term to which he or she was elected and until his or her successor is qualified. At the end of the term of each member of the city council, that member of the city council's successor shall be elected on a by-district basis in the districts established in this section and as provided in Section 1.12.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1949, § 3, 3-7-2018)  
1.12.060 - Election schedule. 
Except as otherwise required by California Government Code Section 36512, the members of the city council shall be elected from Council Districts D1, D2, and D3 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2018, and every four years thereafter, as such council districts may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. Members of the city council shall be elected from Council Districts D4 and D5 beginning at the general municipal election in November 2020, and every four years thereafter, as such council districts may be amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1949, § 3, 3-7-2018)  
1.12.070 - Map of council districts. 
The city clerk shall maintain a map of the city showing the current boundaries and numbers of each city council district as may be established and amended from time to time by ordinance of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1949, § 3, 3-7-2018)  
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters:  
Chapter 2.04 - CITY COUNCIL MEETINGS 
 
2.04.010 - Regular meetings—Day and time. 
Regular meetings of the council shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month at seven p.m.; provided, however, that any such regular meeting at which a closed session is to be held may be commenced, for the holding of such closed session, at such earlier time on the meeting day as may be noticed on the council's agenda and posted at least seventy-two hours in advance of such earlier commencement time. In the event of any such earlier commencement of a regular meeting for the purpose of holding a closed session, no other items of business on the council's meeting agenda shall be addressed before seven p.m. In case the regular meeting falls upon a legal holiday, then the regular meeting which otherwise would have occurred on that day shall be held on the first business day thereafter at the hour of seven p.m. 
(Ord. 1699 § 1, 2001)  
2.04.020 - Informal informational meetings. 
Informal informational meetings of the city council shall be held on each Tuesday morning of each month at the hour of seven a.m. in the council chambers of the city or at such location and at such time as the council may deem appropriate, subject to notice requirements as provided by law. No formal action shall be taken by the city council at such meetings. The city manager, city attorney, department heads and members of the public, as the council may request, shall be present and present such information as may be deemed desirable. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.030 - Meeting place. 
All regular meetings of the council shall be held in the council chambers, Carnegie Forum Building, Lodi, California, or at such other place as the council may deem appropriate, subject to notice requirements as provided by law. If by reason of fire, flood, earthquake or other emergency, it is unsafe to meet in the place so designated, the meetings may be held for the duration of the emergency at such place as is designated by the mayor. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.040 - Meetings to be public. 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.050 - Special meetings. 
At any time the mayor or three city council members may call a special meeting by delivering written notice to each member and to each local newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing, such notice to be delivered personally or by mail at least twenty-four hours before the time of such meeting. Written notice may be dispensed with if a representative of the newspaper, radio or television station is present at the meeting and if all council members give their written consent to the meeting and the consent is filed in the city clerk's office when the meeting is held. A council member may give such consent by telegram. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.060 - Quorum. 
A majority of all members elected to the council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the council. Unless otherwise required by law, a simple majority of the members present may take action or adopt ordinances or resolutions. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.070 - Presiding officer—Mayor—Mayor pro tempore. 
The presiding officer of the council shall be the mayor who shall be elected by the council annually at the first regular meeting after the canvass of votes done in conjunction with the statewide general election in even-numbered years. In years where there is no general statewide election, the mayor shall be elected at the first regular meeting in December. At the time of the election of the mayor, one of the members of the council shall be chosen as mayor pro tempore. If the mayor is absent or unable to act, the mayor pro tempore shall serve until the mayor returns or is able to act. The mayor shall preserve strict order and decorum at all regular and special meetings of the council. He shall state every question coming before the council, call for the vote, announce the decision of the council on all subjects and decide all questions of order, subject, however, to an appeal to the council, in which event a majority vote of the council shall govern and conclusively determine such question of order. He shall sign all ordinances adopted by the council during his presence. In the event of the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall sign ordinances as then adopted. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.080 - Call to order—Temporary chairman. 
The mayor, or in his/her absence the mayor pro tempore, shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the meeting, and shall immediately call the council to order. In the absence of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the city clerk, or the acting city clerk shall call the council to order whereupon a temporary chairperson shall be elected by the members of the council present. Upon the arrival of the mayor or mayor pro tempore, the temporary chairperson shall immediately relinquish the chair upon the conclusion of the business immediately before the council. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.090 - Roll call. 
Before proceeding with the business of the council at regular, special or informational sessions, the city clerk or the acting city clerk shall call the roll of the members, and the names of those present shall be entered in the minutes. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.100 - Order of business—Assembly of officers. 
All meetings of the council shall be open to the public, except for closed sessions as permitted by law. The council shall provide by resolution the order of business for regular meetings of the council, and shall provide therein for public comment as required by law. In attendance shall be the city manager, the city clerk, and the city attorney or their authorized designees. 
(Ord. 1699 § 2, 2001)  
2.04.110 - Reading and approval of minutes. 
Unless the reading of the minutes of a council meeting is requested by a majority of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each member with a copy thereof. Any council member can correct an error in the minutes, subject to verification by the clerk. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.120 - Rules of debate. 
The council shall, by resolution, adopt rules of conduct and debate applicable to all city council meetings. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.130 - Addressing the council. 
A.  Any interested person may, subject to the rules of procedure adopted hereunder, speak on any item coming before the council. It shall not be required that persons wishing to speak give prior written notice, but priority shall be given to those who have so notified the city clerk in advance. 
B.  After a motion is made and seconded, no person shall address the city council without first securing permission of the council to do so. 
C.  Remarks by the public shall be made only from the podium. Speakers are requested but not required to first give their names and addresses for the record. No one shall be permitted to enter into any discussion without permission of the presiding officer. 
(Ord. No. 1884, § 1, 10-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1884, § 1, adopted October 16, 2013, repealed the former § 2.04.130, and enacted a new § 2.04.130 as set out herein. The former § 2.04.130 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1594, 1994.  
2.04.140 - Voting. 
All members of the council, when present, must vote. If a member of the council states that he is not voting, his silence shall be recorded as an affirmative vote unless, however, the council member abstains from voting by reason of his/her interest in the matter before the council and that reason is stated at the meeting. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.150 - Decorum. 
A.  Council Members. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither, by conversation or otherwise, delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council nor disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the council or its presiding officer, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. Any member who, after warning by the chair, repeatedly violates these rules may be ejected for the remainder of the meeting by two-thirds vote of the council. 
B.  Other Persons. Any person who utters language or engages in conduct that disrupts, disturbs or otherwise impedes the orderly conduct of any council meeting shall be forthwith, by the presiding officer, barred from further audience at the meeting before the council, unless permission to continue is granted by a majority vote of the council. 
C.  Any violation of this section may be punished as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1884, § 2, 10-16-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1884, § 2, adopted October 16, 2013, repealed the former § 2.04.150, and enacted a new § 2.04.150 as set out herein. The former § 2.04.150 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1594, 1994.  
2.04.160 - Persons allowed within rail. 
No person, except city officials, their representatives and newsgathering or media personnel, shall be permitted within the rail in front of the council chamber during meetings, without the express consent of the council. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.170 - Entry of dissent in minutes. 
Any council member shall have the right to have the reasons for his dissent from, or protest against, any action of the council entered on the minutes. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.180 - Preparation of agendas. 
A.  Consistent with the provisions of the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.), the agenda for council meetings shall be prepared by the city manager, and distributed by the city clerk. 
B.  Matters may be placed on the agenda for consideration by the city council by request of: 
1.  Any member of the city council; 
2.  The city manager; 
3.  The city clerk; 
4.  The city attorney. 
C.  Any reasonable request by any person named in this section to place a matter on the agenda shall be honored, subject to the city manager's discretion as to the preparation of accompanying staff reports. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
2.04.190 - Closed sessions—Confidentiality. 
A.  No officer, employee or agent of the city shall, without proper authorization, divulge confidential information received by such person as part of his or her official duties during any closed session of the city council authorized under the Ralph M. Brown Act (Government Code Section 54950 et seq.) as it now exists or may later be modified. 
B.  Such confidential information may include but is not limited to matters involving pending litigation, property acquisition, labor negotiations, personnel matters or other information, the disclosure of which would reasonably be likely to prejudice the good faith conduct of city business, constitute an unwarranted invasion of privacy, or place the city at an unfair disadvantage in negotiations. 
C.  For purposes of this section, "proper authorization" means: 
1.  In matters of personal privacy, a waiver by the individual enjoying such right of privacy; 
2.  The order or subpena of a court of competent jurisdiction; 
3.  Authorization by the city council as a body; 
4.  Conclusion or finalization of the matter or subject involved, as determined by the city council. 
D.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed a waiver of any other confidential privilege for any information established elsewhere by statute or case law. 
(Ord. 1594 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Chapter 2.08 - CITY COUNCIL SALARIES 
 
2.08.010 - Basis. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted pursuant to Section 36516 of the Government Code, as added by Chapter 286 of the Statutes of 1965, authorizing the council to provide by ordinance that each member of the council shall receive a prescribed salary the amount of which is based upon the population of the city as determined by estimate made by the State Department of Finance. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(2)(1), 1984; prior code § 2-81)  
2.08.020 - Amount. 
Each member of the council of the city shall receive, as salary, the sum of eight hundred sixty dollars per month, as prescribed in Government Code Section 36516(a)(3) in cities over fifty thousand in population, which shall be effective December 3, 2008, and shall be payable from and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the same time and in the same manner as the salaries are paid to other officers and employees of the city. 
(Ord. 1810 § 1, 2008: Ord. 1478 § 1, 1990: Ord. 1360 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1333 § 1(2)(1, 3), 1984; prior code § 2-83)  
2.08.030 - Increase or decrease. 
Following any new and later estimate of population made by the Department of Finance placing the city in a population group other than that set forth in Section 2.08.020, the salary payable under this chapter to each member of the council shall be increased or decreased accordingly to equal the sum prescribed for that population group in Section 36516 of the Government Code, as added by Chapter 286 of the Statutes of 1965; provided, however, that the salary as so increased or decreased shall become payable only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the council become eligible therefor by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the next succeeding general municipal election held in the city. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(1), 1984; prior code § 2-84)  
2.08.040 - Expense reimbursement separate. 
The salaries prescribed in this chapter are and shall be exclusive of any amounts payable to each member of the council as reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses incurred by him in the performance of official duties for the city. 
(Prior code § 2-85)  
2.08.050 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative only on and after the date upon which one or more members of the council become eligible for the salary prescribed in this chapter by virtue of beginning a new term of office following the general municipal election next succeeding its effective date. 
(Prior code § 2-86)  
Chapter 2.12 - CITY MANAGER 
 
2.12.010 - Office established—Appointment—Qualifications. 
The office of city manager is established. The city manager shall be appointed by the city council solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications. 
(Prior code § 2-20)  
2.12.020 - Eligibility of councilmen. 
No person elected to membership on the city council shall, subsequent to such election, be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after he has ceased to be a member of the council. 
(Prior code § 2-21)  
2.12.030 - Absence or disability. 
During the absence or disability of the city manager, the council may designate some properly qualified person to perform the duties of the office of city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-22)  
2.12.040 - Bond. 
The city manager shall furnish a surety company bond to be approved by the council in such sum as may be determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 2-23)  
2.12.050 - Removal. 
The council shall appoint the city manager for an indefinite term and may remove him by a majority vote of its members. At least thirty days before such removal shall become effective, the council shall by a majority vote of its members adopt a preliminary resolution stating the reason for his removal. The manager may reply in writing within ten days after receipt of notice of such preliminary resolution, and may request a public hearing which shall be held not earlier than twenty days nor later than thirty days after the filing of such request. After such public hearing, if one is requested, and after full consideration, the council by a majority vote of its members may adopt a final resolution of removal. By the preliminary resolution the council may suspend the manager from duty, but shall in any case cause to be paid him forthwith any unpaid balance of his salary and his monthly salary shall continue to be paid following adoption of the preliminary resolution until he is reinstated or removed. In event of removal, the city council shall appoint a new city manager within a reasonable time thereafter and must exercise due diligence in naming a successor. 
(Prior code § 2-24)  
2.12.060 - Powers and duties generally. 
The city manager shall be the administrative head of the city government under the direction and control of the council, except as otherwise provided by this code or other ordinance of the city. He shall be responsible to the city council for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to the city manager's general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it is his duty and he shall have power: 
A.  Enforcement of laws: To see that all laws and ordinances are duly enforced; 
B.  Appointment, removal, etc., of certain officers: To employ, discipline or remove all heads of departments and all subordinate officers and employees of the city; to transfer employees from one department to another; and to consolidate or combine offices, positions, departments or units under his jurisdiction. Nothing contained in this subsection shall apply, however, to the city attorney, city clerk or city treasurer, each of whom shall be appointed and removed by the city council; 
C.  Control over departments and appointive officers: To exercise control over all departments and divisions of the city government and over all appointive officers and employees thereof except as provided in this section; 
D.  Attendance at council meetings: To attend all meetings of the council and its committees unless excused therefrom by the council or by the committee and except when his removal is under consideration by the council; 
E.  Recommend ordinances: To recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary or expedient; 
F.  Advice as to finances: To keep the city council at all times advised as to the financial conditions and needs of the city, and at least quarterly shall submit a financial report; 
G.  Preparation of budget: To prepare the budget annually and submit it to the council and be responsible for its administration after adoption; 
H.  Annual report: To prepare and submit to the council as of the end of the fiscal year a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city for the preceding year; 
I.  Salary plan: To prepare and recommend to the city council a salary plan; 
J.  Purchasing: To purchase all supplies for all of the departments or divisions thereof, and no expenditure shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except upon report or approval of the city manager; 
K.  Investigation of city affairs: To make investigations into the affairs of the city or any department or division thereof or any contract, or the proper performance of any obligation running to the city; 
L.  Investigation of complaints: To investigate all complaints in relation to all matters concerning the administration of the government of the city and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city, and to see that all franchises, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed; 
M.  Supervision of public buildings, parks, etc.: To exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council; 
N.  Organizational chart: To prepare and submit to the city council an organization chart showing the organization plan for all departments of the city government; 
O.  Issue licenses and permits: To issue on behalf of the council all licenses and permits not otherwise provided for by ordinance; 
P.  Public works construction: To superintend the construction of all public work done by the city; 
Q.  Devotion of entire time to duties: To devote his entire time to the duties and interest of the city; 
R.  Delegated duties: To perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated by ordinance or motion of the city council; 
S.  Political activity: The city manager shall not participate in any city political activities or politics; 
T.  Contracts: To execute on behalf of the city, without city council approval, contracts, as defined in Lodi Municipal Code [Section] 3.20.015, in the amount of twenty thousand dollars or less, and to delegate authority to subordinate officers and employees to execute contracts without city council or city manager approval contracts in the amount of fifteen thousand or less to the public works director or designee, fifteen thousand or less to the electric utility director or designee and ten thousand dollars or less to all other directors or designees. Nothing in this section shall allow departure from the other purchasing requirements of Chapter 3.20 of this code. For contracts of not less than ten thousand nor greater than twenty thousand the city manager shall quarterly prepare for the city council a report which includes a list of the contracts into which the city has entered during the previous three months. No contract shall be split into smaller segments to avoid the provisions of this subsection. (Government Code § 4526, Public Contract Code § 10359) 
(Ord. 1763 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1506 § 1, 1991; prior code § 2-25) 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 1, 9-7-2011)  
2.12.070 - Council to deal exclusively through city manager. 
Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative services solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any of the subordinates of the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-26)  
2.12.080 - Compensation. 
The city manager shall receive such salary as the city council shall from time to time determine and fix by resolution or motion. 
(Prior code § 2-27)  
2.12.090 - Approval of claims and demands. 
No claim or demand shall be audited or allowed by the council which is not approved by the city manager. 
(Prior code § 2-28)  
2.12.100 - Subordinate appointment or removal. 
Neither the council nor any of its members shall demand the appointment of any person to, or exercise their influence in the appointment of any person, or his removal from office by the city manager or by any of his subordinates, or in any manner take part in the appointment or removal of officers and employees in the administration service of the city other than by suggestions to the city manager. The council nor any member thereof shall not give orders to any subordinates of the city manager either publicly or privately. 
(Prior code § 2-29)  
2.12.110 - Legislative powers of council—Library jurisdiction. 
A.  There is retained to the city council the sole power of being the policy making and legislative body for the city, and the duties and powers of the city manager are expressly confined to the administration service of the city. 
B.  The city manager shall have no power to administer the affairs of the city library nor shall he have any control or direction over the board of trustees or the library. However, the city manager shall exercise direction over the library director's employment practices. 
(Prior code § 2-30) 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 1, 8-1-2018)  
2.12.120 - Disposition of surplus personal property. 
A.  The city manager may, upon recommendation of the city purchasing officer, authorize the sale of surplus personal property having a value of five thousand dollars or less, which is no longer required for city use. Within thirty days following the sale of any surplus city property under this section, the city manager shall notify the city council in writing of such sale. 
B.  Prior to sale of property under this section, the city manager shall notify all departments of its availability for city use. 
C.  The following procedures shall be used to dispose of surplus city property under this section: 
1.  The property to be sold shall be advertised by publication at least one time in a newspaper of general circulation, in a magazine or periodical generally distributed to municipalities, or via online public auction, and blind or sealed bids solicited. The manner of advertising and processing of bids shall be consistent with practices employed for other city transactions requiring bids. 
2.  If the procedures specified in subsection 1 of this section produce no bids, or bids of less than a reasonable sale price, all bids may be rejected by the city manager, and offers in any form may be solicited and accepted without further competitive procedures. 
3.  If no satisfactory bids or offers are received under subsections 1 or 2 of this section, such surplus property may be sold by auction or delivered to a broker for consignment sale. 
4.  Surplus property having a total value of less than one thousand dollars, as determined by the city purchasing officer, may be sold without compliance with the advertising and sealed bid requirements of subsection 1 of this section. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provisions in this chapter, the chief of police may authorize a peace officer (as defined in Penal Code Section 830) to purchase his or her city-issued duty handgun, if such peace officer has been honorably retired through a service retirement or from a job-incurred disability not related to a mental or emotional disorder, and has been granted the legal right to carry a concealed firearm pursuant to Penal Code Section 25450. The retired peace officer will pay the city an amount equal to the city's cost to acquire a new city-issued handgun, plus any handling and transfer costs, as determined by the Lodi Police Department. The purchase of a city-issued handgun from the city will be made pursuant to policies approved by the city manager and chief of police, which shall include, without limitation, a waiver and release of liability of the city of Lodi, its employees, elected and appointed officials, officers, and volunteers as to all matters concerning the sale of the city-issued handgun under this provision. 
(Ord. No. 1959, § 1, 10-17-2018; Ord. 1474 § 1, 1990)  
Chapter 2.13 - CITY CLERK 
 
2.13.010 - City clerk. 
The city clerk shall be appointed by the city council. The city council shall prescribe the qualifications, additional duties, and compensation of the city clerk. The city clerk shall report his or her advice, recommendations, and requests directly to the city council. The city clerk is the custodian of the city seal and shall perform the functions and duties of the city clerk as specified in California Government Code §40801 et seq. and other state and local statutes. 
(Ord. 1762 § 1, 2005)  
Chapter 2.14 - CITY ATTORNEY 
 
2.14.010 - City attorney. 
The city attorney shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve as legal counsel to the city government and all officers, departments, boards, commissions, and agencies thereof and shall have such other powers and duties as may be prescribed by state law and by ordinance or resolution of the city council. In situations where the city attorney determines there is a conflict in representation by that office, the city council may authorize the retention of other legal counsel to represent one of the conflicting parties. The city attorney shall report his or her advice, recommendations, and requests directly to the city council. 
(Ord. 1762 § 2, 2005)  
Chapter 2.16 - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
2.16.010 - Established—Appointment. 
A.  A city planning commission is created in accordance with the provisions of Section 65100, et seq. of the California Government Code. 
B.  Such commission shall consist of seven members to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
C.  In order to be considered for appointment to the planning commission, a person must be a registered voter of the city of Lodi at the time of application for consideration. The provisions of this subsection shall apply to appointments made after October 15, 2003. 
(Ord. 1736 § 1, 2003; Prior code § 2-31)  
2.16.020 - Compensation. 
Members of the planning commission shall receive the sum of twenty dollars for each and every meeting of the commission actually attended by them but not to exceed three meetings in each calendar month. Such compensation may be increased or decreased from time to time by resolution of the city council. All members of the commission shall be entitled to such expenses as are authorized by law when approved by the council. 
(Prior code § 2-32)  
2.16.030 - Officers—Rules—Powers and duties. 
The city planning commission shall have power to elect its own presiding officer with the title of chairman and such other officers as may be necessary or expedient, to adopt rules of order and procedure, and do and perform its duties in conformance with Title 7 of the California Government Code and such other laws as may appertain to city planning and zoning. 
(Ord. 1736 § 2, 2003)  
2.16.040 - Terms of office. 
The terms of office of the members of the planning commission shall be for four years from their respective dates of appointment; provided, however, that terms of office of the various members of the planning commission appointed after the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives shall be determined by lot so that there will be staggered terms with one member to serve one year, two members to serve two years, two members to serve three years and two members to serve four years. 
(Prior code § 2-33.1)  
Chapter 2.20 - POLICE AUXILIARY 
 
2.20.010 - Established—Composition. 
A city police auxiliary is established as a voluntary organization composed of persons appointed by the chief of police. Membership in the police auxiliary shall not exceed the number of regular officers in the police department. 
(Prior code § 2-69)  
2.20.020 - Chief of police authority. 
Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall have complete authority and control over the police auxiliary. He may appoint as members thereof any persons whom he deems to be qualified, and he may reject an application for membership. He may provide for the training of candidates for membership, and for the further training of members. 
(Prior code § 2-70)  
2.20.030 - Qualifications—Swearing. 
No person shall become a member of the police auxiliary until he has taken the training and is able to meet all other requirements prescribed by the chief of police. When so qualified and selected, he shall then be sworn in by the city clerk as a member of the police auxiliary. 
(Prior code § 2-71)  
2.20.040 - Expansion or diminishment. 
Subject to the provisions of Section 2.16.010, the chief of police may, by order, diminish or expand the membership of the police auxiliary as an existing or contemplated condition or emergency may require. 
(Prior code § 2-72)  
2.20.050 - Termination of membership. 
The membership of any person in the police auxiliary may be terminated by the chief of police at any time, and such member may resign from the police auxiliary at any time upon notifying the chief of police in writing of his resignation. 
(Prior code § 2-73)  
2.20.060 - Status as employees. 
Each member of the police auxiliary while acting under the direction of the chief of police during a regular assigned tour of duty, is an employee of the city and is entitled to receive compensation from the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 3362 of the California Labor Code. 
(Prior code § 2-74)  
2.20.070 - Duty—Rules—Orders. 
The duty of the police auxiliary, subject at all times to the direction, supervision and control of the chief of police, is to assist the regular members of the police department in the enforcement of law and the maintenance of peace and order whenever and wherever its services are required. The chief of police may, by order, establish rules and regulations to govern the police auxiliary, including the fixing of specific duties of its members in providing for the maintenance of discipline. He may change such orders from time to time. 
(Prior code § 2-75)  
2.20.080 - Authority. 
A member of the police auxiliary, when on duty as assigned by the chief of police shall have the authority given to officers of the police department to direct traffic and shall have the same power of arrest granted a regular member of the police department, subject to any limitations which the chief of police may impose. 
(Prior code § 2-76)  
2.20.090 - Crowd control duty. 
The police auxiliary may be assigned to functions at which members of the public may assemble in relatively large numbers where there may be a problem of a breach of the peace and control of the crowd is important in the experience and opinion of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 2-77)  
2.20.100 - Uniform—Identification. 
The uniform for members of the police auxiliary shall be similar to the uniform worn by members of the regular police department, with an identifying insignia to be prescribed by the chief of police. Sidearms shall be carried in the regulation police Sam Brown belt and holster. An identification card, badge and cap piece, and such other insignia or evidence of identification as the chief of police may prescribe, shall be issued to each member who shall carry the card at all times. Each member shall surrender all city property issued to him upon the termination of his membership. The uniform, badge and cap piece may be worn, and the gun and baton carried, only while on duty as assigned by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 2-78)  
2.20.110 - Firearm qualification. 
No member of the police auxiliary shall carry any firearm until he has qualified for it, and received permission from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 2-79)  
2.20.120 - Impersonation. 
It is unlawful for any person to impersonate or falsely represent himself to be a member, or to wear, use or possess a badge, cap or insignia used by the police auxiliary. 
(Prior code § 2-80)  
Chapter 2.24 - PEACE OFFICER TRAINING 
 
2.24.010 - Desire to qualify for state aid. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, relative to peace officers' training fund. 
(Prior code § 2-67)  
2.24.020 - Adherence to state standards. 
Pursuant to section 13522 of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code, the city while receiving aid from the state pursuant to such Chapter 1 will adhere to the standards for recruitment and training established by the State Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. 
(Prior code § 2-68)  
2.24.030 - Standards and training for corrections. 
The city declares that it desires to qualify to receive aid from the state under the provisions of Chapter 5, Title 7, Part 3 of the California Penal Code, relative to Corrections Training Fund. While receiving any state aid pursuant to Article 3, commencing with Section 6040 of the California Penal Code, the city will adhere to the standards for selection and training established by the board of corrections. 
(Ord. 1611 § 1, 1995)  
Chapter 2.28 - INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY 
 
2.28.010 - Findings. 
In accordance with the California Industrial Development Financing Act (Title 10, commencing with Section 91500 of the California Government Code) (the "Act"), this city council finds and declares that there is a need for an industrial development authority to function in the city. 
(Prior code § 2-99)  
2.28.020 - Established. 
The council further declares that an industrial development authority shall function in the city in accomplishment of the purposes provided in the Act, and to carry out and complete projects and perform and exercise derivative obligations and powers as set forth in the Act. 
(Prior code § 2-100)  
2.28.030 - Board of directors. 
The council further declares itself to be the board of directors of such industrial development authority, and all the rights, powers, privileges, duties, liabilities, disabilities and immunities vested in such a board under the Act shall be vested in this city council as such board. 
(Prior code § 2-101)  
2.28.040 - Authority. 
The authority established in the city by the Act and authorized to transact business and exercise its powers thereunder by this chapter and shall be known as the "Industrial Development Authority of the City of Lodi, California." 
(Prior code § 2-102)  
Chapter 2.32 - EMERGENCY SERVICES 
 
2.32.010 - Purpose. 
The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency, the direction of the emergency organization, and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. 
(Prior code § 8-2)  
2.32.020 - Emergency defined. 
As used in this chapter, "emergency" means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. It shall not include nor does any provision of this chapter apply to any condition relating to a labor controversy. 
(Prior code § 8-1)  
2.32.030 - Emergency services council—Established. 
The city emergency services council is created and shall consist of the following: 
A.  The mayor, who shall be the chairman; 
B.  The director of emergency services, who shall be vice-chairman; 
C.  The coordinator of emergency services; 
D.  All chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency services operations plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter; 
E.  Such representatives of municipalities, civic, professional and industry organizations having an official responsibility as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. 
(Prior code § 8-3)  
2.32.040 - Emergency services council—Powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the city emergency services council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The emergency services council shall meet upon call of the chairman, or in his absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice-chairman. 
(Prior code § 8-4)  
2.32.050 - Director and coordinator—Established. 
A.  There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. 
B.  There is created the office of coordinator of emergency services. The assistant city manager shall be the coordinator of emergency services. 
(Prior code § 8-5)  
2.32.060 - Director and coordinator—Powers and duties. 
A.  The director is empowered to: 
1.  Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a "local emergency" if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect; 
2.  Request the governor to proclaim a "state of emergency" when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are considered to be inadequate to cope with the emergency; 
3.  Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter; 
4.  Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city, and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them; 
5.  Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined in this chapter; 
6.  In the event of the proclamation of a "local emergency" as provided this chapter, the proclamation of a "state of emergency" by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services or the existence of a "state of war emergency," the director is empowered: 
a.  To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, that such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council, 
b.  To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use, 
c.  To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a "state of emergency" in the city or the existence of a "state of war emergency," to command the aid of as many citizens of this city as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered emergency service workers, 
d.  To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency; 
e.  To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant to this chapter adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority. 
B.  The director of emergency services shall be succeeded by the coordinator of emergency services in the event that the director is unavailable or unable to perform his duties during an emergency. In such order of succession the coordinator shall assume all powers and duties as conferred in subsection A of this section upon the director. 
C.  The coordinator of emergency services shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of emergency service chiefs, develop emergency plans and manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. 
(Prior code § 8-6)  
2.32.070 - Emergency organization. 
All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who are by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.32.060(A)(6)(c), charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, constitute the emergency organization of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-7)  
2.32.080 - Emergency operations plan. 
The city emergency services council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency operations plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 8-8)  
2.32.090 - Expenditures. 
Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. 
(Prior code § 8-9)  
2.32.100 - Prohibited acts. 
It is a misdemeanor for any person, during a state of war emergency, state of emergency or local emergency, to: 
A.  Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter; 
B.  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof; 
C.  Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. 
(Prior code § 8-10)  
Chapter 2.36 - FINDINGS OF FACT 
 
2.36.010 - Hearing body defined. 
For purposes of this chapter, "hearing body" includes a one-person hearing officer. 
(Prior code § 2-90)  
2.36.020 - Request. 
In proceedings where findings of fact are required, the hearing body shall make its findings in writing, if a written request is filed by any interested person with the hearing body within ten days of its decision. 
(Prior code § 2-87)  
2.36.030 - Preparation and adoption. 
Where findings are requested, they shall be prepared within fifteen days of the date of receipt of the request. Thereafter, the hearing body shall adopt findings, which set forth its conclusions on facts material to its decision, at its next regular meeting or as soon thereafter as is practicable, but, in any event, within sixty days after expiration of the preparation period. Proposed findings may be submitted by the prevailing party, who shall be notified in writing of the request for findings. Proposed counter-findings may be submitted by any interested person. Those persons who were present and spoke at the hearing shall be notified of the request for findings. 
(Prior code § 2-88)  
2.36.040 - Findings not requested. 
Where findings are not requested, they are waived. It shall thereafter be presumed that all findings which are necessary to sustain the hearing body's decision were made by that body. Such presumption shall be applicable to court proceedings. 
(Prior code § 2-89)  
2.36.050 - Appeal period not extended. 
Nothing contained in this chapter extends the appeal periods established for hearings that are set forth elsewhere in this code. 
(Prior code § 2-91)  
Chapter 2.38 - BOARD OF LIBRARY TRUSTEES 
 
2.38.010 - Creation. 
Pursuant to authority of Education Code Section 18900, et seq., as amended from time to time, there is created a city library board of trustees. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.020 - Appointment of board of trustees. 
The public library shall be managed by a board of library trustees, consisting of five members, to be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.030 - Term of office and compensation. 
Each trustee shall hold office for three years beginning July 1st and ending on June 30th, or when a trustee's successor is appointed and qualified, whichever occurs last. The members of the first board so appointed shall so classify themselves by lot that one of their number shall go out [of] office at the end of the current fiscal year, two at the end of one year thereafter, and three at the end of two years thereafter. Each trustee shall serve without compensation unless the city council, by ordinance, otherwise provides for compensation which shall not exceed fifty dollars per month. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.40 - Termination for absences. 
A.  The appointment of any trustee absent from three consecutive regular or special meetings without approval of the library board of trustees, confirmed by majority vote of the board, shall be terminated and the city clerk notified thereof. 
B.  The city clerk then shall notify any member whose appointment has been terminated and report to the city council that a vacancy exists on said board and that an appointment should be made for the unexpired term. 
C.  A trustee may be granted a leave of absence by the city council, and a temporary vacancy shall thereupon exist for the period of such leave of absence. During the period of such temporary vacancy, the council may fill such vacancy by a temporary appointment to said board, provided, however, that the period of such temporary appointment shall not exceed the period of the temporary vacancy. At the expiration of a leave of absence so granted, the member shall automatically resume full and permanent membership on said board. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.050 - Vacancies. 
Vacancies shall be filled by appointment by the mayor with the consent of the city council for the unexpired term in the same manner as the original appointments are made. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.060 - Monthly meetings. 
The board of library trustees shall meet at least once a month at such times and places as may be fixed by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.070 - Special meetings. 
Special meetings may be called by the chair or by a majority of the trustees, the city manager, and/or the city council provided written notice is given 48 hours in advance of the special meeting to the following: each trustee, the city manager, and anyone filing written request for notice with the city clerk. Notice of meetings shall comply in all respects with Section 54950 et seq., of the Government Code, known commonly as the Ralph M. Brown Act, and include posting on the library website. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.080 - Quorum. 
A majority of the board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.090 - President and chairperson per tem. 
The board shall appoint one of its number president, who shall serve for one year and until his successor is appointed, and in his absence shall select a chairperson pro tem. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.100 - Record of proceedings. 
The board shall cause a proper record of its proceedings to be kept. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
2.38.110 - Rules, regulations and by-laws. 
Pursuant to the provisions of Education Code Section 18900, et seq., as amended from time to time, the board of library trustees may make and enforce all rules, regulations, and by-laws necessary for the administration, government, and protection of the libraries under its management, and all property belonging thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 3, 8-1-2018)  
Chapter 2.40 - LIBRARY CONFLICT OF INTEREST CODE 
 
2.40.010 - Authority—Applicability—Sanctions. 
A.  In compliance with the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Section 81000, et seq., the city council adopts this Conflict of Interest Code, which shall be applicable to all designated trustees and employees of the Lodi public library as specifically required by California Government Code Section 87300. 
B.  This chapter has the force and effect of law. Designated trustees and employees violating this chapter are subject to the sanctions provided in Chapter 11 of the Political Reform Act, Government Code Section 91000, et seq. 
(Prior code § 2-92)  
2.40.020 - State provisions adopted—Materials on file. 
Unless otherwise indicated, the definitions contained in the Political Reform Act of 1974, Government Code Section 81000, et seq., the regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission adopted pursuant thereto, and any amendments to the Act and regulations are incorporated into this Conflict of Interest Code. Copies of this chapter, the Political Reform Act of 1974, and the regulations of the Fair Political Practices Commission shall be on file with the filing officer. The filing officer shall supply each designated employee with an instruction manual and statement of economic interests forms. 
(Prior code § 2-98)  
2.40.030 - Disclosure required. 
Government Code Section 87302(a) requires that persons, including governing board members, who occupy positions with the Lodi public library which involve the making, or participation in the making, of decisions which may foreseeably have a material effect on any financial interest shall be designated employees. All persons who hold the positions enumerated in Section 2.40.040 are designated employees and must disclose all economic interests set forth in that section. 
(Prior code § 2-93)  
2.40.040 - Scope of disclosure. 
Persons occupying the following positions are designated employees and must disclose the following economic interests. The manner of reporting reportable items shall be as provided by Government Code Section 87200. The trustees and librarian shall disclose: 
A.  Investments in any business entity which, within the last two years, has contracted, or in the future foreseeably may contract, with this agency to provide services, supplies, materials, machinery or equipment. See Government Code Sections 82034, 87103 and 87206; 
B.  Income from any source which, within the last twelve months, has contracted, or in the future foreseeably may contract, with the agency to provide services, supplies, materials, machinery or equipment to the district. See Government Code Sections 82030, 87103 and 87207; 
C.  Interests in real property, located in whole or in part either within the boundaries of the agency or within two miles of the boundaries of the agency, including any leasehold, beneficial or ownership interest or option to acquire such interest in real property. See Government Code Sections 82033, 87103, 87206. 
(Prior code § 2-94)  
2.40.050 - When filings required. 
A.  Initial Statement. An initial statement shall be filed by each designated employee within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter disclosing investments in business entities and interests in real property made reportable by Section 2.40.040. All new designated employees shall file statements not less than thirty days after being appointed or nominated, unless an earlier assumption of office is required by emergency circumstances (Government Code Section 87302(b)). 
B.  Annual Statements. Thereafter, each designated employee shall file an annual statement during the month of January, disclosing reportable investments in business entities, interests in real property, and income held or received in the period since the closing date of the employee's previously filed statement and December 31st. 
C.  New Positions. Designated employees appointed, promoted or transferred to designated positions within the agency shall file initial statements disclosing reportable investments in business entities and interests in real property within thirty days after assuming office (Government Code Section 87302(b)). 
D.  Leaving Office. Any designated employee whose employment with the Lodi public library is terminated, voluntarily or involuntarily, shall, within thirty days after termination, file a statement disclosing investments in business entities, interests in real property and income, covering the period between the closing date of the previous statement of economic interests and the termination date. 
E.  Filing With the City Clerk. All designated employees required to submit a statement of financial interest shall file the original with the city clerk. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(2)(4), 1984; prior code § 2-95)  
2.40.060 - Manner of reporting. 
The manner of reporting reportable interests shall be pursuant to Government Code Sections 87206 and 87207. 
(Prior code § 2-96)  
2.40.070 - Disqualification from decisionmaking. 
A designated employee must disqualify himself from making or participating in the making of any decisions which will foreseeably have a material financial effect, distinguishable from its effect on the public generally, on any reportable economic interest (except gifts of less than two hundred fifty dollars) or upon any business entity in which the designated employee holds a position of management or is a director, officer, partner, sole owner, trustee or employee. No member shall be prevented from making or participating in the making of any decision to the extent his participation is legally required for the decision to be made. 
(Prior code § 2-97)  
Chapter 2.44 - PERSONNEL SYSTEM  
Article I. - Generally 
 
2.44.010 - Authority—Purpose—Applicability. 
Pursuant to the authority granted to the legislative body of any city within the state under the provisions of Chapter 1, Division 5, Title 4 of the Government Code of the state and in order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters and to place municipal employment on a merit basis so that the best qualified persons available are brought into service of the city, the personnel system set forth in this chapter is adopted, and the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employments. 
(Prior code § 17-1)  
2.44.020 - Classified service. 
The classified service shall consist of all employees except: 
A.  Officers appointed by the city council; 
B.  Department heads; 
C.  All part-time employees; 
D.  Employees paid on an hourly or per diem basis and employees who do seasonal work. 
(Prior code § 17-2)  
2.44.040 - Appointing authorities. 
The appointing authorities are the city council, in the case of the city manager, city attorney, city clerk and city treasurer; the library board, in the case of the library director; and the city manager, for all other employees. These appointing authorities, in whom is vested by law the power to make appointments, transfers, promotions, demotions, reinstatements, lay-offs, and to suspend or dismiss employees, shall retain such power, subject to the provisions of this chapter and the rules established under this chapter. In addition the city manager shall have the authority to discipline or dismiss the library director based on employment practices. 
(Prior code § 17-4) 
(Ord. No. 1955, § 2, 8-1-2018)  
2.44.050 - City manager. 
The city manager shall: 
A.  Administration of system: Administer all provisions of this chapter and the rules established under this chapter not specifically reserved to other authorities; 
B.  Personnel board meetings: Attend all meetings of the personnel board; 
C.  Rules and regulations: Formulate rules and regulations and amendments, to be approved by resolution of the city council, establishing specific procedures to govern all phases of the personnel program, to include: 
1.  The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position classification plan, 
2.  The preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a salary and wage plan, 
3.  The public announcement of vacancies and examinations and the acceptance of applications for employment, 
4.  The preparation and conduct of examinations and the establishment and use of employment lists containing names of persons eligible for appointment, 
5.  The certifications and appointments of persons from employment lists to fill vacancies and the making of temporary and emergency appointments, 
6.  The evaluation of employees during the probationary period, 
7.  The transfer, promotion and demotion of employees, 
8.  The separation from the service of employees through layoff, suspension, dismissal and for incapacity to perform required duties, 
9.  The standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training, 
10.  The maintenance and use of necessary records and forms. 
(Prior code § 17-5)  
2.44.060 - Unlawful discrimination. 
No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, promoted, demoted or discharged, or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations or because of race or religious belief. 
(Prior code § 17-11)  
Article II. - Personnel Board of Review 
 
2.44.070 - Composition of board—Vacancies. 
The personnel board of review created under this article shall consist of five members to be appointed by the city council. Vacancies on the personnel board, from whatsoever cause, shall be filled by appointment by the city council. Three of the five members shall constitute a quorum and may conduct business. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 1842, § 1, 11-17-2010)  
2.44.080 - Terms. 
The personnel board appointed and sworn in on January 18, 1990 shall, no later than June 1, 1990, choose by lots one member whose term shall expire on January 17, 1991, one member whose term shall expire on January 17, 1992, and one member whose term shall expire on January 17, 1993. Thereafter, at the expiration of the terms so determined, successors shall be appointed for terms of three years. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990)  
2.44.090 - Qualifications of members. 
The members of the personnel board shall be qualified electors within the county and shall serve without compensation. No person shall be appointed to the board who holds any position with the city nor shall any member while a member of the board be eligible for appointment to any position with the city. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 1851, § 1, 9-7-2011)  
2.44.100 - Hearing of appeals. 
A.  As provided in this article, by rule adopted hereunder or by memoranda of understanding between the city and employees' bargaining units, the board shall hear appeals by any person in the classified service relative to any situation involving the employees' status or conditions of employment, including disciplinary matters. 
B.  Unless provisions to the contrary contained in any memoranda of understanding or pertinent law require otherwise, the findings and actions of the board are deemed advisory only to the city manager. If memoranda of understanding or law provide differently, then such findings or actions shall be deemed final action by the city and reviewable under administrative mandamus provisions of state law. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990) 
(Ord. No. 1842, § 2, 11-17-2010)  
2.44.110 - Powers of the board. 
A.  In any proceeding or hearing before the board, it shall have the power to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents or other evidence, to examine witnesses under oath, to regulate conduct of proceedings before the board and to issue subpoenas in the name of the city. A subpoena issued hereunder shall be served by the police department and failure to appear may subject the subpoenaed party to prosecution or other sanctions in the manner set forth in law for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. 
B.  Each member of the board may administer oaths to witnesses. Wilful failure or refusal of a witness to take the oath or affirmation may be treated as a contempt. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990)  
2.44.120 - Procedural rules. 
The board shall, with the concurrence and approval of the city council, adopt procedural guidelines for the conduct of hearings by the board. 
(Ord. 1477 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 2.48 - RETIREMENT SYSTEM* 
 
2.48.010 - Amendment to contract with state authorized. 
A.  An amendment to the contract between the city council of the city of Lodi and the Board of Administration, California Public Employees' Retirement System, is authorized, a copy of the amendment, marked Exhibit A, is attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and is on file in the office of the city clerk, and by such reference made a part of this code as though set out in full. 
B.  The mayor of the city is authorized, empowered, and directed to execute the amendment for and on behalf of the agency. 
(Ord. 1505 §§ 2, 3, 1991)  
Chapter 2.52 - REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY 
 
2.52.010 - Established—Composition—Authority. 
A.  It is found, determined and declared that there is a need for a redevelopment agency to function in the city of Lodi in accordance with the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
B.  Such redevelopment agency is established pursuant to Section 33101 of the Community Redevelopment Law, to be known as the redevelopment agency of the city of Lodi. The redevelopment agency is hereto authorized to transact business and exercise its powers under the provisions of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
C.  Pursuant to the provisions of Section 33200 of the Community Redevelopment Law, this city council declares itself to be the redevelopment agency of the city of Lodi. 
D.  The city council finds and determines that the designation of the city council as the redevelopment agency of the city of Lodi will serve the public interest and promote the public health, safety and welfare in an effective manner in that this public body is best able to serve the needs of the community to implement the purposes of the Community Redevelopment Law. 
(Ord. 1675 §§ 1—4, 1999)  
2.52.020 - The Homeowner and Property Protection Ordinance—Eminent domain. 
Whereas, this section shall be known as "The Homeowner and Property Protection Ordinance"; 
Whereas, eminent domain has been subject to abuse in California, whereby local governmental entities have condemned property and transferred it, by sale, lease, or otherwise, to the control, management, or exploitation of private entities for private use and profit on the theory that generalized public benefits will flow therefrom; 
Whereas, the United States Supreme Court, in Kelo v. City of New London, _______ U.S._______ (2005), has held that the United States Constitution does not prevent the transfer of property, seized through eminent domain, to private entities for private profit; 
Whereas, it is the intent of the Lodi city council that private property shall not be taken or damaged for the use, exploitation, or management of any private party, including, but not limited to, the use, exploitation, or management of property taken or damaged by a corporation or other business entity for private profit, as is currently permitted under the United States Constitution under Kelo v. City of New London, _______ U.S. _______ (2005) by the Redevelopment Agency; 
Whereas, it is not the intent of this section to prevent the rental of space in a government building or any other government-owned property for incidental commercial enterprises, including, but not limited to, gift shops, newsstands, and private nonprofit entities such as churches and other religious and civic organizations; and 
Whereas, this section shall apply only to condemnation actions that are completed after the ordinance codified in this section goes into effect. 
A.  Property taken by eminent domain by the redevelopment agency of the city of Lodi shall be owned and occupied by the condemnor or another governmental agency utilizing the property for the stated public use by agreement with the condemnor, or may be leased only to entities that are regulated by the public utilities commission or to private nonprofit entities. All property that is taken by eminent domain shall be used only for a public use or as set forth above. 
B.  If any property taken through eminent domain after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section ceases to be used for the stated public use, within ten years of its original acquisition, the former owner of the property or a beneficiary or an heir, if a beneficiary or heir has been designated for this purpose, shall have the right to reacquire the property at the original purchase price or fair market value of the property, whichever is lesser, before the property may be otherwise sold or transferred. 
(Ord. 1776 § 1, 2006)  
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 3.01 - BUSINESS TAX CERTIFICATION 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
3.01.010 - Purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are enacted solely to raise revenue for general municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.020 - Business tax certification required. 
Business taxes are imposed upon all businesses, professions, trades, vocations, enterprises, establishments, occupations or callings conducting business in the city to which a business tax may lawfully apply, in an amount established by resolution of the city council. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, vocation, enterprise, establishment, occupation or calling in the city not otherwise exempt without first having procured a business tax certificate from the city or complying with all of the applicable provisions of this chapter. 
The business tax certificate shall be evidence only of the fact that such business tax has been paid. Neither the payment of the business tax nor the possession of the business tax certificate shall authorize, permit or allow the doing of any act which the person paying or holding such business tax certificate would otherwise be entitled to do; nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on business at any place within the city where the conduct or carrying on of such business is prohibited or fails to comply with the city's zoning, planning or building regulations, nor shall it be construed as permission to conduct or carry on a business in such a manner as to create or maintain a nuisance. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.030 - Exemptions. 
The following persons and organizations are exempt from the provisions of this chapter: 
A.  Minors Under the Age of Eighteen. Businesses owned and conducted by minors under the age of eighteen years shall be exempt from the business tax provisions of this chapter where all of the following conditions exist and legal documentation is provided to support that: 
1.  All persons engaged in the operation of the business are under the age of eighteen years; and 
2.  All persons engaged in the operation of the business have a bona fide ownership interest in the business; and 
3.  Gross receipts do not exceed three thousand dollars per year. 
B.  Charitable, Religious and Nonprofit Organizations. 
1.  Organization Activities. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a business tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activity of any institution or organization recognized by the state of California or Internal Revenue Service of the United States as a "Domestic Non Profit Organization" to conduct business which is wholly for the benefit of charitable, religious or nonprofit purposes and from which a profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person. 
2.  Nonexempt Activities. The exemption provisions of this section shall not be construed to extend to any person, business, corporation or organization receiving a fee, wage, stipend, salary, remuneration, compensation or pay for performance of any business, occupation or activity related to exempt organization activities. Any such person, business corporation or organization shall be subject to the business tax provisions of this chapter and shall obtain a business tax certificate prior to any business, occupation or activity being undertaken in the city. 
C.  Conflicts with Federal and State Laws or Contractual Agreements. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require a person to obtain a business tax certificate prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with the applicable statues, laws or constitution of the United States or the state of California or other contractual obligations or franchise agreements. The finance director may develop administrative guidelines concerning exemptions, apportionment and any other matters which he determines as necessary for the lawful and effective implementation of this chapter. 
D.  Certain Home Occupations. 
1.  Every person commencing, transacting and carrying on in the city any business in his home in a residential zone, not as a nonconforming use, whose annual gross receipts from such business is three thousand dollars or less shall not be required to pay a business tax. 
2.  Persons who by reason of age or infirmity are physically unable to earn a livelihood through ordinary means of labor or business, whose annual gross receipts from such business is five thousand dollars or less shall not be required to pay a business tax. 
E.  Public Utilities. Public utilities engaged in providing services or commodities to the city under a franchise agreement shall not be required to pay a business tax. 
F.  Disabled Veterans. Veterans of the armed forces of the United States qualified under the provisions of the Business and Professions Code Section 16001 shall not be required to pay a business tax. 
G.  Residential Rental Units. Persons renting four or less residential units within the city shall not be required to pay a business license tax. 
H.  Street Fairs and Special Events. Sponsors of street fairs or special events may request the city council to waive the business license tax in part or whole for participants of a street fair or special event when the waiver is for a limited period of time and a participant does not otherwise conduct business within the city either directly or indirectly by positing, advertising or other means as described in Section 3.01.470; and, when the city council determines a blanket waiver of the business license tax for a street fair or special event is in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
"Business" means and includes professions, trades, vocations, rentals, leases, enterprises, establishments and occupations and all and every kind of calling, any of which is conducted for the purpose of earning in whole, or in part, a profit or livelihood, whether or not a profit or a livelihood actually is earned thereby, whether paid in money, goods, labor or otherwise, and whether or not the business has a fixed place of business in the city. 
"Finance director" means the individual designated by the city manager to collect business taxes pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
"Gross receipts" means and includes the total amounts received or receivable from sales, services, rentals or leases in the total amounts actually received or receivable for the performance of any act or service, of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or a credit allowed, whether or not such act or service is done as a part of, or in connection with, the sale or rental of materials, property (real or personal), goods, wares or merchandise. Included in "gross receipts" shall be receipts, cash, credits and property of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of the property sold, rented or leased, the cost of the materials used, labor and service costs, interest paid or payable, or losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from "gross receipts" shall be the following: 
1.  Cash and jobber discounts (which reduce selling price and ultimate receipts from sale); 
2.  Any tax (such as a sales tax, use tax, gas tax, transient occupancy tax, real property transfer tax) which is measured by the sales price and is included in the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser; 
3.  Any refund that is granted, either in cash or credit, to a purchaser who returns property upon the rescission of a contract of sale; 
4.  Amounts received by persons acting as agents, brokers or trustees, where such amounts have been collected for and are paid to another party (e.g., amounts collected by salesmen and transmitted to manufacturer or distributor; trust funds received and transmitted by trustee; fees separately itemized on statements and forwarded to a subcontractor or fee consultant as payment for services rendered, provided that a list of subcontractors or consultants and amounts paid is reported to the city; receipts collected for and subsequently paid to a lessor, provided that the name of the lessor and the amount paid is reported to the city); 
5.  Amounts received as refundable deposits, except those amounts that are forfeited and subsequently taken as business income; 
6.  Any credit that is granted for property provided by the consumer or purchaser as part of the purchase price (trade-in merchandise), provided that the value of property taken is reported in gross receipts when sold to someone else; 
7.  Bad debts, when credits are reported in total in the first year and prove uncollectible in a subsequent year; 
8.  Passive income (e.g., interest, on investments, dividends, occasional sale of property or surplus equipment, etc.); and 
9.  Receipts not taxable by virtue of provisions included in the Federal or State Constitution. 
"Gross receipts subject to the business tax" shall be that portion of gross receipts relating to business conducted within the city. For businesses with their headquarters located within the city, their total gross receipts shall be deemed to be related to business conducted within the city unless an apportionment of gross receipts is requested by the business pursuant to Section 3.01.490 of this chapter. 
"Person" means and include all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint-stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, Massachusetts trust, business and other common law trusts, societies and individuals transacting and carrying on any business in the city, other than an employee. 
"Sworn statement" means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths or a declaration or certification made under the penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.050 - Business classifications. 
For purposes of this chapter, the broad classifications used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  Administrative headquarters: any business operation where the principal business transacted consists of providing administrative or management related services such as, but not limited to, recordkeeping, data processing, research, advertising, public relations, personnel administration, legal and corporate headquarters services, to other locations where the operations of the same business are conducted which lead more directly to the production of gross receipts. 
B.  Contractors: any person who is licensed as a contractor by the state of California and who undertakes to or offers to undertake to or purports to have the capacity to undertake to or submits a bid to, or does himself or by or through others, construct, alter, repair, add to, subtract from, improve, move, wreck or demolish any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development or improvement, or to do any part thereof, including the erection of scaffolding or other structures or works in connection therewith, is defined as a contractor. The term "contractor" includes subcontractor and specialty contractor. 
C.  Manufacturers: any person conducting, managing or carrying on a business consisting mainly of manufacturing, packing or processing any goods, wares, merchandise or produce. 
D.  Professions: any person, group, association, partnership, firm or corporation engaged in a profession or vocation licensed by the state, related to a licensed profession or vocation, and/or requiring a period of specialized training such as, but not limited to, physicians, dentists, attorneys and accountants. 
E.  Public utilities: any person, including the city, engaged in the business of providing utility services to the general public or to private businesses including such services as electrical, gas, sanitary and garbage, water, sewer, cable television and telephone. 
F.  Recreation and entertainment: any person engaged in the business of providing directly recreation, entertainment or amusement services. 
G.  Rental of residential property: any person engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or structure to a tenant for purposes of dwelling, sleeping or lodging (i.e., apartment, duplex, condominium or other residential property rental excluding hotels and motels). 
H.  Rental of nonresidential property: any person engaged in the business of renting or letting a building or structure to a tenant for purposes of conducting business (i.e., commercial retail space, office buildings, warehouses or other nonresidential property use). Space occupied by the owner is exempt. 
I.  Retail: any person conducting, managing or carrying on the business consisting mainly of selling at retail any goods. 
J.  Services: any business providing services, repairs or improvements to or on real and personal property; renting or leasing personal property to businesses or persons; involving the operation of hotel or motel; providing services to persons such as, but not limited to, laundries, cleaning and dyeing, shoe repair, barber and beauty shops, photographic studios and transportation. 
K.  Wholesale: any person conducting, managing or carrying on the business consisting mainly of selling at wholesale any goods. 
L.  Miscellaneous: any person engaged in a business not specifically described by other provisions of this chapter and not otherwise exempt. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.060 - Savings clause. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable. Should any portion of this chapter be deemed invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the provisions of this chapter shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Article II. - Tax Amounts 
 
3.01.110 - Tax basis. 
The amount of the business tax to be paid by the applicant shall be paid at a rate determined by the business classification established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.120 - Tax rate. 
The tax rate for all businesses shall be set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.130 - Minimum tax. 
The minimum tax shall be paid in full on application for a business license certificate and shall not be prorated for the calendar year of January 1st through December 31st. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.140 - Payment schedule. 
When the business license tax is greater than seven hundred fifty dollars, the tax may be paid to the city in four equal installments due January 31st, April 30th, July 31st and October 31st. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Article III. - Application and Renewal 
 
3.01.210 - Business tax certificate applications. 
Every person required to have a business tax certificate pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall make a written application to the finance director and submit the following information: 
A.  The nature or kind of business for which the business tax certificate is requested; 
B.  The place where the business is to be conducted and, if the business is not to be conducted at a permanent location, the residence address, identified as such, of the owners of the business; 
C.  If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a person to do business under a fictitious name, the names, social security numbers and residence addresses of the owner(s) of the business; 
D.  If the application is made for the issuance of a business tax certificate to a corporation or partnership, the names, franchise tax number and residence addresses of the officers or partners thereof; and 
E.  Any further information which the federal or state taxing authority or the finance director may require to enable the issuance of the business tax certificate. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.220 - Business tax certificate renewals. 
In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of the business tax certificate required by the provisions of this chapter shall submit to the finance director a written statement, upon a form provided by the finance director, written under penalty of perjury or sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the actual gross receipts earned the preceding calendar or fiscal year as reported to any federal or state taxing authority to which gross receipts are reported to enable the finance director to ascertain the amount of the business tax to be paid. Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual business taxes required by the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable on January 1st of each year and shall be delinquent on January 31st of each year. 
No renewal of a business tax certificate shall be issued until payment in full of all delinquent business taxes, including accrued interest and applicable penalties thereon is received by the city. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to ensure renewal of the business tax certificate. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Article IV. - Business Tax Certificate Issuance 
 
3.01.310 - Content. 
All business tax certificates required by the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise provided in this chapter, shall be prepared and issued by the finance director upon the payment to the city of the proper amount of business tax. Each business tax certificate shall state upon the face thereof the following: 
A.  The name of the person to whom the business tax certificate is issued; 
B.  The type of business taxed; 
C.  The location or address of the business taxed; 
D.  The date of the expiration of the business tax certificate; 
E.  That the possession of the business tax certificate shall not authorize, permit or allow the person to do any act which such person would not otherwise be lawfully entitled to do. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.320 - Posting and keeping. 
All business tax certificates issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be posted and kept in the following manner: 
A.  Any persons transacting and carrying on the business at a permanent location in the city shall keep such business tax certificate posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on. 
B.  Any persons transacting and carrying on business, but not operating at a permanent location in the city, shall keep such business tax certificate upon them at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.330 - Duplicates. 
A duplicate business tax certificate may be issued by the finance director to replace any business tax certificate previously issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, which business tax certificate has been lost or destroyed, upon the filing of a statement of such fact and the payment of a duplicate fee set by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.340 - Branch establishments. 
A separate business tax certificate shall be issued for each branch establishment or location of business; provided, however, warehouses and distribution plants used in connection with, and incidental to, a business tax pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments; and provided, further, any person conducting two or more types of business at the same location and under the same management, or at different locations, but which businesses use a single set or integrated set of books and records, may elect to pay only one business tax calculated on all the gross receipts of the businesses, except that a fee set by resolution of the city council shall be paid upon issuance for each additional branch or location. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.350 - Change of location. 
No business tax certificate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferable; provided, however, where a business tax certificate is issued for a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such person, upon an application therefor and the payment of a fee set by resolution of the city council, may have the business tax certificate reissued for transacting and carrying on of such business under such business tax certificate at some other location to which it is to be moved. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Article V. - Administration 
 
3.01.410 - Certification of records. 
A.  Conclusiveness of Statements. No statement required by the provisions of this chapter shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth therein, nor shall the filing of such statements preclude the city from collection by appropriate action such sums as are actually due and payable pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Such statements and each of the several items therein contained shall be subject to certification by the finance director, the deputies of the finance director, or authorized employees or representatives of the city, who are authorized to examine such books and records of any certificate holder or applicant for a business tax certificate as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of the business tax due. 
B.  Record Retention. All persons subject to the provisions of this chapter shall keep complete records of all business transactions and shall retain such records for examination by the finance director, the deputies of the finance director, or authorized employees or representatives of the city, and maintain them for a period of at least three years from the annual due date of the federal tax return or the city business tax return, whichever time period is greater. Records which shall be maintained for audit purposes shall include state and federal income tax returns, schedules and records included in such returns, and any and all work papers used to prepare such returns. 
C.  Examinations of Records. All business tax certificate holders, applicants for business tax certificates, and persons engaged in business in the city are required to permit an examination of such books and records for the purposes set forth in this section during regular business hours and at reasonable times. 
D.  Interest and Penalties. If, subsequent to the examination, it is determined that the business has been delinquent or has non-reported or under-reported gross receipts, thereby underpaying business taxes, the certificate holder shall pay to the city within ten days of notification of the determination of the amount of tax due, interest in the amount equal to the current rate for ninety-day Treasury Notes from the date the tax was due, and a penalty in the amount of the business tax due. Interest shall continue to accrue on the additional tax amount until such amount is paid in full. A mistake made in stating the amount of the business tax shall not, in any case, prevent or prejudice the finance director from collecting what is actually due from any person or entity carrying on a trade, calling, profession or occupation subject to a business tax under this chapter. 
E.  Determination of Tax Amounts Due. If any person subject to the tax imposed by this chapter fails to submit information required; or if the finance director is not satisfied with records and statements filed, the finance director shall determine the amount of the business tax due from such person by means of such information as may be obtainable and shall mail a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Lodi, California, postage prepaid, addressed to the person at their last-known address. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.420 - Information confidential. 
It is unlawful for the finance director or designee, or any person having an administrative duty pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or financial information obtained by an investigation of the records of any person required to obtain a business tax certificate, or pay a business tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge or the official duty of the finance director, or of the amount or source of income, profits, losses or expenditures, or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or amended statement or application, or copy of either, or in any book containing any abstract or particulars therein to be seen or examined by any person; provided, however, the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prevent: 
A.  Disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for the collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing the provisions of this chapter or collecting the business taxes imposed by the provisions of this chapter; 
B.  The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, if the reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grand jury or court of law upon a subpoena; 
C.  The disclosure of information and the results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law for proceedings brought to determine the existence of the amount of any business tax liability of such particular taxpayers of the city; 
D.  The disclosure, after the filing of a written request to the effect, to the taxpayer, or to the taxpayers' successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees or guarantors if directly interested, of information as to items included in the measure of any paid business tax, any unpaid business tax, or any amount of business tax required to be collected, including interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney shall approve each such disclosure, and the finance director or designee may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when, in their opinion, the public interest would suffer thereby; 
E.  The disclosure of the names and business address of persons to whom business tax certificates have been issued and the general type and nature of their business; 
F.  The disclosure, by way of public meeting or otherwise, of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit the city council to be fully advised as to the facts if a taxpayer files a claim for the refund of business taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against them by the city for business taxes, or when acting upon any other similar matter; and 
G.  The disclosure of general statistics regarding business taxes collected or business done in the city. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.430 - Finance director adjustment powers. 
The finance director shall have the power, for good cause shown, and documented by the finance director as a permanent record: 
A.  To extend the time for filing any required sworn statement; 
B.  To waive any penalties which would otherwise have accrued; 
C.  To adjust the amount of the business tax due; 
D.  To make refunds or prorations of taxes paid; and 
E.  To establish a basis or "proxy" to calculate gross receipts for those businesses and classes of business which do not have gross receipts on which to base the tax, i.e., administrative headquarters. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.440 - Debt to city. 
The amount of any business tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city. A suit may be brought against any person to enforce the collection of the debt described in this chapter in any court of competent jurisdiction. 
The conviction of any person for transacting any business without a certificate shall not excuse or exempt such person from payment of any license due or unpaid at the time of such conviction and nothing herein shall prevent a criminal prosecution for any violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.450 - Delinquencies and penalties. 
For failure to pay the business tax required by the provisions of this chapter prior to the delinquency date, the finance director shall add a penalty of ten dollars or ten percent of the business tax, whichever is the greater, on the first day of each month after the delinquency thereof; provided, however, the total amount of such penalty to be added in no event shall exceed one hundred percent of the amount of the business tax due. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.460 - Enforcement. 
A.  Duties of the Finance Director. It shall be the duty of the finance director to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter. For purposes of such enforcement, the finance director and finance technicians (or equivalent position as it may be renamed from time to time) are "officers" who may issue citations to violators of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
B.  Inspections. The finance director, in the exercise of the duties imposed by the provisions of this section, and acting through deputies of duly authorized assistants, shall have the right to enter and examine all places of business free of charge during normal business hours to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. 
C.  Penalty for Violation. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 1778 § 2, 2006)  
3.01.470 - Evidence of doing business. 
When any person, by the use of a sign, circular, card, telephone book, newspaper, other publication, or advertising media, shall advertise, hold out or represent that they are in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a government agency indicating that they are conducting a business in the city, and such person fails to deny, by a sworn statement given to the finance director or designee, that they are not conducting a business in the city after being requested to do so by the finance director or designee, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that such person is conducting a business in the city. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.480 - Remedies cumulative. 
All remedies prescribed by the provisions of this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.490 - Apportionment. 
When the business tax imposed by this chapter cannot be enforced without there being an apportionment according to the amount of business done in the city, apportionment rules shall be established by the finance director. The finance director shall conduct an investigation and shall fix as the business tax for the applicant an amount that is reasonable and nondiscriminatory or, if a business tax has already been paid, shall order a refund of the amount over and above the business tax so affixed. In fixing the business tax to be charged, the finance director shall have the power to base the business tax upon a percentage of gross receipts, operating expenses, floor space, payroll, number of employees, business taxes paid to other cities, or any other measure which will assure that the business tax assessed shall be uniform with the amount of business done in the city, or of businesses of a like nature, so long as the amount assessed does not exceed the business tax set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
3.01.500 - Appeals. 
A.  Any tax payer aggrieved by a decision of the finance director with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue a business tax certificate may appeal such decision by first submitting a written request to the city manager for an administrative hearing by the city manager or his designee who shall have the power, for good cause shown to: 
1.  Waive any penalties which would other wise accrued; 
2.  Adjust the amount of the business tax due; 
3.  Make refunds or prorations of taxes paid; and 
4.  Establish a basis or "proxy" to calculate the tax. 
B.  Any tax payer dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager or his designee following an administrative heating may appeal to the city council by filing a notice of such appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Lodi, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last-known address. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Article VI. - Implementation 
 
3.01.510 - Implementation of revised provisions. 
For business tax renewals due between January 1, 1995 and April 1, 1995, the tax rate upon renewal will be the amount of tax paid in 1994 but not less than the minimum tax set by resolution of the city council. 
The finance director shall have the power, for economic hardship or financial impact on any one business, to adjust the amount of the business tax due through January 1997. 
(Ord. 1607 § 2 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 3.04 - TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS TO COUNTY 
Sections: 
 
3.04.010 - Property tax assessment and tax collection. 
A.  The city council hereby elects that the duties of assessing property and collecting taxes provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector, respectively, of the city shall be performed by the county assessor and the county tax collector, respectively, of the county, as provided in "An act to provide for the levy and collection of taxes by and for the use of municipal corporations and cities incorporated under the laws of the State of California, except municipal corporations of the first class, and to provide for the consolidation and abolition of certain municipal offices and to provide that their duties may be performed by certain officers of the county and fixing the compensation to be allowed for such county officers for the services so rendered to such municipal corporation," approved March 27, 1895, and all acts amendatory thereof and supplementary thereto. 
B.  All assessments made by the county assessor, after the same may be equalized or corrected by the board of supervisors or state board of equalization shall be used as a basis for the levy of the taxes of the city and such taxes shall be collected by the assessor and tax collector of the County of San Joaquin at the same time and in the manner county taxes are collected. 
C.  The assessment for taxation, equalization of assessments, levy of taxes and the collection of the same shall be conducted in all respects in accordance with and in the manner set out in Sections 51500 to 51519 of the California Government Code and the duties of all officers and agents of the county and of the city in relation to assessment and equalization and to the levy and collection of all taxes, current and delinquent, shall be such as are prescribed by such sections; provided, that such taxes, when so collected, shall be paid to the director of finance, as provided in such sections. 
(Prior code § 23-1 (part))  
3.04.020 - Other city assessor and tax collector duties. 
All duties, other than the assessing of the property of such city or municipal corporation, theretofore performed by the city assessor, shall be transferred to and be performed by the city clerk. All duties, other than the collection of taxes, theretofore performed by the city tax collector, shall be transferred to and be performed by the director of finance. 
(Prior code § 23-1 (part))  
Chapter 3.08 - SALES AND USE TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.08.010 - Purpose. 
The city council declares that this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish these purposes: 
A.  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which comply with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state; 
B.  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which incorporate provisions identical to those of the sales and use tax law of the state, insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code; 
C.  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which impose a ninety-five hundredths of one percent tax, to and including September 30, 1976, and at the rate of one percent thereafter, and which provide measures therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practical to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the state sales and use taxes. 
D.  To adopt sales and use tax regulations which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of recordkeeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 23-3)  
3.08.020 - Contract with state. 
This chapter shall become operative on July 1, 1956, and prior thereto, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of these sales and use tax regulations; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization, as set forth in this section, prior to July 1, 1956, this chapter shall not be operative until the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract by the city and by the State Board of Equalization; provided further, that this chapter shall not become operative prior to the operative date of the uniform local sales and use tax ordinance of the county. 
(Prior code § 23-4)  
3.08.030 - Sales tax—Imposed. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent to and including September 30, 1976, and at the rate of one percent thereafter, of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in the city on and after the operative date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 23-5(a)(part))  
3.08.040 - Sales tax—Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the Board of Equalization. 
(Prior code § 23-5(a)(part))  
3.08.050 - Sales tax—State provisions adopted. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to sales taxes are hereby adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
B.  Whenever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of the city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasury, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter, and neither shall the substitution be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while those gross receipts remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, nor to impose this tax with respect to certain gross receipts which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, as adopted. 
(Prior code § 23-5(b)(1), (2))  
3.08.060 - Sales tax—Seller's permit. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller's permit shall not be required by reason of this section. 
(Prior code § 23-5(b)(3))  
3.08.070 - Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the sales tax is measured: 
1.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
2.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
B.  There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the sales tax is measured: 
1.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer. 
2.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of waterborne vessels to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes. 
3.  The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
(Prior code § 23-5(b)(4.5), (4.6))  
3.08.080 - Use tax—Imposed. 
An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or consumption in the city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on or after the operative date of this chapter, for storage, use or other consumption in the city, at the rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent to and including September 30, 1976, and at the rate of one percent thereafter of the sale price of the property. The sale price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Prior code § 23-6(a))  
3.08.090 - Use tax—State provisions adopted. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of such code, as amended and in force and effect on July 1, 1956, applicable to use taxes are adopted and made a part of this section as though fully set forth herein. 
B.  Wherever, and to the extent that, in Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code the state is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to require the substitution of the name of this city for the word "state" when that word is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization or the name of the State Treasurer, or of the Constitution of the state; nor shall the name of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; and neither shall the substitution be made in those sections, including but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such storage, use or other consumption remains subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the provisions of that code; and, in addition, the name of the city shall not be substituted for that of the state in Sections 6701, 6702, except in the last sentence thereof, 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 and 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as adopted, and the name of the city shall not be substituted for the word "state" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this state" in Section 6203, nor in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Prior code § 23-6(b)(1))  
3.08.100 - Use tax—Exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  There shall be exempt from the use tax due under this chapter: 
1.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
2.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state; 
3.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States, or any foreign government. 
B.  There shall be exempt from the use tax due under this chapter: 
1.  The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a retailer or consumer; 
2.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county, or city in this state; 
3.  The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of waterborne vessels and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the carriage of persons or property in such vessels for commercial purposes; 
4.  In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. 
(Prior code § 23-6(b)(3.5), (3.6))  
3.08.110 - State law amendments adopted. 
All amendments to the California Revenue and Taxation Code enacted subsequent to the effective date of this chapter which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 23-7)  
3.08.120 - Applicability of exclusions and exemptions. 
A.  Sections 3.08.070(A) and 3.08.100(A) shall be operative January 1, 1984. 
B.  Sections 3.08.070(B) and 3.08.100(B) shall be operative on the operative date of any act of the Legislature of the state of California which amends or repeals and reenacts Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code to provide an exemption from city sales and use taxes for operators of waterborne vessels in the same, or substantially the same, language as that existing in subdivisions (i)(7) and (i)(8) of Section 7202 of the Revenue and Taxation Code as those subdivisions read on October 1, 1983. 
(Prior code § 23-7.1)  
3.08.130 - Enjoining collection. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officers of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Prior code § 23-8)  
3.08.140 - Suspension of existing ordinances. 
At the time this article goes into operation, the provisions of Ordinance No. 373 and all amendments thereto shall be suspended and shall not again be of any force or effect until and unless for any reason the State Board of Equalization ceases to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax imposed by this chapter; provided, however, that if for any reason it is determined that the city is without power to adopt this chapter or that the State Board of Equalization is without power to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance No. 373 and all amendments thereto shall not be deemed to have been suspended, but shall be deemed to have been in full force and effect at the rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent continuously from and after July 1, 1956. Upon the ceasing of the State Board of Equalization to perform the functions incident to the administration and operation of the taxes imposed by this chapter, the provisions of Ordinance No. 373 and all amendments thereto shall again be in full force and effect at the rate of ninety-five hundredths of one percent. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as relieving any person of the obligation to pay to the city any sales or use tax accrued and owing by reason of the provisions of Ordinance No. 373 and all amendments thereto in force and effect prior to and including June 30, 1956. 
(Prior code § 23-9)  
Chapter 3.12 - TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.12.010 - Definitions. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter: 
A.  "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of any structure which is occupied or intended or designed for the occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodginghouse, roominghouse, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location or other similar structure or portion thereof. 
B.  "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any room or rooms or portion thereof in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes. 
C.  "Operator" means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortagagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than an employee, the managing agent is also an "operator" for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both. 
D.  "Person" means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit. 
E.  "Rent" means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
F.  "Tax administrator" means the director of finance of the city. 
G.  "Transient" means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. 
(Prior code § 23-10)  
3.12.020 - Hotel registration. 
Within thirty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register such hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. Such certificate shall, among other things, state the following: 
A.  The name of the operator; 
B.  The address of the hotel; 
C.  The date upon which the certificate was issued; 
D.  The following: 
 This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of Chapter 3.12 of the Lodi Municipal Code by registering with the Tax Administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting such tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. 
(Prior code § 23-12)  
3.12.030 - Imposed. 
For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of six percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owed by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 23-13)  
3.12.040 - Refunds. 
A.  Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in subsections B and C of this section, provided a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator. 
B.  An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to the rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator. 
C.  A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator, or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, established to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax. 
D.  No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. 
(Prior code § 23-15)  
3.12.050 - Collection by operators. 
Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 23-16)  
3.12.060 - Return and remittance. 
Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. 
(Prior code § 23-17)  
3.12.070 - Failure to report or remit. 
A.  If any operator fails or refuses to collect such tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of such tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. 
B.  As soon as the tax administrator procures such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so assessed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. 
C.  Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed in this section to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in such notice why such amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. 
D.  At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.12.100. 
(Prior code § 23-18)  
3.12.080 - Delinquency. 
A.  Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax. 
B.  Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten percent penalty first imposed. 
C.  Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section. 
D.  Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid. 
E.  Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax required to be paid under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 23-19)  
3.12.090 - Recordkeeping. 
It is the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. 
(Prior code § 23-20)  
3.12.100 - Appeals. 
Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last-known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. 
(Prior code § 23-21)  
3.12.110 - Collection action. 
Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. 
(Prior code § 23-23)  
3.12.112 - Sale or transfer. 
If an operator who is liable for any tax or penalties under this chapter sells or otherwise transfers his business, his successor in interest shall withhold a sufficient portion of the purchase price to equal the amount of such tax or penalty until the selling operator produces a receipt from the treasurer showing that the tax or penalty has been paid or a tax clearance certificate from the tax administrator stating that no tax or penalty is due. If the seller does not present a receipt tax clearance certificate within thirty days after such successor commences to conduct business, the successor shall deposit the withheld amount with the tax administrator pending settlement of the account of the seller. 
(Ord. 1630 § 1 (part), 1996)  
3.12.114 - Successor liability. 
If the successor to the business fails to withhold a portion of the purchase price as required, the successor shall be liable to the city for the payment of the amount required to be withheld. Within thirty days after receiving a written request from the successor for a tax clearance certificate stating that no tax or penalty is due, the tax administrator shall either issue the certificate or mail notice to the successor at its address as it appears on the records of the city of the estimated amount of the tax and penalty that must be paid as a condition of issuing the certificate. 
(Ord. 1630 § 1 (part), 1996)  
3.12.120 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required in this chapter, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 23-22)  
Chapter 3.16 - REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX 
Sections: 
 
3.16.010 - Authority. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the City of Lodi." It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 23-24)  
3.16.020 - Imposed. 
There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city are granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars, a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents for each five hundred dollars or fractional part thereof. 
(Prior code § 23-25)  
3.16.030 - Who shall pay. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.16.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. 
(Prior code § 23-26)  
3.16.040 - Exemptions—Instruments to secure debt. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to any instrument in writing given to secure a debt. 
(Prior code § 23-27)  
3.16.050 - Exemptions—Public agencies. 
Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. 
(Prior code § 23-28)  
3.16.060 - Exemptions—Reorganization or adjustment. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making, delivering or filling of conveyances to make effective any plan of reorganization or adjustment: 
1.  Confirmed under the Federal Bankruptcy Act, as amended; 
2.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a railroad corporation, as defined in Subdivision (m) of Section 205 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; 
3.  Approved in an equity receivership proceeding in a court involving a corporation, as defined in Subdivision (3) of Section 506 of Title 11 of the United States Code, as amended; or 
4.  Whereby a mere change in identity, form or place of organization is effected. 
B.  Subdivisions 1 through 4, inclusive, of subsection A of this section shall only apply if the making, delivery or filing of instruments of transfer or conveyances occurs within five years from the date of such confirmation, approval or change. 
(Prior code § 23-29)  
3.16.070 - Exemptions—Orders of Securities and Exchange Commission. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply to the making or delivery of conveyances to make effective any order of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as defined in subdivision (a) of Section 1083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, but only if: 
A.  The order of the Securities and Exchange Commission in obedience to which such conveyance is made recites that such conveyance is necessary or appropriate to effectuate the provisions of Section 79k of Title 15 of the United States Code, relating to the Public Utility Holding Company Act of 1935; 
B.  Such order specifies the property which is ordered to be conveyed; 
C.  Such conveyance is made in obedience to such order. 
(Prior code § 23-30)  
3.16.080 - Exemptions—Partnerships. 
A.  In the case of any realty held by a partnership, no levy shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of any transfer of an interest in a partnership or otherwise, if: 
1.  Such partnership (or another partnership) is considered a continuing partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954; and 
2.  Such continuing partnership continues to hold the realty concerned. 
B.  If there is a termination of any partnership within the meaning of Section 708 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, for purposes of this chapter, such partnership shall be treated as having executed an instrument whereby there was conveyed, for fair market value (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrance remaining thereon), all realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
C.  Not more than one tax shall be imposed pursuant to this chapter by reason of a termination described in subsection B of this section, and any transfer pursuant thereto, with respect to the realty held by such partnership at the time of such termination. 
(Prior code § 23-31)  
3.16.090 - Exemptions—Instrument in lieu of foreclosure. 
Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or writing to a beneficiary or mortgagee, which is taken from the mortgagor or trustor as a result of or in lieu of foreclosure; provided, that such tax shall apply to the extent that the consideration exceeds the unpaid debt, including accrued interest and cost of foreclosure. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(3)(C)(part), 1984)  
3.16.100 - Exemptions—Division of marital or community property. 
A.  Any tax imposed pursuant to this chapter shall not apply with respect to any deed, instrument or other writing which purports to transfer, divide or allocate community property, quasi-community or quasi-marital property assets between spouses for the purpose of effecting a division of community, quasi-community or quasi-marital property which is required by a judgment decreeing a dissolution of the marriage or legal separation, by a judgment of nullity, or by any other judgment or order rendered pursuant to Part 5 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 4 of the Civil Code, or by a written agreement between the spouses, executed in contemplation of any of those judgments or orders. 
B.  In order to qualify for the exemption provided in subsection A of this section, the deed, instrument or other writing shall include a written recital, signed by either spouse, stating that the deed, instrument or other writing is entitled to the exemption. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(3)(C)(part), 1984)  
3.16.110 - Administration by county. 
The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. 
(Prior code § 23-32)  
3.16.120 - Refunds. 
Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 23-33)  
3.16.130 - Operative date. 
This chapter shall become operative upon the operative date of any ordinance adopted by the county, pursuant to Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state, or upon the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, whichever is the later. 
(Prior code § 23-34)  
Chapter 3.20 - PURCHASING SYSTEM[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1849, § 2, adopted Sept. 7, 2011, repealed the former Ch. 3.20, §§ 3.20.010—3.20.150, and enacted a new Ch. 3.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 3.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1763, § 2(part), adopted 2005. 
 
3.20.010 - Purpose. 
In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment, to secure for the city supplies, services, and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function, and to assure the quality of purchases, the city's purchasing system is set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.015 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the following respective meanings: 
A.  "Best value" is associated with determining the greatest worth and benefit to the city based on a number of factors, including 
1.  Cost; 
2.  Quality of the product or service; 
3.  Delivery lead time; 
4.  Ability of the manufacturer or contractor to provide services, supplies, or equipment as required, and parts, repairs, maintenance and support after the sale; 
5.  The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, and experience of the manufacturer, contractor, or supplier. 
B.  "Bid" may mean a competitive sealed (formal) bid processed in accordance with Section 3.20.100, or an informal bid processed in accordance with Section 3.20.110 herein. 
C.  "Contract" means a written or oral agreement to expend money on a product or service including but not limited to purchase orders, formal contracts, invoices, and oral orders. 
D.  "Department" or "using department" means any of the departments of the city government. 
E.  "Emergency" shall mean an unforeseen circumstance or combination of circumstances calling for immediate action to procure materials, supplies, equipment, or services in order to make repairs, safeguard lives or property, or maintain public health or welfare, as a result of extraordinary conditions created by war, disease, weather, fire, or other catastrophic or unforeseen occurrence, or imminent or actual failure of any plant, equipment, structure, street, or public work. 
F.  "Equipment" shall mean items of property which are maintained on inventory as fixed assets. These items are durable and have a fixed, predetermined life expectancy. 
G.  "Professional services," as used in this section, shall mean all services which (1) are of an advisory nature, (2) provide a recommended course of action or personal expertise, or (3) have an end product which is basically a transmittal of information either written or verbal and which is related to the governmental functions of city administration and management and city program management or innovation, and which are obtained by awarding a services contract, a grant, or any other payment of funds for services of the above type. In general, "Professional services" are provided by qualified professionals in such disciplines as accounting, architectural, engineering, environmental, financial, legal, and medical fields. 
H.  "Professional services agreement" means the agreement entered into between the service provider and the city for services, as opposed to goods and materials, in a form created by the city attorney. 
I.  "Public project" shall mean a project for the erection, improvement, painting, or repair of public buildings and works; work in or about streams, rivers, lakes, or embankments for protection against overflow; street, sewer, water, and electrical distribution system work except maintenance or repair; furnishing supplies or materials for any such project, including maintenance or repair of streets or sewers. (Public Contract Code § 20161) 
J.  "Purchases" shall mean legal transactions (including lease and rental) by which the city acquires supplies, equipment, materials, and contractual services. 
K.  "Purchasing authority" shall mean any department head authorized to purchase or otherwise enter into contracts for the city under provisions of Part 3.20.040 herein. 
L.  "Procurement cards" shall mean bank issued credit cards assigned to positions specified by resolution of the city council. 
M.  "Responsible bid" shall mean an offer, submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish supplies, equipment, materials, or services in conformity with the bid instructions, specifications, delivery terms and conditions, and other requirements contained in the Invitation for Bids. 
N.  "Responsible bidder" shall mean a bidder who is financially responsible and has the resources, judgment, skill, ability, capacity, integrity, and reliability required and necessary to perform the requirements set forth in the bids, and which will assure good faith performance. 
O.  "Responsive bid" is a bid that conforms in all material respects to the invitation for bids. 
P.  "Services" shall mean the furnishing of labor, time, or effort performed by specially trained and experienced persons, firms, or corporations rendering professional work and advice in such disciplines as the maintenance or repair of buildings or grounds, equipment or machinery, or other city-owned or operated property. Such term shall not include services rendered by city officers or employees, nor professional or technical services as defined elsewhere in this section. 
Q.  "Shall" denotes the imperative. 
R.  "Supplies" shall mean property, including but not limited to materials, required to perform a department's routine functions. 
S.  "Technical services" shall mean design, installation, diagnostic, or repair services for electrical, electronic, data/telecommunications, mechanical, and/or control systems and their components. These services are distinguished from general repair and maintenance services by their requirements for technical training and/or professional certification. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.020 - Purchasing officer—Established. 
There is established the position of purchasing officer. The purchasing officer shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be the head and have general oversight of the purchasing functions of the city. The duties of the purchasing officer may be combined with those of any other office or position. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.030 - Purchasing officer—Powers. 
The purchasing officer shall have the responsibility and authority to: 
A.  Purchase or contract for supplies, services, and equipment required by any city department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt for the internal management and operation of the purchasing function of the city and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council or city manager; 
B.  Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment; 
C.  Act to procure for the city the needed quantity and quality in supplies, services, and equipment at least expense to the city; 
D.  Discourage uniform bidding (wherein bidders conspire to submit the same cost for a given job or tangible item), and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases; 
E.  Prepare rules governing the purchase of supplies, services, and equipment for the city; 
F.  Prepare and recommend to the city council revisions and amendments to this chapter; 
G.  Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions, and new products; 
H.  Prescribe and maintain such forms as reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations; 
I.  Oversee the inspection of all supplies, services, and equipment purchased to insure conformance with specifications; 
J.  Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any department or which may become unsuitable for city use; 
K.  Maintain a bidders' list, vendors catalog file, and records necessary for the efficient operation of the purchasing function; 
L.  The foregoing responsibilities and authorities may be delegated by the purchasing officer to departmental purchasing authorities (as defined herein) under this purchasing policy. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.040 - Delegation of purchasing authority. 
The city manager, in accordance with Lodi Municipal Code Section 2.12.060(T), may authorize in writing any department head (hereinafter "purchasing authority") to purchase or contract for, or to delegate to qualified staff members the authority to purchase or contract for specified supplies, services, and equipment independently; but shall require that such purchases or contracts be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.045 - State and local agency contracts. 
The bidding process described in this chapter may be waived when advantageous for the city and authorized by the city manager for purchase of supplies, equipment, or contractual services awarded in accordance with formally adopted bidding or negotiation procedures approved by the governing boards of other California public agencies. Purchases or contracts in excess of twenty thousand dollars shall require the approval of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.060 - Requisitions. 
City departments shall submit requests for supplies, services, and equipment to the purchasing officer, or designee, electronically or by standard requisition forms, for the purposes and within the limits of funds appropriated therefore. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.070 - Bidding. 
Purchases of supplies, services, equipment, and the sale of personal property shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 3.20.100 and 3.20.110. Bidding shall be dispensed with only (1) bid in cases of emergency as defined in this chapter, and therefore requires that an order be placed with the best available source of service or supply, (2) when the amount involved is less than two thousand five hundred dollars (but competitive quotes shall be obtained if it is in the city's best interest to do so), (3) when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor, due to (a) product standardization by resolution of the city council, or (b) need for branded replacement parts or supplies for equipment of like brand; (4) when professional or technical requirements preclude competitive bidding, pursuant to Section 3.20.075 of this chapter, or (5) when the city council determines that the purchase or method of purchase would be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.075 - Professional/technical services contracts. 
The following professional services contracts are specifically exempt from the advertising and bidding requirements of Section 3.20.070: 
Contracts for: 
1.  Legal defense, legal advice, or legal services; 
2.  Architectural and engineering services, including, but not limited to construction management, aerial photography, laboratory, and material testing services; 
3.  Accounting and financial services; 
4.  Real estate appraisals; 
5.  Transportation services consultants; 
6.  Safety, environmental, or hazardous material consultants; 
7.  Workshops, seminars, and conferences; 
8.  Computer consulting services. 
Such contracts shall be awarded on the basis of professional qualifications and experience, quality of service, past performance, and negotiated prices. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.076 - Contract authority. 
The city manager shall have the contracting authority set forth in Section 2.12.060(T) of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.077 - Electronic hardware and software. 
Acquisition of electronic hardware and software shall be by negotiation, requests for proposal, or competitive bids, and award shall be based on 'best value' criteria as established by Section 3.20.15, under direction of the information systems manager, and set forth in the terms of the negotiation, Request for Proposals, or bid. Alternatively, purchase of electronic hardware and software may be made in accordance with Section 3.20.045. Electronic software purchases shall also be made in accordance with the City of Lodi Administrative Polices - Information Systems - Section 5 Software Selection and Acquisition. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.080 - Purchase orders. 
Purchases of supplies and equipment in an amount of two thousand five hundred dollars or more shall be made only by written contract or by purchase orders. Purchase orders should not be used to procure services, except as noted in Section 3.20.085. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.085 - Professional services agreements. 
Services, as opposed to goods or materials, shall be procured using a professional services agreement as created, and revised as needed, by the city attorney. Purchase orders, with the appropriate terms, conditions, and insurance requirements, may be used in lieu of a professional services agreement when the nature of the service is that of a one-time service. On-going, recurring services shall be procured using a professional services agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.090 - Use of unencumbered funds required. 
Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer or purchasing authority shall not issue any purchase order or otherwise contract for supplies, services, or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.095 - State and federal grants. 
Where a procurement involves the expenditure of state or federal grant funds the procurement process shall comply with such state or federal laws and authorized regulations which are mandatorily applicable and which are not presently reflected in this code. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.100 - Formal contract procedure. 
Purchases of supplies, equipment, contractual services, public projects, and sales of personal property of an estimated value greater than twenty thousand dollars shall follow the formal contract procedure: 
A.  Specifications and plans shall be subject to review and approval by the city council prior to the solicitation of bids. 
B.  The advertisement for bids will be conducted as provided for in the Government Code. 
C.  Notice Inviting Bids. Notice inviting bids shall include a general description of the articles to be purchased or sold, or work to be performed, and shall state where bid forms and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening of bids. 
1.  Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be published at least ten calendar days before the date of opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, or if there is none, it shall be posted in at least three public places in the city that have been designated by ordinance as the places for posting public notices. 
2.  Bidders' List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders' list. 
3.  Internet Posting. The purchasing officer may also advertise pending bids for purchases or sales on the city's web page. 
D.  Bidder's Security. When required by law or deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, bidder's security may be prescribed in the notice inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to the return of their bid security; except that a successful bidder shall forfeit all or part of his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. Thereafter, if the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder's security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder. 
E.  Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the notice inviting bids. A tabulation of all bids received shall be available for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty calendar days after the bid opening. 
F.  Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any and all bids presented and, if it is in the city's best interest to do so, readvertise for bids. 
G.  Award of Contracts. After evaluation of bids, contract shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest responsible bidder except as otherwise provided in this chapter. In determining the lowest responsible bid, considerations shall include but not be limited to such factors as (1) whether any portion of the state sales tax payable on the article which is the subject of the bid will be rebated to the city by reason of awarding such contract to a person or firm domiciled within the city, (2) total life-cycle costs, and/or (3) residual value. 
H.  Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount or unit price, with quality, service, and factors considered in Section 3.20.100(E) above, being equal and if the public interest will not permit the delay of readvertising for bids, the city council may accept the lowest bid determined by toss of a coin performed at a time as soon after the bid opening as is possible. 
I.  Performance Bond. The city council shall have authority to require a performance bond before entering a contract in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessity to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the bidding documents. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.105 - Public works projects. 
Public works projects in excess of five thousand dollars shall be bid pursuant to the procedures of the Public Contracts Code Section 20162). Public works projects under twenty thousand dollars may be advertised for and contracted by staff as authorized under this chapter. Public works contracts over twenty thousand dollars shall be approved by council. Public works project bid disputes, rejections, and other exceptions shall be agendized for council action regardless of contract value. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.106 - Local hire policy and apprenticeship. 
A.  Generally. The city of Lodi suffers economically as evidenced by unemployment rates, and the Lodi city council supports improving the economic well being of the city by increasing employment opportunities for citizens of Lodi and the surrounding communities. 
The city of Lodi periodically awards construction contracts, which employ significant numbers of employees in various trades, and many city and San Joaquin County residents possess the skills required of such construction efforts and are in need of employment. 
B.  Local Hire: 
1.  Bidders on construction projects shall complete a bidder local hire information form and checklist. The form shall be submitted with all construction bids in excess of two hundred thousand dollars, which indicates the bidder's effort to employ local hire. A copy of the local hire information form and checklist is attached [by reference] as exhibit A and shall be included in all bid packages with an engineer's estimate over two hundred thousand dollars. Unless this provision conflicts with a state law, federal law, regulation, or funding requirement, bidders who fail to establish a good faith local hire effort shall be rejected as non-responsive. 
2.  In the event that two or more bids are the same and the lowest, the city shall award the contract to the bidder that made the most significant effort to employ local residents as indicated on the bidder local hire information form. 
C.  Local Apprenticeship Program. Unless the provision would conflict with a state law, federal law, regulation, or funding requirements applicable to a particular contract for a public works project, city contracts for public works in excess of two hundred thousand dollars shall contain provisions pursuant to which each contractor or subcontractor shall make a good faith effort to employ apprentices who are enrolled in and participating in an apprenticeship program serving the San Joaquin Valley and approved by the state department of apprenticeship standards. This apprenticeship requirement shall apply for each apprenticable craft or trade in which the contractor employs workers in performing any of the work under the contract. A contractor shall evidence its good faith effort by complying with California Labor Code Section 1777.5 and the implementing regulations and seeking apprentices from apprenticeship programs serving San Joaquin County. 
A contractor employing apprentices pursuant to this section shall employ apprentices in a ratio consistent with the provisions of the California Labor Code. 
This section shall not be construed to exempt a contractor from any otherwise applicable requirement imposed upon the contractor by federal or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1857, § 1, 2-15-2012) 
Editor's note— It should be noted that exhibit A is not set out at length herein but is on file and available for inspection in the office of the city clerk.  
3.20.110 - Open market procedure. 
Purchases of supplies, equipment, contractual services and sales of personal property of an estimated value in the amount of twenty thousand dollars or less may be made in the open market without observing the formal contract procedure prescribed by Section 3.20.100. 
A.  Minimum Number of Informal Bids or Quotations. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three informal bids or quotations, and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. 
B.  Request for Quotations. The purchasing officer or purchasing authority shall solicit informal written bids or quotations from prospective vendors by written request, by telephone or by electronic data interchange. Quotations or informal bids shall be in writing for amounts greater than two thousand five hundred dollars. 
C.  Quotations and written informal bids shall be submitted to the requestor, who shall keep a record of all quotations, bids, and open market orders for a period of one year after the submission of quotations or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. 
D.  The purchasing officer or purchasing authority may reject any and all informal bids, offers and quotations when, in his or her discretion, it shall be in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.115 - Split transactions. 
No person shall willfully split a single transaction into two or more transactions for the purposes of evading the bidding requirements of this section. (Public Contract Code § 10329, 20163) 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.120 - Inspection and testing of purchases. 
The purchasing officer or purchasing authority shall assure the inspection of supplies and equipment delivered, and contractual services performed, to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.130 - Vehicle purchases and disposition exemption. 
The purchase and disposition of fleet vehicles and other specific equipment governed by the city's fleet policies and procedures, as adopted by resolution of the city council, is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.135 - Procurement cards. 
The city council shall select a vendor to provide procurement cards for use by city staff. Purchases in accordance with this policy shall be authorized to be paid for with such cards. The city council shall approve issuance of procurement cards to specified staff positions by resolution for the efficient operations of the city. Authorized limits for individual and aggregate transactions shall be in accordance with the transaction and contract limits set forth in this chapter. The purchasing officer shall be responsible for preparing rules and procedures governing the use of procurement cards. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.140 - Restrictions. 
If any department purchases or contracts for any supplies, equipment or contractual services made contrary to the provisions of this chapter, the purchase or contract shall be void and of no effect. The head of the department making the purchase transaction shall be personally liable for the amount of the purchase or contract, or, if already paid for out of city funds, the amount thereof may be recovered in the name of the city in appropriate action therefore. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
3.20.150 - Penalty for violation. 
Any person who violates, or permits a violation of this chapter is guilty of an infraction which may be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1849, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
Chapter 3.24 - LOST AND UNCLAIMED PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
3.24.010 - Retention for three months. 
Any unclaimed property in the custody of the police department of the city shall be kept by the department under lock and key in a place accessible only to authorized members of the department for a period of at least three months from the date on which the property came into the custody of the department. All such unclaimed property shall be tagged or otherwise marked to show date received and from whom or how received. A record shall also be maintained by the police department setting forth the above data, a description of the property and its disposition. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 1989; prior code § 13-1)  
3.24.020 - Auction sale. 
At such times as the chief of police may determine necessary, so much of the unclaimed property in the custody of the police department which has been held for more than three months shall be sold at public auction, the time and place of such sale to be published at least five days before the sale in the newspaper of general circulation to which the city council has awarded the contract for publication of legal notices required by law to be published in a newspaper of general circulation. The auction may be held and conducted by the chief of police or by any person selected by him to conduct the same. Sales must be for cash, at least ten percent of the amount bid deposited with the bid, the balance to be paid on delivery of the article sold. All sales are final with no right of redemption unless specifically provided by law. The chief of police or the person designated by him may give the buyer a bill of sale describing the article sold, the amount paid and the date of sale. All moneys received as proceeds of the sale shall be deposited with the director of finance to the credit of the general fund of the city. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 1989; prior code § 13-2)  
3.24.030 - Redemption prior to sale. 
All unclaimed property in the custody of the police department is subject to redemption, before its sale as provided in the preceding section, by its legal owner or his authorized representative, upon proof of ownership and proper identification. 
(Prior code § 13-3)  
3.24.040 - Valueless property—Perishable property. 
Unclaimed property of no monetary value may be destroyed by the chief of police with consent of the city manager. Perishable property may be sold without notice and the proceeds thereof held for the benefit of the legal owner for at least three months, when, if such proceeds are unclaimed, they shall be paid into the city treasury as in the case of sales of other property. 
(Ord. 1462 § 1 (part), 1989; prior code § 13-4)  
3.24.050 - Safekeeping charge. 
The owner of any property coming into the custody of the police department as unclaimed may be assessed a reasonable charge for the safekeeping thereof. If it be necessary that the same be placed for safekeeping in a warehouse, the owner shall be liable for the total amount of the storage charges thereon and the cost of transportation to the warehouse. 
(Prior code § 13-5)  
Chapter 3.28 - SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND 
Sections: 
 
3.28.010 - Established. 
There is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the "special gasoline tax street improvement fund." 
(Prior code § 2-34)  
3.28.020 - Deposits. 
All moneys received by this city from the state under the provisions of the state Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways other than state highways, shall be paid into the fund created by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 2-35)  
3.28.030 - Expenditures. 
All moneys in the fund created by this chapter shall be expended exclusively for the purposes authorized by Chapter 3 of Division 3 of the Streets and Highways Code as well as Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of that code. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(3)(G), 1984; prior code 2-36)  
Chapter 3.30 - 2018 GENERAL RETAIL TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX 
 
3.30.010 - Title. 
This ordinance shall be known as the City of Lodi 2018 General Retail Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance. The City of Lodi hereinafter shall be called "City." This ordinance shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.020 - Operative Date. 
"Operative date" means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than 110 days after the adoption of this ordinance, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.030 - Purpose. 
This ordinance is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes: 
A.  To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose. 
B.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
C.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes. 
D.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this ordinance. 
E.  To adopt a retail transactions and use tax for unrestricted general revenue purposes, to remain in effect until the voters amend or repeal it. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.40.040 - Contract with state. 
Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.050 - Transactions tax rate. 
For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of one-half percent (0.50%) of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.060 - Place of sale. 
For the purposes of this ordinance, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.070 - Use tax rate. 
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of this ordinance for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one-half cent (0.50%) of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.080 - Adoption of provisions of state law. 
Except as otherwise provided in this ordinance and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this ordinance as though fully set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.090. - Limitations on adoption of state law and collection of use taxes. 
In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code: 
A.  Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefore. However, the substitution shall not be made when: 
1.  The word "State" is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California; 
2.  The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this ordinance. 
3.  In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to: 
a.  Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; or 
b.  Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provision of that code. 
4.  In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code. 
B.  The word "City" shall be substituted for the word "State" in the phrase "retailer engaged in business in this State" in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.100. - Permit not required. 
If a seller's permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor's permit shall not be required by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.110. - Exemptions and exclusions. 
A.  There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax levied by the State of California or by any city, city and county, or county pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any state-administered transactions or use tax. 
B.  There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from: 
1.  Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. 
2.  Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied: 
a.  With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and 
b.  With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address. 
3.  The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
C.  There are exempted from the use tax levied by this ordinance, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property: 
1.  The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any state-administered transactions and use tax ordinance. 
2.  Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California. 
3.  If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
4.  If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of this ordinance. 
5.  For the purposes of subsections (3) and (4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised. 
6.  Except as provided in subparagraph (7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer. 
7.  "A retailer engaged in business in the City" shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Chapter 2 of Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City. 
D.  Any person subject to use tax under this ordinance may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for, a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.120. - Amendments to state law. 
All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this ordinance to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this ordinance, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.130 - Enjoining collection forbidden. 
No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this ordinance, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.140 - Annual Accountability Report. 
The City Council shall cause preparation of an annual accountability report for the benefit of the citizens of the City and in order to assure accountability in the expenditure of tax revenues received pursuant to this ordinance. The annual accountability performance report shall be posted on the City's website and shall include the following information: 
A.  The amount of revenue collected pursuant to the transactions and use tax imposed by this ordinance; 
B.  The amount and general purposes of the expenditures made possible by this ordinance including, where feasible, a categorization of the nature and purpose of the expenditures. These categories may include, among other things: 
1.  A listing of general fund service expenditures (such as police, fire, parks and recreation, library, youth and senior programs, and other general fund services). 
2.  A listing of capital facility expenditures (such as streets, police and fire facilities, emergency communication systems, and other general fund capital expenditures). 
3.  Such other categories of general fund services or capital expenditures as the City Council may from time to time deem necessary and desirable. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.150 - Establishment of citizens' oversight committee. 
A.  Committee Established. A Citizens' Oversight Committee is hereby established in the City of Lodi which shall have the duty and responsibility to review the annual accountability performance report and report its findings to the City Council and the citizens of the City. 
B.  Selection of Members. Members of the Citizens' Oversight Committee shall be appointed by the City Council. The Committee shall consist of five members. Members of the Citizens' Oversight Committee shall not be current City of Lodi employees, officials, contractors, or vendors of the City. Past employees, officials, contractors, and vendors shall be eligible to serve on the Committee, provided that there are no conflicts of interest as determined by the City Attorney. To the extent possible at least two members of the Committee shall be certified public accountants or equivalent. Of the members of the Committee first appointed, three members shall be appointed for terms of two years and two members shall be appointed for terms of three years. Their successors shall be appointed for terms of three years. No member may serve more than two consecutive three-year terms. The City Council shall solicit members of the Citizens' Oversight Committee, through an open application process that is promoted through the City's recruiting process for boards and commissions. Any resident of the City is eligible to apply for Committee membership, subject to the restrictions specified above. All applications will be reviewed by the City Council, which will have the authority to make final decisions regarding Committee composition, subject to the guidelines in this ordinance. 
C.  Purposes and Jurisdiction. The Citizens' Oversight Committee shall meet a minimum of three times per year, including conducting an annual review of expenditures of revenue collected pursuant to this ordinance to determine whether such funds are expended for the purposes set forth in this ordinance. Committee members may review the annual financial audit performed by an independent auditor during the review process. The Citizens' Oversight Committee shall issue an annual report on their findings to the City Council and to the citizens of Lodi. The Citizens' Oversight Committee annual report is subject to review and approval of the City Council. The Committee shall confine its review specifically to revenues generated pursuant to this ordinance and the expenditure of those revenues. The Committee shall serve in an advisory-only role to the City Council. Committee members shall not play a formal or informal role in the expenditure of the funds raised by this ordinance. The Committee is not charged with decision-making on spending priorities; schedules; project details; funding source decisions; financing plans; or tax rate assumptions. The Committee shall have no jurisdiction other than that delegated to it by the People pursuant to this ordinance. The Lodi City Manager or the City Manager's designee shall provide reasonable administrative or technical assistance required by the Committee to fulfill its responsibilities or publicize its findings. 
D.  Meetings. The Citizens' Oversight Committee shall meet a minimum of three times per year with specific meeting dates to be determined by Committee members. Citizens' Oversight Committee meetings are subject to the Brown Act. Meetings must be noticed and open to the public. Committee minutes and reports are a matter of public record, and must be posted on the City's web site. Additional meetings may be scheduled by the Committee as necessary. All Committee members shall attend a training and orientation session prior to the first regular Committee meeting. Committee members are expected to attend all regular meetings. Failure to attend two consecutive meetings may result in removal from the Committee at the discretion of the City Council. 
E.  Committee Operations. The Citizens' Oversight Committee will select members to serve as Chair and Vice Chair of the Committee. A City staff person will be appointed by the City Manager, or the City Manager's designee, to serve as Secretary. The Secretary will be responsible for preparing, posting, and distributing agendas and taking minutes at each meeting. Approved minutes shall be made available to the public. Committee decisions, positions, findings, and procedures shall require a simple majority vote of those Committee members in attendance. The quorum requirement for any meeting shall be a minimum of three (3) members. 
F.  Vacancies. Committee members may be removed from the Committee only by the City Council for repeated absences at committee meetings, malfeasance, failure to meet the qualifications set forth in this Section, or for inability or unwillingness to fulfill the duties of a Committee member. In the event of removal, resignation, or death, the City Council shall appoint a person to fill the vacant seat. 
G.  Miscellaneous. Subject to the restrictions specifically addressed in this Section, the Committee may draft and adopt its own standard procedures and by-laws by majority vote. All Citizens' Oversight Committee procedures and by-laws remain subject to review and approval of the City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
3.30.160 - Annual audit and review. 
The revenue from the tax imposed by this ordinance, as well as the expenditure thereof, shall be subject to the annual audit performed by the City's independent auditor of the City's books, records, accounts, and fiscal procedures and which is reported in the City's Comprehensive Annual Financial Report. The audit results may be combined with the audit of other City funds, so long as the proceeds from this ordinance are reported separately. The City Council shall discuss the results of such audit at a meeting of the City Council that is open to the public. The report of such audit shall be posted on the City's website. 
(Ord. No. 1953, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Title 5 - PERMITS AND REGULATIONS 
Chapters:  
Chapter 5.08 - BINGO 
Sections: 
 
5.08.010 - Statutory authority. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 4B-1)  
5.08.020 - Qualified organizations. 
All organizations qualified pursuant to section 326.5 of the Penal Code are authorized to conduct bingo games within the city. 
(Prior code § 4B-2)  
5.08.030 - Compliance with state law. 
All authorized organizations shall conduct bingo games in strict compliance with Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 4B-3)  
5.08.040 - Hours of operation. 
No authorized organization shall conduct any bingo game or games more than once a week, nor more than six hours in length. No bingo game or games shall be conducted prior to the hour of ten a.m. or after two a.m. 
(Prior code § 4B-4)  
Chapter 5.12 - CARDROOMS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1821, § 1, adopted April 15, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 5.12, §§ 5.12.010, 5.12.015, §§ 5.12.020—5.12.170, and enacted a new Ch. 5.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.12 pertained to cardrooms and derived from Ord. 1779 § 1 (part), 2006. 
 
5.12.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter: 
"Cardroom" means any space, room, or enclosure, furnished or equipped with a table used or intended to be used as a cardtable for the playing of cards and similar games, and the use of which is available to the public, or any portion of the public. 
"Cardroom employee" means any natural person employed in the operation of a gambling enterprise, including, without limitation, dealers, floor personnel, security employees, countroom personnel, age personnel, collection personnel, surveillance personnel, data-processing personnel, appropriate maintenance personnel, waiters and waitresses, and secretaries, or any other natural person whose employment duties require or authorize access to restricted gambling establishment areas. 
"Gross revenue" means and includes seat rental fees, membership fees, table revenues, rental fees and charges, and any and all other gaming revenues derived from activities conducted on or within the card room premises. 
"Financial interest" means any direct or indirect financial interest in the management, operation, ownership, profits, or revenue (gross or net) of a card room. A direct financial interest means a monetary investment in a card room. An indirect financial interest means owning one percent or more of any entity, i.e., any business, corporation, joint venture partnership, or trust that in turn has a direct financial interest in a card room. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.015. - No vested right. 
This article does not create any vested or other property right of any kind in any permittee, pointholder, key management employee, or other person. The city reserves the right to, at any time, amend, modify, or repeal the provisions of this article and to otherwise regulate or prohibit any privilege exercised hereunder. This reservation includes but is not limited to the right of the city to amend, from time to time, a permit issued pursuant to the terms of this article by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.020 - Compliance with state law. 
Any person or persons wishing to apply for any license or permit authorized in this chapter must comply with not only this chapter, but with Sections 330 through 337 of the California Penal Code. In each case where a license is issued, it shall be nontransferable. 
It is the stated purpose of this article to regulate card rooms in the City of Lodi concurrently with the State of California, and to impose local controls and regulations upon card rooms as codified in the "Gambling Control Act" as codified in Division 8, Chapter 5 of the California Business and Professions Code (commencing with Section 19800). All such references to the Gambling Control Act are to Division 8, Chapter 5 of the California Business and Professions Code, as may be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.030 - License—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on, or to maintain or conduct, or cause to be engaged in, carried on, maintained, or conducted, any card room in the city without first having secured a license to do so, or without complying with each regulation contained in this chapter pertaining to such cardroom. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.040 - License—Application. 
A.  Any applicant for a cardroom license shall submit his application to the chief of police, which application shall be under oath, and shall include, among other things, the true names and addresses of all persons financially interested in the business. The term "persons financially interested" includes all persons who share in the profits of the business, on the basis of gross or net revenue. The past criminal record, if any of the applicant and of all persons financially interested in the business shall be shown on such application. The application shall also be accompanied by fingerprints of the applicant and of persons financially interested in the business. 
B.  The applicant shall pay a fee to the finance department of the city to defray the cost of investigation in an amount as may be fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.050 - License—Denial grounds. 
The chief of police shall deny any applicant for a cardroom license, a license to operate such room if: 
A.  The applicant has previously been convicted of a felony including a conviction by a federal court or a court in another state for a crime that would be a felony if committed in California; or 
B.  The applicant has previously been convicted of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, gambling, or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code. 
C.  The applicant fails to clearly establish eligibility and qualification under this chapter and under Business and Professions Code Section 19800 et seq. 
D.  The applicant fails to provide information, documentation, and assurances required by this chapter, or failure to reveal any fact material to qualification, or supplying false information. 
E.  Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.060 - License—Appeal from denial. 
The action of the chief of police in denying such a license shall be subject to an appeal to the city council. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the denial of the license. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such license shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.070 - Work permit—Required. 
A.  Each cardroom employee must obtain and possess a valid work permit issued by the chief of police. Applications for such work permits shall be submitted under oath and contain the past criminal record, if any, of the applicant and such information as may be necessary to determine whether the applicant is a proper person to be employed in a cardroom. Fingerprints of the applicant shall accompany the application. A work permit shall be issued only to persons twenty-one years of age or older. 
B.  Any application for a work permit shall be subject to objection by the state division. If the division objects to the issuance of a work permit, it shall be denied. Such a denial may be reviewed in accordance with the Gambling Control Act (Business and Professions Code Section 19801 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.080 - Work permit—Denial grounds. 
The chief of police shall deny any applicant for a cardroom license, a license to operate such room if: 
A.  The applicant has previously been convicted of a felony including a conviction by a federal court or a court in another state for a crime that would be a felony if committed in California; or 
B.  The applicant has previously been convicted of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, gambling, or moral turpitude within the ten-year period immediately preceding the submission of the application, unless the applicant has been granted relief pursuant to Section 1203.4, 1203.4a, or 1203.45 of the Penal Code. 
C.  The applicant fails to clearly establish eligibility and qualification under this Chapter and under Business and Professions Code Section 19800 et seq. 
D.  The applicant fails to provide information, documentation, and assurances required by this chapter, or failure to reveal any fact material to qualification, or supplying false information. 
E.  Association of the applicant with criminal profiteering activity or organized crime as defined by Section 186.2 of the Penal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.090 - Work permit—Appeal from denial. 
The action of the chief of police in denying such work permit shall be subject to an appeal to the city manager. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the denial of the work permit. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in denying such work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.100 - Work permit—Fee—Term—Identification measures. 
A.  Each application for a work permit shall be accompanied by an application fee, to be paid to the finance department, in an amount as may be fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The fee shall not be returned in the event that such work permit is refused, revoked, or suspended as provided in this chapter. 
B.  The work permit shall be valid even though the holder of the permit may change his place of employment within the city. Upon approval of a work permit, the work permit shall be valid, unless suspended or revoked, for a period of one year from date of issuance. 
C.  In order that the chief of police may investigate the applicant's qualifications and fitness to receive a cardroom employee work permit, every applicant shall be photographed and fingerprinted. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.110 - Work permit—Renewal. 
Any person who holds a valid cardroom employee work permit may obtain a new permit for the succeeding year by applying for the new permit during the month preceding the expiration date of the current permit. Cost for the new permit, which shall include the cost of a new identification card, shall be paid to the finance department, and shall be an amount as fixed and established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.120 - Work permit—Failure to renew. 
If the holder of a cardroom employee work permit fails to renew the permit, his permit shall cease to be valid and he must make application for a new permit, if desired, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.130 - Suspension or revocation—Procedure. 
A.  The chief of police has the right for cause to revoke or suspend any cardroom license or card room work permit issued under this chapter and to take possession of such permits. 
B.  Any of the grounds upon which the chief of police is required to refuse to issue an initial cardroom license or cardroom work permit also constitutes grounds for such revocation or suspension. In addition, the failure of a holder of a cardroom license or cardroom work permit to comply with the provisions set forth in this chapter also constitutes grounds for revocation or suspension of such license or work permit. 
C.  Suspension or revocation of a cardroom work permit shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of such permit before the chief of police, after five days' notice to the permit holder, setting forth the grounds of the complaint against him and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. The action of the chief of police in this respect is subject to an appeal to the city manager. Notice of such appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the revocation or suspension. Upon failure to file such notice within the ten-day period, the action of the chief of police in revoking or suspending the license or work permit shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.140 - Rules and regulations. 
It is unlawful to operate a cardroom in violation of any of the following regulations and rules: 
A.  Not more than one cardroom shall be located at any one address. 
B.  Only those games approved by and as defined by the California Office of the Attorney General, Bureau of Gambling Control, shall be played in any cardroom. 
C.  Not more than fifteen tables shall be permitted in any cardroom. No more than fifteen tables shall be permitted to operate within the city. 
D.  No gambling establishment may be located in any zone which has not been specifically approved for such a business. Additionally, none may be located near any of the unsuitable areas, as specified in Business and Professions Code Section 19852(a)(3). 
E.  No person under the age of twenty-one shall be permitted at any card table, nor shall any person under the age of twenty-one be permitted to participate in any game played thereat. 
F.  Cardrooms may be operated twenty-four hours per day, seven days a week. A cardroom shall adopt a schedule of hours of operation before it shall be allowed to operate. Such schedule of hours shall be clearly posted at the cardroom in order to provide adequate notice of its hours of operation. 
G.  All cardrooms shall be open to police inspection during all hours of operation. 
H.  Only table stakes shall be permitted. 
I.  The cashing of bank checks for players or extensions of credit to players shall be in full compliance with the California Gambling Law and Regulations. No cardroom shall extend credit or cash checks for players in a manner not authorized by state law. 
J.  Each card table shall have assigned to it a person whose duty shall be to supervise the game to see to it that it is played strictly in accordance with the terms of this chapter and with the provisions of the penal code of the state. This person may have more than one table under his supervision. He shall not, however, participate in the game. 
K.  There shall be posted in every cardroom in letters plainly visible from all parts thereof, signs stating that only games approved by and as defined by the California Office of the Attorney General, Bureau of Gambling Control, shall be played in the cardroom. These signs shall also contain such other information relating to the regulations contained in this chapter as the chief of police may require. 
L.  No person who is in a state of intoxication shall be permitted in any cardroom. 
M.  The sale, purchase, transfer, assignment, or pledge of any property, or of any document evidencing title to the same, is prohibited in any cardroom. 
N.  The operator or his employees shall not loan money to any person on any ring, watch, or other article of personal property for the purpose of securing tokens, chips, or other representatives of money as an ante. 
O.  No shills shall engage in card games. This prohibition shall not apply to house players, provided they wear a badge in a conspicuous place, which badge identifies them as employees of the licensee. 
P.  Patron security and safety. Each cardroom license shall be responsible and liable for its patrons' safety and security in and around the cardroom establishment. Before it shall be allowed to operate, each cardroom shall adopt a plan, to be approved by the city, to provide for the safety and security of its patrons. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009; Ord. No. 1864, § 1, 10-3-2012; Ord. No. 1900, § 1, 11-19-2014; Ord. No. 1952, § 1, 6-6-2018)  
5.12.150 - State—Prohibited games. 
The city council declares that it is not the intention of this chapter to permit the licensing of any cardroom for the playing of any game prohibited by the laws of the state, including but not limited to those games enumerated in Section 330 of the Penal Code of the state, which section includes banking and percentage games. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.160 - Business license required. 
Operators of cardrooms shall be required to obtain a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009)  
5.12.170 - Gross revenue permit fees. 
A.  In addition to the permit fees previously prescribed each permittee permitted pursuant to the provisions of this article shall pay to the city a monthly fee equal to twenty thousand dollars on the first two hundred forty thousand dollars of monthly gross revenue the permittee received from cardroom operations, and four and one-half percent of monthly gross revenue in excess of two hundred forty thousand dollars. Such payment shall be made to the city not later than fifteen days after the end of each month during which such gross revenues on which it was computed were received by the permittee. 
B.  Each permittee shall file with the finance department before the fifteenth day following the end of each month a statement, under oath, showing the true and correct amount of gross revenue derived from the card game business permitted by the permit issued to the permittee for the preceding month. Such statement shall be accompanied by the payment of the correct amount of permit fee due and owing in accordance with the provisions of subsection A. of this section, and such sums correctly reflecting the monthly fees payable for the preceding month shall be accepted by the city, subject, however, to the right of the city to audit the matters reported in the statement to determine the accuracy of the figures contained therein and whether or not the correct amount payable to the city has been paid. 
A signed declaration shall be attached to the statement or included therein, which shall be in substantially the same form: 
"I hereby declare under penalty of perjury that the foregoing is true and correct." 
(Ord. No. 1821, § 1, 4-15-2009; Ord. No. 1864, § 2, 10-3-2012)  
Chapter 5.16 - COMMUNITY CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
5.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Access channel" means a single channel dedicated in whole or in part for local programming which is not originated by a cable company. 
B.  "Basic service" means any service tier which includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals and public, educational and governmental access channels. 
C.  "Cable services" are defined as the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming and other programming services together with subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such programming and programming services that the cable operator makes available to all subscribers generally. Examples of cable services include: video programming, pay-per-view, voter preference polls in the context of a video program, teletexts, one-way transmission of any computer software, and one-way videotex services such as news services, stock market information, etc. Noncable services would include: shop-at-home, bank-at-home services, electronic mail, one-way and two-way transmission of nonvideo data and information not offered to all subscribers, data processing, video conferencing and voice communication. 
D.  "Cablecasting" is programming carried on a cable system, exclusive of broadcast signals, whether originated by the cable operator or any other party. 
E.  "Cable system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves only subscribers in one or more multiple-unit dwellings under common ownership, control, or management, unless such facility or facilities uses any public right-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1984, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers; or (4) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
F.  "Local origination programming" means programming locally produced by the company. 
G.  "Franchise" means any nonexclusive authority granted pursuant to this chapter in terms of franchise or franchise renewal or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system in the incorporated area of the city. The term "franchise" includes the term "franchise renewal" in this chapter. 
H.  "Franchise area" means all or any portions of the incorporated area of the city for which a franchise has been granted under this chapter. 
I.  "Grantee" means the person to whom a franchise under this chapter is granted by the council and any lawful successor or assignee of such a person. 
J.  "Gross annual receipts" means any and all compensation or receipts obtained from and as a result of the operation of a cable system by a grantee within the franchised area; except that such term shall not include receipts or compensation for: 
1.  Installation, reconnection or any other nonrecurring charges; 
2.  The amount of any refunds, credits or other payments made to subscribers or users; 
3.  Any taxes on services furnished by the grantee imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber or user by any municipal corporation, political subdivision, state or other governmental unit and collected by the grantee for the governmental unit; and 
4.  The sale or transfer of tangible property; 
5.  The sale or transfer of the franchise; 
6.  The issuance, sale or transfer of corporation stocks, bonds or other securities; and 
7.  Loans or gifts to the grantee. 
K.  "Person" means any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, joint venture, corporation or company. 
L.  "Property of grantee" means any property constructed, installed, operated or maintained by a grantee under the authority of a nonexclusive franchise issued pursuant to this chapter. 
M.  "Street" means the surface of, and the space above and below, any public street, road, highway, freeway, lane, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, drive, public utility easement or other public place as may be authorized by the council, existing as such as of or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter within the incorporated area of the city. 
N.  "Subscriber" means any person or entity receiving for any purpose the cable service of a grantee. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.020 - Franchise required. 
No person shall extend, operate or carry on the business of distributing to any persons in this city any television signals or radio signals by means of a cable system unless a franchise or renewal of franchise therefor has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. No person shall construct, install or maintain within any street in the city or within any other public property of the city or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable system, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.030 - Grant of authority. 
A.  A nonexclusive franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable system within any franchise area may be granted by the council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise or not, offering to furnish and provide a system pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter. No provision of this chapter shall be construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more. Neither the granting of any nonexclusive franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, nonexclusive franchise to any person within the city. 
B.  Successful applicants chosen by the city council will be granted the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof and additions thereto in the city poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other cable conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the city of a cable system to be used for the sale and distribution of cable services to the residents of the city. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property. 
D.  Insofar as it is not inconsistent with or otherwise preempted by federal or state regulation, the city council also grants the right and privilege to successful grantees to provide noncable communications services. The city council retains all authority, not otherwise preempted, to regulate noncable communication services to the extent necessary to assure the delivery of proposed noncable services, if any, and that they are in compliance with all regulatory provisions of this chapter. 
E.  The construction, maintenance, and operation of grantee's cable system and all property of grantee subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to all lawful police powers, rules and regulations of the city. The city shall have the power at any time to order and require grantee to remove or abate any pole, line, tower, wire, cable, guy, conduit, electric conductor, or any other structure or facility that is dangerous to life or property. In the event grantee, after written notice, fails or refuses to act, the city shall have the power to remove or abate the same at the expense of the grantee, all without compensation or liability for damages to grantee. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.040 - Application. 
A.  An application for a franchise or franchise renewal under this chapter shall be in writing and accompanied by a payment to the city in an amount to be established and amended from time to time by resolution of the city council. An application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is a partnership, the name and address of each partner shall be set forth. If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall state the names and addresses of its directors, main officers, major stockholders and associates, and the names and addresses of parent and subsidiary companies. 
2.  A description of the manner in which the applicant proposes to construct, install, maintain and operate the cable system and the extent and manner in which existing or future poles or other public utilities will be used for the system. 
3.  A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
a.  A detailed map indicating all areas to be served, how they are to be served and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become one hundred percent operational, throughout the entire area to be served; 
b.  A detailed, informative, and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and the operational and technical standards proposed by the applicants. 
4.  A statement of the estimated costs of the installation of the proposed system described in subdivisions 2 and 3 of this subsection. 
5.  All applicants are required to clearly delineate the initial service area being proposed on a map of sufficient detail (see subdivision 3 of this subsection). The map shall also indicate any and all areas that will not receive services. 
6.  All applicants shall agree to extend cable system upon request of any contiguous area not designated for initial service in the plan when potential subscribers can be served by extension of the cable system past dwelling units equivalent to a density of forty homes per mile of street. Extension shall be at grantee's cost. If undergrounding is required by regulation, grantee must make installation at grantee's expense. Where aerial extension is allowed by regulation but underground installation is requested by benefitted subscribers, the cost of undergrounding that exceeds the estimated aerial extension cost may be charged to benefitted subscribers. 
7.  A statement or schedule in a form approved by the city manager of proposed rates and charges to subscribers for installation and services, and a copy of the proposed service agreement between the grantee and its subscribers shall accompany the application. 
8.  A statement setting forth all agreements and understandings, whether written, oral or implied existing between the applicant and any person who is a party in interest with respect to the proposed franchise or the proposed cable operation. If a franchise is granted to a person posing as a front or as the representative of another person, and such information is not disclosed in the original application, such franchise is void and of no force and effect. 
9.  A financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or public accountant satisfactory to the council, demonstrating applicant's financial status and its financial ability to complete the construction or reconstruction, installation and operation of the proposed system. 
10.  An original application for a franchise shall include a detailed financial plan (pro forma) describing for each year of the franchise, projected number of subscribers, rates, all revenues, operating expenses, capital expenditures, depreciation schedule, income statements and a sources and uses of funds statement. All information is to be presented in the format to be prescribed by the city. 
B.  The council may at any time demand, and applicant shall then provide, such supplementary, additional or other information as the council deems reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.050 - Grant or refusal. 
Upon consideration of any application, the council may refuse to grant the requested franchise or the council may by resolution grant a franchise for a cable system to any applicant as may appear from its application to be in the opinion of the council best qualified to render good and efficient cable service to subscribers in the proposed franchise area. The application submitted, together with any amendments, and this chapter shall constitute and form part of the franchise if granted. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.060 - Acceptance. 
Within thirty days after the date of a resolution awarding a franchise, or within such extended period of time as the council may authorize, the grantee shall file with the city manager his written acceptance in forms satisfactory to the city attorney, of the franchise, together with the required bond and insurance policies, and his agreement to be bound by and to comply with and to do all things required of him by the provisions of this chapter and the franchise. Such acceptance and agreement shall be acknowledged by the grantee before a notary public and shall be in form and content satisfactory to, and approved by, the city attorney. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.070 - Conditions. 
A.  Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include, among other things, the following condition: 
 The cable system herein franchised shall be used and operated solely and exclusively for the purpose expressly authorized by Ordinance of the City of Lodi and no other purpose whatsoever. 
B.  Inclusion of the statement set out in subsection A of this section in any such franchise does not limit the authority of the city to include any other reasonable condition, limitation or restriction which it deems necessary to impose in connection with a franchise granted pursuant to the authority conferred by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.080 - Duration—Renewal of franchise. 
A.  The duration of the right, privileges and authorizations granted in a franchise agreement shall be not to exceed twenty years from the date a franchise is awarded. A franchise may be renewed by the city upon application of the grantee pursuant to the procedure established in subsection B of this section and in accordance with the then applicable law. 
B.  Renewal. 
1.  During the six-month period which begins with the thirty-sixth month before the franchise expiration, the city may on its own initiative, and shall at the request of the grantee, commence proceedings which afford the public appropriate notice and participation for the purpose of: 
a.  Identifying the future cable-related community needs and interests; and 
b.  Reviewing the performance of the grantee under the franchise during the then current franchise term. 
2.  a.  Upon completion of a proceeding under subdivision 1 of this subsection, the grantee seeking renewal of a franchise may, on its own initiative or at the request of the city, submit a proposal for renewal. 
b.  Any such proposal shall contain such material as the city may require, including proposals for an upgrade of the cable system. 
c.  The city may establish a date by which such proposal shall be submitted. 
3.  a.  Upon submittal by the grantee of a proposal to the city for the renewal of the franchise, the city shall provide public notice of such proposal and, during the four-month period which begins on the completion of any proceedings under subdivision 1 of this subsection, renew the franchise or, issue a preliminary assessment that the franchise should not be renewed and, at the request of the grantee or on its own initiative, commence an administrative proceeding, after providing prompt public notice of such proceeding, in accordance with subparagraph b of this subdivision to consider whether: 
i.  The grantee has substantially complied with the material terms of the existing franchise and with applicable law; 
ii.  The quality of the grantee's service, including signal quality, response to consumer complaint, and billing practices, but without regard to the mix, quality, or level of cable services or other services provided over the system, has been reasonable in light of community needs; 
iii.  The grantee has the financial, legal, and technical ability to provide the services, facilities, and equipment as set forth in the grantee's proposal; and 
iv.  The grantee's proposal is reasonable to meet the future cable-related community needs and interests, taking into account the cost of meeting such needs and interests. 
b.  In any proceeding under subparagraph a of this subdivision, the grantee shall be afforded notice and the grantee and the city, or its designee, shall be afforded fair opportunity for full participation, including the right to introduce evidence (including evidence related to issues raised in the proceeding under subdivision 1 of this subsection) to require the production of evidence and to question witnesses. A transcript shall be made of any such proceeding. 
c.  At the completion of a proceeding under this subdivision, the city shall issue a written decision granting or denying the proposal for renewal based upon the record of such proceeding, and transmit a copy of such decision to the grantee. Such decision shall state the reasons therefor. 
4.  Any denial of a proposal for renewal shall be based on one or more adverse findings made with respect to the factors described in subparagraphs i through iv of subdivision 3a, pursuant to the record of the proceeding under subdivision 3. 
5.  If the grantee's proposal for renewal has been denied by a final decision of the city made pursuant to this section, or has been adversely affected by a failure of the city to act in accordance with the procedural requirements of this section, the grantee may appeal such final decision or failure pursuant to the provisions of Section 635 of the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
6.  Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions 1 through 5 of this subsection, the grantee may submit a proposal for the renewal of the franchise pursuant to this subdivision at any time, and the city may, after affording the public adequate notice and opportunity for comment, grant or deny such proposal at any time (including after proceedings pursuant to this subsection have commenced). The provisions of subdivisions 1 through 5 of this subsection shall not apply to a decision to grant or deny a proposal under this subdivision. The denial of a renewal pursuant to this subdivision shall not affect action on a renewal proposal that is submitted in accordance with subdivisions 1 through 5. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.090 - Payment. 
Any grantee granted a franchise under this chapter shall pay to the city, during the life of such franchise, a sum equal to three percent of the annual gross receipts of the grantee, payable quarterly. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.100 - Financial statement—Audit—Minimum payment. 
A.  The grantee shall file with the council within ninety days after the expiration of any fiscal year or portion thereof during which a franchise is in force, a financial statement prepared by a certified public accountant or public accountant showing in detail gross annual receipts, as defined in this chapter, of the grantee during the preceding calendar year or portion thereof. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the city within fifteen days after the time for filing such statements the sum prescribed by the franchise, or any unpaid balance thereof, for the calendar year or the portion thereof covered by the statement. 
B.  The right is reserved to the city of audit and recomputation of any and all amounts paid under this chapter and acceptance until expiration of a period of five years following payment shall not be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligations under this chapter. 
C.  In any year, commencing with the first full calendar year of service during which the franchise payments amount to less than twelve hundred dollars, the grantee shall pay to the city for such a year a minimum total amount of twelve hundred dollars. 
D.  In the event of any holding over after expiration or any other termination of a franchise issued under this chapter, whether with or without the consent of the city, the grantee shall pay to city a compensation twice the percent of its gross annual receipts during such period as it would be required to pay under its franchise if there were no holding over. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.110 - Rates for service. 
A.  The grantee shall file with the city council a true and correct schedule of rates to be charged for installation and connection to its cable system and a monthly charge for cable service. Such rates shall not be changed or modified in any manner without first filing the changed or modified rates with the city council thirty days prior to the effective date of such change or modification. 
B.  The city council shall have the authority to regulate the rates to the extent the council is permitted to by federal, state or local law. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.120 - Limitations. 
A.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive. 
B.  No privilege or exemption shall be authorized or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed in this chapter. 
C.  Any privilege claimed under a franchise by the grantee in any street, or other public property, shall be subordinate to any prior occupancy thereof for public purposes. 
D.  A franchise granted under this chapter shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the council expressed in writing. The grantee shall file with the council within thirty days prior to sale, transfer, assignment or lease of the franchise or any part thereof or any rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the proposed transaction certified to by the grantee or its duly authorized officers. Any proposed assignee must show financial responsibility to carry out the terms of the franchise and must agree to comply with all of the provisions of this chapter; and provided further, that no consent or approval shall be required for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by security agreement, or by other hypothecation as a whole, to secure an indebtedness, or for a transfer required by operation of law. 
E.  Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the council or by law to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city. 
F.  The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage, arising out of any provisions or requirements of this chapter or its enforcement. 
G.  Any franchise granted under this chapter shall not relieve the grantee of any obligation involved in obtaining pole space from any department or division of the city, other agency of government, utility company, or from others maintaining poles in streets; provided, that the latter shall cooperate with the grantee to the end that only one set of poles shall be required by all. 
H.  Any franchise granted under this chapter is in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, or any successor to any interest of the grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable system in the incorporated limits of the city, and the acceptance of a franchise under this chapter shall operate as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between the grantee and the city, any and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any cable system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to such franchise, and not under or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.130 - Rights reserved by city. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the city to acquire the grantee's property either by purchase or through exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed to contract away or to modify or abridge the city's right of eminent domain in respect to any grantee. 
B.  No franchise granted under this chapter shall be given any value before any court or other public authority in any action or proceeding brought by the city in excess of the amount of the required filing fee and any other sum paid by the grantee to city for a franchise at the time of granting. 
C.  There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be reserved or provided in this chapter by any ordinance or resolution of the city, and the grantee, by its acceptance of any franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, enacted or established before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
D.  The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter. 
E.  Neither the granting of any franchise under this chapter nor any of the provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent the city from granting any identical, or similar, franchise to any other person within all or any portion of the city. 
F.  There is reserved to city the right to amend any section or part of this chapter so as to require reasonable additional or greater standards of construction, operation, maintenance or otherwise, on the part of the grantee for purposes of protecting the public health, safety and welfare. This provision shall not apply to commitments of a contractual nature made in a franchise agreement or franchise renewal agreements. 
G.  Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision in this chapter shall constitute a bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of city. 
H.  All facilities of any grantee licensed under this chapter within the city shall be available for civil defense purposes at such times as the city director of civil defense shall require. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.140 - Complaint procedure. 
A.  The city manager or the city manager's designee is specified by the city as having primary responsibility for the continuing administration of a franchise and implementation of complaint procedures. 
B.  A grantee shall maintain a central office within or in close proximity to the city, which shall be open during all usual business hours, have a publicly listed telephone with a toll-free number and sufficient lines; and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs, billing or adjustments shall be received on a twenty-four hour basis. 
C.  A grantee shall maintain a repair and maintenance crew which shall respond to subscriber complaints or requests for service within twenty-four hours after receipt of the complaint or request. No charge shall be made to the subscriber for this service unless such maintenance or repair is required as a result of damage caused by subscriber. 
D.  1.  A grantee shall establish procedures for receiving, acting upon, and resolving subscriber complaints to the satisfaction of the city manager's office. A grantee shall furnish a notice of such procedures to each subscriber at the time of initial subscription to the system and annually thereafter. 
2.  Grantee's service call procedures shall contain provisions to protect the interests of subscribers. In the event that the grantee or its employee determines that grantee's cable system is not responsible for any given problem which has resulted in a service call (i.e., subscriber equipment is at fault), the subscriber shall have the right to have this contention demonstrated through the use of an additional television receiver comparison. A standard television receiver will be used in the subscriber's home to allow a direct A/B comparison of performance. 
E.  A grantee shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the date and time it was received, the disposition of said complaint and the time and date thereof. The log shall be made available for periodic inspection by representatives of the city manager. All service complaint entries shall be retained on file for a period consisting of the most recent three years. 
F.  When there have been similar complaints made or when there exists other evidence, which, in the judgment of the city manager casts doubt on the reliability or quality of cable service, the city manager shall have the right and authority to compel a grantee to test, analyze, and report on the performance of the system. Such report shall be delivered to the city manager no later than fourteen days after the city manager formally notifies the grantee and shall include the following information: the nature of the complaints which precipitated the special tests; what system components were tested, the equipment used, and procedures employed in said testing; the results of such tests; and the method in which said complaints were resolved. 
G.  The city manager may require that tests and analyses shall be supervised by a professional engineer not on the permanent staff of a grantee. The aforesaid engineer should sign all records of the special tests and forward to the city manager such records with a report interpreting the results of the tests and recommending actions to be taken by a grantee and the city. 
H.  The city's right under this section shall be limited to requiring tests, analyses, and reports covering specific subjects and characteristics based on said complaints or other evidence when and under such circumstances as the city has reasonable grounds to believe that the complaints or other evidence requires that tests be performed to protect the public against substandard cable service. 
I.  The city manager is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber in the best interest of the public. 
J.  Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. 
K.  The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the city manager and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of any grantee or from any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.150 - Refunds. 
A.  Subscribers not satisfied that services have been provided as outlined in this chapter and the franchise agreement shall be encouraged to notify the system manager. The grantee shall work with the subscriber to resolve the problem within forty-eight hours, and upon request by a subscriber, the grantee shall credit the subscriber's account on a pro rata basis for loss of service commencing forty-eight hours after notification of the grantee. 
B.  A grantee shall at the time of initial subscription to the system and annually thereafter furnish a notice to subscribers of their right to a refund for any loss or interruption of service for forty-eight hours or more. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.160 - Liquidated damages. 
By acceptance of the franchise granted by the city, a grantee understands and shall agree that failure to comply with any time and performance requirements as stipulated in this chapter and franchise agreement will result in damage to the city, and that it is and will be impracticable to determine the actual amount of such damage in the event of delay or nonperformance; the franchise agreement shall include provisions for liquidated damages to be paid by the grantee in amounts set forth in the franchise agreement and chargeable to the security fund for the following concerns: 
A.  Failure to complete system construction or reconstruction in accordance with Sections 5.16.170 and 5.16.430 unless the council specifically approves the delay by motion or resolution, due to the occurrence of conditions beyond grantee's control, a grantee shall pay five hundred dollars per day for each day or part thereof, the deficiency continues. 
B.  Failure to provide upon written request, data, documents, reports, information or to cooperate with city during an application process or cable system review, a grantee shall pay fifty dollars per day for each day or part thereof, the violation occurs or continues. 
C.  Failure to test, analyze and report on the performance of the system following a written request pursuant to this chapter, a grantee shall pay to city one hundred dollars per day for each day or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues. 
D.  For failure to provide in a continuing manner the broad categories of services proposed in the accepted application unless the council specifically approves grantee a delay or change, or the grantee has obtained modification of its obligation under Section 625 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; grantee shall pay to the city five hundred dollars per day for each day or part thereof that each noncompliance continues. 
E.  Forty-five days following adoption of a resolution by the city council in accordance with Section 5.16.270 determining a failure of grantee to comply with operational, maintenance or technical standards, grantee shall pay to the city five hundred dollars for each day or part thereof, that such noncompliance continues. 
F.  Any other action or nonaction by the grantee as agreed upon between the city and grantee and set forth in the franchise agreement. Nothing in this section shall preclude further liquidated damages as agreed upon by the parties in the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.170 - Commencement of construction and service. 
A.  Construction Plan and Schedule. 
1.  Map and Plan. Grantee shall submit a construction plan or reconstruction plan which shall be incorporated by reference and made a part of the franchise agreement. The plan shall consist of a map of the entire franchise area and shall clearly delineate the following: 
a.  The areas within the franchise area where the cable system will be initially available to subscriber including a schedule of construction for each year that construction or reconstruction is proposed. 
b.  Areas within the franchise area where extension of the cable system cannot reasonably be done due to lack of present or planned development or other similar reasons, with the areas and the reasons for not serving them clearly identified on the map. 
B.  1.  Upon acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall immediately initiate action to obtain all permits, licenses, easements, variances and any other authorizations which are required or necessary in the conduct of its business, including but not limited to any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses, any authorizations required to import distant signals, and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having or asserting jurisdiction over the operation of the cable system, any associated microwave transmission facilities, or any other associated facility, and the grantee shall proceed with due diligence until all such matters are obtained. 
2.  Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting cable operations authorized pursuant to its franchise, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the city by the grantee. 
C.  Within ninety days after obtaining all the required or necessary permits, licenses, easements, variances and any other authorizations referred to in subsection A of this section, the grantee shall commence construction and installation of the cable system. 
D.  Within six months after building permits are granted for a particular area, the grantee shall proceed to render initial service to subscribers, and the completion of construction and installation shall be pursued with reasonable diligence, not to exceed fifteen months from the date of the granting of the permits for the particular area to be served. 
E.  Failure to do any of the requirements of subsections A, B, C and D of this section within the time specified except as provided in subsection F of this section shall be grounds for termination of the franchise. 
F.  The council may in its discretion extend the time for the grantee, acting in good faith, to do any act required under this section. The time for commencement of construction and installation, or the rendering of service to subscribers, initially or thereafter, shall be extended or excused, as the case may be, for any period during which the grantee experiences delay or interruptions due to any of the following circumstances if reasonably beyond its control: necessary utility changes or rearrangements, governmental or regulatory restrictions or requirements, labor strikes, lockouts, war (declared or undeclared), national emergency, fire, earthquake, the elements and acts of God. 
G.  Grantee shall extend cable system upon request of any contiguous area not designated for initial service in the plan when potential subscribers can be served by extension of the cable system past dwelling units equivalent to a density of forty homes per mile of street. Extension shall be at grantee's cost. If undergrounding is required by regulation, grantee must make installation at grantee's expense. Where aerial extension is allowed by regulation but underground installation is requested by benefitted subscribers, the cost of undergrounding that exceeds the estimated aerial extension cost may be charged to benefitted subscribers. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.180 - Forfeiture and termination. 
A.  In addition to all other rights and powers retained by the city under this chapter or otherwise, the city reserves the right to forfeit and terminate a franchise and all rights and privileges of a grantee in the event of a material breach of its terms and conditions. In interpreting this chapter, material provisions shall include all labeled as such and all others, which, under all the facts and circumstances indicated, are a significant provision of the franchise agreement. A material breach by grantee shall include but shall not be limited to the following: 
1.  Failure to begin or complete system construction, reconstruction or system extension, or system improvement as provided under the franchise; 
2.  Failure to provide the broad categories of services promised; assuming grantee has unsuccessfully pursued whatever recourse is available under Section 625 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984; 
3.  Failure to restore service after ninety-six consecutive hours of interrupted service, except when approval of such interruption is obtained from the city; or 
4.  Material misrepresentation of fact in the application for or negotiation of the franchise. 
B.  The foregoing shall not constitute a material breach if the violation occurs but it is without fault of a grantee or occurs as a result of circumstances beyond its control. Grantee shall not be excused by mere economic hardship nor by misfeasance or malfeasance of its shareholders, directors, officers, or employees. 
C.  The city may make a written demand that a grantee comply with any such provision, rule, order, or determination under or pursuant to this chapter and franchise agreement. If the violation by the grantee continues for a period of thirty days following such written demand without written proof that the corrective action has been taken or is being actively and expeditiously pursued, the city may place the issue of termination of a franchise before the city council. The city shall cause to be served upon grantee at least twenty days prior to the date of such a council meeting, a written notice of intent to request such termination and the time and place of the meeting. Public notice shall be given of the meeting and issue which the council is to consider. 
D.  The city council shall hear and consider the issue and shall hear any person interested therein, and shall determine in its discretion, whether or not any violation by the grantee has occurred. 
E.  If the city council shall determine the violation by a grantee was the fault of grantee and within its control, the council may by resolution declare that the franchise of the grantee shall be forfeited and terminated unless there is compliance within such period as the city council may fix, such period not to be less than sixty days, provided no opportunity for compliance need be granted for fraud or misrepresentation. 
F.  The issue of forfeiture and termination shall automatically be placed upon the council agenda at the expiration of the time set by it for compliance. The council then may terminate a franchise forthwith upon finding that grantee has failed to achieve compliance or may further extend the period in its discretion. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.190 - Security fund. 
A.  Within thirty days after the award or renewal of a franchise, a grantee shall deposit with the city a corporate surety bond in the amount of fifty thousand dollars. The bond shall be used to insure the faithful performance by a grantee of all provisions of this chapter and resulting franchise agreement; and compliance with all orders, permits and directions of any agency, commission, board, department, division or office of the city having jurisdiction over its acts or default under a franchise and the payment by the grantee of any penalties, liquidated damages, claims, liens and taxes due the city which arise by reason of the construction, operation or maintenance of the system, including cost of removal or abandonment of any property of grantee. 
B.  The corporate surety bond shall be maintained at fifty thousand dollars during the entire term of a franchise, even if amounts have to be withdrawn pursuant to subsection A or C of this section. The grantee shall keep the same in force and effect at all times throughout the existence of the franchise and thereafter until grantee has liquidated all of its obligations with the city that may have arisen from the acceptance of the franchise ordinance by grantee or from the exercise of any right or privilege granted hereunder, including the removal of all poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes, and other conductors and fixtures incident to the maintenance and operation of its cable system, should such removal be required by city council or undertaken by grantee upon the termination of the franchise. 
C.  If a grantee fails to pay to the city any compensation within the time fixed herein; or fails after ten days' notice to pay to the city any taxes due and unpaid; or fails to repay the city within ten days any damages, costs or expenses which the city is compelled to pay by reason of any act or default of the grantee in connection with a franchise; or fails after ten days' notice by the city of such failure to comply with any provision of a franchise which the city reasonably determines can be remedied by demand on the corporate surety bond. The city may immediately require payment of the amount thereof with interest and any penalties from the corporate surety bond. 
D.  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the corporate surety bond are in addition to all other rights of the city whether reserved by a franchise or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such corporate surety bond shall affect any other right the city may have. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.200 - Construction bond. 
A.  1.  Within thirty days after the award or renewal of a franchise, a grantee shall obtain and maintain at its cost and expense, and file with the city clerk, a corporate surety bond in a company authorized to do business in the state of California and found acceptable by the city attorney, in the amount of five hundred thousand dollars to guarantee the timely construction, rebuild or reconstruction and full activation of the cable system and the safeguarding of damage to private property and restoration of damages incurred with utilities. 
2.  The bond shall provide but not be limited to the following condition: There shall be recoverable by the city, jointly and severally from the principal and surety, any and all damages, loss or costs suffered by the city resulting from the failure of a grantee to satisfactorily complete construction, rebuild, or reconstruction and fully activate the cable system throughout the franchise area pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreement. 
B.  Any extension to the prescribed construction time limit must be authorized by the council. Such extension shall be authorized only when the council finds that such extension is necessary and appropriate due to causes beyond the control of a grantee. 
C.  The construction bond shall be terminated only after the council finds that a grantee has satisfactorily completed initial construction and activation or reconstruction of the cable system pursuant to the terms and conditions of this chapter and the franchise agreements. 
D.  The rights reserved to the city with respect to the construction bond are in addition to all other rights of the city, whether reserved by this chapter or authorized by law, and no action, proceeding or exercise of a right with respect to such construction bond shall affect any other rights the city may have. 
E.  The construction bond shall contain the following endorsement: 
It is hereby understood and agreed that this bond may not be cancelled by the surety nor the intention not to renew be stated by the surety until sixty (60) days after receipt by the City, by registered mail, of written notice of such intent to cancel or not to renew. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.210 - Construction practices. 
A.  Any poles, cable lines, wires, conduits or other properties of the grantee shall be constructed or installed in streets in accordance with good engineering practice at such locations and in such manner as is approved by the director of public works and shall conform to all applicable codes and laws. 
B.  The grantee shall not install or erect any facilities or apparatus in or on other public property, places or rights-of-way, or within any privately-owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, except those installed or erected upon existing or future public utility facilities, without obtaining the prior written approval of the director of public works and the owner-subdivider. 
C.  In those areas and portions of the city where the transmission and distribution facilities of both the public utility providing telephone service and those of the utility providing electric service have been or are to be placed underground, then the grantee, upon written request by the director of public works so to do, shall likewise initially construct, install, operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground. For the purposes of this subsection, "underground" includes a partial underground system. Amplifiers in the grantee's transmission and distribution lines may be in appropriate housings as approved by the director of public works. The city shall not in any manner be responsible for any costs incurred by any grantee in placing his property underground. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.220 - Removal or abandonment of facilities. 
A.  In the event that the use of any part of the cable system is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of six months, or in the event such system or property has been installed in any street or public place without complying with the requirements of this chapter, or the franchise has been terminated, cancelled or has expired, the grantee shall promptly, upon being given ten days' written notice, remove from the streets or public places all such property and poles of such system other than any which the director of public works may permit to be abandoned in place. In the event of such removal, the grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to a condition satisfactory to the director of public works. 
B.  Any property of the grantee remaining in place sixty days after the termination, forfeiture or expiration of the franchise shall be considered permanently abandoned. The director of public works may extend such time. 
C.  Any property of the grantee to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the director of public works prescribes. Subject to the provisions of any utility joint use attachment agreement, upon permanent abandonment of the property of the grantee in place, the property shall become that of the city and the grantee shall submit to the director of public works an instrument in writing, to be approved by the city attorney, transferring to the city the ownership of such property. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.230 - Changes required by public improvements. 
The grantee shall, at its expense, protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate in the same street or other public place, or remove from the street or other public place, any property of the grantee when required by the director of public works by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or any other type of structures or improvements by public agencies; provided, however, that the grantee shall in all such cases have the privilege and be subject to the obligations to abandon any property of the grantee in place, as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.240 - Failure to complete work. 
Upon failure of the grantee to commence, pursue or complete any work required by law or by the provisions of this chapter or by its franchise to be done in any street or other public place, within the time prescribed, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, the director of public works may, at his option, cause such work to be done and the grantee shall pay to the city the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported by the director of public works to the grantee within thirty days after receipt of such itemized report. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.250 - Insurance. 
A.  The grantee shall indemnify the city, its officers and its employees against all claims, demands, actions, suits and proceedings by others, against all liability to others, and against any loss, cost and expense resulting therefrom, including reasonable attorneys' fees, arising out of the exercise and enjoyment of its franchise irrespective of the amount of the comprehensive liability insurance policy required under this section. 
B.  The grantee shall at all times during the existence of any franchise issued under this chapter maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and expense, a general comprehensive liability insurance policy, in protection of the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, in a company approved by the city attorney and in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, protecting the city and all persons against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death and property damage, occasioned by the operations of the grantee under such a franchise, and for property damage; provided, that the maximum amount for which liability shall be assumed, and requirements for the city being named an additional insured, and any other insurance requirements shall be as set and required from time to time by resolution of the city council. A copy of such policy or policies, or certificates of insurance showing the existence of such insurance coverage, shall be filed by the grantee with the city clerk. 
C.  The policies mentioned in subsection B of this section shall name the city, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, as additional insureds, shall contain a contractual liability endorsement approved by the city attorney and shall contain a provision that a written notice of any cancellation or reduction in coverage of such policies shall be delivered to the city manager thirty days in advance of the effective date of the cancellation or reduction. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.260 - Right of inspection—Plans and records. 
A.  At all reasonable times, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee in relation to its franchise. If any maps or records are not kept in the city, and upon reasonable request they are not made available in the city, and if the council determines that an examination of them is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance expense necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee. 
B.  The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the director of public works and the city manager at the times and in the form prescribed by either of such officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonable, necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise. 
C.  The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all cable system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city. 
D.  When any portion of the cable system is to be installed on public utility poles and facilities, certified copies of the agreements for such joint use of poles and facilities shall be filed with the director of public works. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.270 - Service standards. 
A.  A grantee shall put, keep, and maintain all parts of the system in good condition throughout the entire franchise period. 
B.  Upon termination of service to any subscriber, a grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon subscriber's request, unless said service serves multiple users. 
C.  Grantee shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly, and interrupt service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Such interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall occur during periods of minimum system use. 
D.  Grantee shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by grantee, nor shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the city. 
E.  A grantee shall continue through the term of the franchise to maintain the technical, operational, and maintenance standards and quality of service set forth in this chapter and franchise agreement. Should the city find, by resolution, that a grantee has failed to maintain these standards and quality of service, and should it, by resolution specifically enumerate improvements to be made, a grantee shall make such improvements. Failure to make such improvements within forty-five days of such resolution will constitute a material breach of condition for which the remedy of Section 5.16.160 is applicable. (Liquidated Damages.) 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.280 - Continuity of service mandatory. 
A.  1.  It shall be the right of all subscribers to continue receiving service insofar as their financial and other obligations to a grantee are honored. 
2.  In the event of a change of grantee, or in the event a new operator acquires the system, a grantee shall cooperate with the city, new grantee or operator in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. During such periods, grantee shall be entitled to the revenues for any period during which it operates the system, and shall be entitled to reasonable costs for its services when it no longer operates the system. 
B.  In the event grantee fails to operate the system for ninety-six consecutive hours without prior approval of the city or without just cause, the city may at its option, operate the system or designate an operator until such time as grantee restores service under conditions acceptable to the city or a permanent operator is selected. If the city is required to fulfill this obligation for a grantee, the grantee shall reimburse the city for all reasonable costs or damages in excess of revenues from the system received by the city that are the result of the grantee's failure to perform. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.290 - Performance evaluation sessions. 
A.  The city and a grantee shall hold scheduled performance evaluation sessions within thirty days of the fourth, eighth, twelfth and sixteenth anniversary dates of a grantee's award of the franchise and as may be required by federal and state law. 
B.  Special evaluation sessions may be held at any time during the term of a franchise at the request of the city or the grantee. 
C.  All evaluation sessions shall be open to the public and announced in a newspaper of general circulation in accordance with legal notice. Grantee shall notify its subscribers of all evaluation sessions by announcement on its system between the hours of seven p.m. and nine p.m. for five consecutive days preceding each session. 
D.  Topics which may be discussed at any scheduled or special evaluation session may include, but not be limited to, service rate structures; franchise fee; liquidated damages; free or discounted services; application of new technologies; system performance; services provided; programming offered; customer complaints; privacy; amendments to this chapter; judicial and FCC rulings; line extension policies; and grantee or city rules. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.300 - New developments. 
A.  Subsequent to each performance evaluation session as set forth in Section 5.16.290, the city council shall have the authority to order a public hearing on the provision of additional channel capacity by grantee or on the inclusion in the grantee's cable system of "state of the art" technology or upgraded facilities. Notice of such hearing shall be provided to grantee and the public not later than thirty days prior to such hearing. 
B.  If after such hearing the city council determines that: (1) there exists a reasonable need and demand for additional channel capacity and/or state of the art technology or upgraded facilities, and (2) provision has been made or will be made for adequate rates which will allow grantee a fair rate of return on its investment (including the investment required to provide the additional channel and/or the state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities), and (3) will not result in economic loss for the grantee, the city council may order grantee to provide a specified number of additional channels and/or specified state-of-the-art technology or upgraded facilities. Without implying any limitations as to other provisions of this chapter, this section is deemed a material provision within the meaning of Section 5.16.180. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.310 - Filings with city. 
All matters provided in this chapter to be filed with the city, unless provided otherwise in this chapter, shall be filed with the city manager. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.320 - Fiscal report. 
The grantee shall file annually with the city manager no later than one hundred twenty days after the end of the grantee's fiscal year, a copy of a financial report applicable to the cable system serving Lodi, or its corporate annual report, including an income statement applicable to its operation during the preceding twelve-month period, a balance sheet, a statement of its properties devoted to the cable system operations, by categories, giving its investment in such properties on the basis of original cost, less applicable depreciation, a statement of sources and application of funds; and a statement of current subscriber and penetration reached for each class of cable service. These reports shall be certified as correct by an authorized officer of grantee and there shall be submitted along with them such other reasonable information as the city shall request. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.330 - Refusal of service. 
Subject to Section 5.16.110, no person or entity in the existing service area of the grantee shall be arbitrarily refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or monthly service charge or any other charges as provided by this chapter or any resolution granting the franchise. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.340 - Service contract. 
A.  Before the grantee shall provide antenna service to any subscriber, the grantee shall obtain a signed contract from the subscriber containing a provision substantially as follows: 
Subscriber understands that in providing antenna service (Grantee) is making use of public rights-of-way and that the continued use of these public rights-of-way is in no way guaranteed. In the event the continued use of such rights of way is denied to (Grantee) for any reason, (Grantee) will make every reasonable effort to provide service over alternate routes. Subscriber agrees he will make no claim nor undertake any action against the City of Lodi, its officers, its employees, or (Grantee) if the service to be provided by (Grantee) hereunder is interrupted or discontinued because the continued use of such rights of way is denied to (Grantee) for any reason. 
B.  The form of the grantee's contract with its subscribers, shall be subject to approval of the council with respect to the installation of this provision. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.350 - Television sale or repair. 
The grantee or any of its employees during their course of employment shall not engage in the business of selling or leasing television or other receivers which make any use of signals transmitted by its system, nor shall the grantee or any of its employees during the course of their employment engage in the repair of such receivers or the sale of parts for the same. This restriction shall not apply to a converter that increases the capacity of the system that may be sold or leased by the grantee to a subscriber. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.360 - Free service. 
The grantee shall provide free of charge a service drop for cable service for all public and nonprofit private schools, city police and fire stations, city recreation centers, and any additional municipal buildings designated by the city council; provided, such locations are passed by transmission cable maintained for the service of paying subscribers. If the service drop exceeds one hundred fifty feet, the grantee may charge for the excess footage on the basis of time and materials. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.370 - Moving of buildings. 
The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit issued by the city, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal or raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the permittee. The grantee shall be given not less than five working days advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.380 - Unauthorized connections—Tampering. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, acoustically, inductively, electronically or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable system within the city for the purpose of taking or receiving television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sound or electronic impulses of any kind for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any such television signal, radio signal, picture, program, sound or electronic impulses. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the grantee, to wilfully tamper with, remove, obstruct or injure any cables, wires, devices or equipment used for the distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs, sound or electronic impulses of any kind. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.390 - Transfers and assignments. 
A.  1.  A franchise shall not be sold, assigned or transferred, either in whole or in part, or leased, sublet, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person without the prior written consent of the city. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably. 
2.  No such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage, or other hypothecation as a whole or in part to secure an indebtedness. 
3.  The proposed assignee must show technical ability, financial capability, legal qualification and general character qualifications as determined by the city and must agree to comply with all provisions of the franchise and such conditions as may be prescribed by council expressed by resolution. City shall be deemed to have consented to a proposed transfer or assignment in the event its refusal to consent is not communicated in writing to grantee within one hundred twenty days following receipt of written notice of the proposed transfer or assignment. 
B.  The grantee shall promptly notify the city of any actual or proposed change in or transfer of, or acquisition by any other party of, control of the grantee. The word "control" as used herein is not limited to major stockholders but includes actual working control in whatever manner exercised. Every change, transfer, or acquisition of control of the grantee shall make the franchise subject to cancellation unless and until the city shall have consented thereto, which consent will not be unreasonably withheld. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change, transfer or acquisition of control, the city may inquire into the qualifications of the prospective controlling party and the grantee shall assist the city in any such inquiry. 
C.  A rebuttable presumption that a transfer of control has occurred shall arise upon the acquisition or accumulation by any person or group of persons of ten percent of the voting interest of the grantee. 
D.  The consent or approval of the city council to any transfer of the franchise shall not constitute a waiver or release of the rights of the city in and to the streets, and any transfer shall by its terms, be expressly subject to the terms and conditions of a franchise. 
E.  In any absence of extraordinary circumstances, the city will not approve any transfer or assignment of a franchise prior to substantial completion of construction or reconstruction of proposed system. 
F.  In no event shall a transfer of ownership or control be approved without successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.400 - Access channels. 
A.  Each cable system franchised by the city shall provide at least one channel dedicated to access for use by the public as well as governmental and educational agencies. 
B.  If the access channel is being utilized more than eighty percent of the time between four p.m. and eleven p.m. for twelve consecutive weeks, grantee shall, upon written notice from the city, make additional community access channel(s) available for the same purpose(s), with a maximum of three community access channels to be dedicated for these said purpose(s). 
C.  Nothing in this section shall require grantee to construct additional channel capacity to the system for the sole purpose of providing additional access channels. 
D.  Whenever any access channel is utilized less than four hours per day for six days per week for twelve consecutive weeks, the grantee may be permitted to utilize unused access channel capacity for different and additional purposes, under rules and procedures established by the city. 
E.  Grantee shall record all requests for use of access channel. Whenever such records indicate in the opinion of the city council that an excessive number of people or programs are being turned away for lack of available access channel capacity; or whenever the criteria in subsection B are exceeded for any one of the existing access channel uses, those access channels which have been permitted by the city for "interim" use by a grantee shall each be restored to public, governmental or educational use as applicable. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.410 - Waivers. 
A.  Any provision of this chapter may be waived at the sole discretion of the city by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Grantee may submit a request for waiver to the city council at any time during the franchise term. Such request for waiver may, at the sole discretion of the city council, be set for public hearing and a decision shall be made within one hundred and twenty days following the submission. Procedures for modification of franchise obligations shall be in compliance with Section 625 of the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
C.  The city council may authorize the economic, technical or legal evaluation of such waiver request and grantee shall be required to reimburse the city for any expenditures incurred by city in connection with such evaluation. 
D.  This section is enacted solely for the convenience and benefit of the grantor and shall not be construed in such a manner as to create any right or entitlement for the grantee. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.420 - Required services and facilities. 
A.  A franchise application shall include a description of the grantee's system design and a description of the broad categories of programming and services being offered, including optional premium services, a description of facilities being proposed for local origination programming, and facilities being offered to various community institutions. The offer of the broad categories of programming and services contained within a grantee's application shall be deemed a binding offer of such grantee for and to the benefit of the city and the subscribers of grantee. In the event a program originator ceases to provide a service, or in the event the grantee determines that other cable services may be of greater benefit to subscribers, the grantee may, subject to subsections B and C, substitute or drop such services. 
B.  The system, after the incorporation of such substitute services, shall satisfy the warranty made by grantee to subscriber and potential subscriber in its application for a franchise. The city council, on behalf of system subscribers, shall have the right to review any substitution of service or change in broad categories of programming that the grantee has made and may order a change therein if it determines, after due hearing on notice, that the warranty has been violated or that certain broad categories of programming and services that were committed by grantee in its proposal are not being delivered. Any such order shall issue only after a public hearing has been scheduled and held; and written notice of such hearing shall have been provided to the grantee and to the public at least thirty days prior to such hearing. Any such order may be enforced by an appropriate action in the courts of California or of the United States. A grantee shall not, in relation to this section, be deemed to have waived any right accorded to a franchised cable television operator arising under the First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States, or under the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B, a grantee may, in accordance with the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, upon thirty days' advance notice to the city, rearrange, replace or remove a particular cable service required by the franchise if: 
1.  Such service is no longer available to the grantee; or 
2.  Such service is available to the grantee only upon the payment of a royalty required under Section 801(b)(2) of Title 17, United States Code, which the grantee can document: 
a.  Is substantially in excess of the amount of such payment required on the date of the grantee's offer to provide such service, and 
b.  Has not been specifically compensated for through a rate increase or other adjustment. 
D.  Notwithstanding subsections A and B, a grantee may take such actions to rearrange a particular service from one service tier to another, or otherwise offer the service, if the rates for all of the service tiers involved in such actions are not subject to regulation. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
5.16.430 - Construction and technical standards. 
A.  Compliance with Construction and Technical Standards. Grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in a manner consistent with all laws, ordinances and construction standards of the city; the standards of Good Engineering Practices for Measurements on Cable Television System, published by the National Cable Television Association, 1983; and detailed standards submitted by grantee as part of its application, which standards are incorporated by reference in the franchise agreement. In addition, grantee shall provide the city, upon request, with a written report of the results of grantee's annual proof of performance tests. In the event of the repeal of FCC Rules and Regulations, Part 76, grantee shall pay the costs incurred by the city for any technical assistance deemed necessary by the city for obtaining independent verification of technical compliance with all standards. This includes the costs that may be incurred by the city for checking compliance during the evaluations required in Section 5.16.290. 
B.  Additional Specifications. 
1.  Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All cables and wires shall be installed, where possible, parallel with and in the same manner as electric and telephone lines. Multiple cable configurations shall be arranged in parallel and bundled with due respect for engineering considerations. Underground installations shall be in conformance with applicable codes. 
2.  Grantee shall at all times comply with: 
a.  National Electrical Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); 
b.  National Electrical Code (National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); 
c.  Bell System Code of Pole Line Construction; and 
d.  The Standards of Good Engineering Practice for Measurements on Cable Television Systems (National Cable Television Association), 1983. 
3.  Furthermore, the system shall not endanger or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the franchise area or other areas where the grantee may have equipment located. 
(Ord. 1370 § 1 (part), 1985)  
Chapter 5.17 - STATE CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES 
Sections: 
 
5.17.010 - Purpose. 
This chapter applies to all cable service or video service providers who are applying for, or have been awarded, a franchise under California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq., the Digital Infrastructure and Video Competition Act of 2006, ("DIVCA"), to serve any area within the city of Lodi, including any cable service or video service providers who are subject to DIVCA. By this chapter the city of Lodi intends to assume to the fullest extent possible all obligations, rights and privileges afforded to it by DIVCA and any other applicable law. Moreover, to the extent this chapter is pre-empted by DIVCA now or as amended in the future, the requirement of DIVCA shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.020 - Definitions and interpretation of language. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given in this section. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined in this chapter shall be given the meaning set forth in California Public Utilities Code, Section 5800 et seq. as amended from time to time. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number, and "including" and "include" are not limiting. The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
A.  "Access," "PEG access," "PEG use," or "PEG" means the availability of a cable or video system for public, educational, or governmental use by various agencies, institutions, organizations, groups, and individuals, including the city of Lodi and its city use channels or any existing agreement between the city and any incumbent cable operator, to acquire, create, and distribute programming not under a state franchise holder's editorial control. 
B.  "City" means the city of Lodi, California. 
C.  "City council" means the City Council of the city of Lodi. 
D.  "City manager" means the City Manager of the city of Lodi or his or her designee. 
E.  "Gross revenues" means all revenues actually received by the holder of a state franchise that are derived from the operation of the holder's network to provide cable service or video service within the incorporated areas of the city, subject to the specifications of California Public Utilities Code Section 5860. 
F.  "Director" means the deputy city manager/internal services director of the city or his or her designee. 
G.  "State franchise holder," "holder of a state franchise," "holder of the state franchise," or "holder" means any person or group of persons who has been issued a franchise by the California Public Utilities Commission to provide cable service or video service, as those terms are defined in Public Utilities Code Section 5830, within any portion of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.030 - State franchise holder fee. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a state franchise holder fee equal to five percent of gross revenues, as defined in this chapter and applicable law. Nothing in this section is intended to limit the city's ability to impose utility user taxes and other generally applicable taxes, fees and charges that are applied in a nondiscriminatory and competitively neutral manner. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.040 - State franchise holder PEG fees. 
Any state franchise holder operating within the city shall pay to the city a PEG fee equal to one percent of gross revenues, as defined in this chapter and applicable law, unless a different amount is payable in accordance with applicable law or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.050 - Payment of fees. 
The state franchise holder shall pay quarterly all fees required pursuant to this chapter in a manner consistent with Public Utilities Code Section 5860. The state franchise holder shall deliver to the city by check or other means agreeable to the city manager, a separate payment for the state franchise fee and the PEG fee not later than forty-five days after the end of each calendar quarter. Each payment made shall be accompanied by a summary explaining the basis for the calculation of the fees. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.060 - Audits. 
The city may examine the business records of the holder of a state franchise in a manner not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5860(i). 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.070 - Late payments. 
In the event a state franchise holder fails to make any payment required by this chapter on or before the due dates specified in this chapter, the city shall impose a late charge at the rate per year equal to the highest prime lending rate during the period of delinquency, plus one percent unless a different rate is set by applicable law or resolution adopted by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.080 - Lease of city property or network. 
To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5840(q)(2)(B), in the event a state franchise holder desires to lease access to city property beyond the access conferred by its state franchise or to a network owned or controlled by the city, the city may set terms and charge a fee for access to the property or city network separate and apart from any franchise fee or other fee charged to the state franchise holders pursuant to this chapter. The city council may set any such fee by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.090 - Customer service and consumer protection standards. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, including, to the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, all existing and subsequently enacted customer service and consumer protection standards established by local, state or federal law and regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.100 - Penalties for violations of standards. 
A.  The city shall monitor compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter and DIVCA. 
B.  For any material breach, as defined in California Public Utilities Code Section 5900(j), by a state franchise holder of applicable customer service and consumer protection standards, the city manager, or the city manager's designee, in his or her sole discretion may impose the following fines or penalties: 
1.  For the first occurrence of a material breach, a fine of five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed one thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
2.  For a second material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of one thousand dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed three thousand dollars for each violation. 
3.  For a third or further material breach of the same nature within twelve months, a fine of two thousand five hundred dollars shall be imposed for each day the violation remains in effect, not to exceed seven thousand five hundred dollars for each violation. 
C.  Any penalties imposed by the city shall be imposed in a manner not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900. 
D.  To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5900, the city, acting through its city manager or his or her designee, in its sole discretion may waive, modify, or defer the imposition of a penalty. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.110 - General requirements. 
Except as expressly provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all work performed by or on behalf of a state franchise holder upon, above or below any street, highway, sidewalk, parkway, alley or other public right-of-way of any kind whatsoever within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.120 - Permits. 
A.  Prior to commencing any work, a state franchise holder shall apply for and obtain a permit in accordance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and chapter 12.04 of this Code and shall comply with all other applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, all applicable requirements of Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. (the California Environmental Quality Act). 
B.  The public works director shall either approve or deny a state franchise holder's application for any permit required under this chapter in accordance with the applicable terms of Chapter 12.04. 
C.  If the public works director denies a state franchise holder's application for a permit, the director shall, at the time of notifying the applicant of denial, furnish to the applicant an explanation of the reason or reasons for the denial. 
D.  A state franchise holder that has been denied a permit by final decision of the public works director may appeal the denial to the city council whose decision shall be final. Upon receiving a notice of appeal, the city council shall consider the permit de novo. 
E.  A state franchise holder whose permit has been revoked may appeal that decision to the city council in writing within ten days after issuance of the notice of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.130 - Terms and conditions. 
The work of constructing, laying, replacing, maintaining, repairing, abandoning, or removing all property and appurtenances of the state franchise holder in, over, under, along, or across any city right-of-way as defined in Chapter 12.04 shall be done to the satisfaction of the public works director and, except where a different outcome is prescribed by applicable law, at the expense of the state franchise holder, and in accordance with the terms and conditions of Chapter 12.04. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.140 - Relocation of franchise property and appurtenances. 
A.  The city reserves the right to change the grade, change the width, or alter or change the location of any city right-of-way. If any franchise holder's property or appurtenance is installed or maintained by the state franchise holder on, along, under, over, in, upon, or across any public right-of way in a manner which prevents or interferes with any alteration or other change of grade, traffic needs, operation, maintenance, improvement, repair, construction, reconstruction, widening, or relocation of the right-of-way, or any work or improvement upon the right-of-way, the state franchise holder shall relocate any such property or appurtenances to the satisfaction of the public works director, and, to the extent consistent with existing law at no expense to the city, upon receipt of a written request from the director to do so and in accordance with the terms of Chapter 12.04. Should the state franchise holder neglect or fail to relocate its facilities in a timely manner as required by law after receipt of any such notice, the state franchise holder shall be responsible for and shall reimburse the city for any and all costs or expenses incurred by city due to or arising from the failure to relocate the facilities. 
B.  The city reserves the right to lay, construct, repair, alter, relocate, and maintain subsurface or other facilities or improvements of any type or description in a governmental and water, sewer and electric utility capacity, but not in a proprietary capacity within the right-of-way over which the franchise is granted. If the city finds that the location or relocation of such facilities or improvements conflicts with the property or appurtenances laid, constructed, or maintained by the state franchise holder, the city shall notify the state franchise holder of such conflict. to the extent and in the manner required by applicable law, the state franchise holder will relocate its facilities as requested by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.150 - Removal of abandoned facilities. 
Upon the abandonment of all or a portion of its property, the state franchise holder shall remove the property in accordance with the terms of Chapter 12.04. If the state franchise holder fails to comply with the terms and conditions of abandonment as may be required by this chapter and Chapter 12.04, the director of public works may direct the state franchise holder to remove, or cause to be removed, such facilities at the state franchise holder's expense and the state franchise holder shall pay to the city the cost of such work. Such decision may be appealed by the state franchise holder to the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.160 - Notification to residents regarding construction or maintenance. 
A.  Prior to any construction activity related to any cable service or video service, a state franchise holder shall provide public notification as required by applicable law. 
B.  To the extent practicable, equipment placed on private property shall be placed at the location requested by the property owner.. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.170 - Identification required. 
Employees, agents, contractors, and subcontractors of any state franchise holder shall at all times be properly identified as employees or agents of the state franchise holder while performing any work or other activity within the city on behalf of the state franchise holder. Identification shall include the name of the employee or agent. The name and telephone number of the state franchise holder shall appear at all construction sites. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.180 - Construction requirements and protection of health and safety. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with all applicable construction requirements of Chapter 12.04 and shall undertake all necessary and appropriate means to protect and preserve health and safety, including complying with all construction requirements of Chapter 12.04 or as otherwise required by the director of public works. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.200 - Emergency alert systems. 
Each state franchise holder shall comply with the emergency alert system requirements of the Federal Communications Commission in order that emergency messages may be distributed over the state franchise holder's network. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.210 - Interconnection for PEG programming. 
Each holder of a state franchise and each incumbent cable operator operating under a city franchise issued pursuant to this Code, shall negotiate with each other in good faith to interconnect their networks for the purpose of providing PEG programming including, but not limited to, any exclusive city use channel. Interconnection may be accomplished by any means authorized under California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h). Each holder of a state franchise and any incumbent cable operator shall provide interconnection of PEG channels, including any exclusive city use channel on reasonable terms and conditions and may not withhold the interconnection. If a holder of a state franchise and an incumbent cable operator cannot reach a mutually acceptable interconnection agreement, the city may require the incumbent cable operator to allow the holder of the state franchise to interconnect its network with the incumbent cable operator's network at a technically feasible point on the state franchise holder's network as identified by the holder or as otherwise permitted by applicable law. If no technically feasible point for interconnection is available, the holder of a state franchise shall make an interconnection available to the channel originator and shall provide the facilities necessary for the interconnection. The cost of any interconnection shall be borne by the state franchise holder requesting the interconnection unless otherwise agreed to by the state franchise holder and the incumbent cable operator. To the extent not inconsistent with California Public Utilities Code Section 5870(h), the city manager or the city manager's designee may waive or defer this requirement of interconnection in his or her sole discretion. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.220 - Notices. 
A.  Each state franchise holder or applicant for a state franchise shall file with the city manager and with the city's communications specialist or other city manager designee a copy of all applications that the state franchise holder or applicant is required to file with the public utilities commission with respect to state franchised video service in the city. 
B.  Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, all notices or other documentation that a state franchise holder is required to provide to the city under this chapter or the California Public Utilities Code shall be provided to the city manager and to the city's communications specialist. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.230 - Rights reserved. 
The rights reserved to the city of Lodi under this chapter are in addition to all other applicable rights of the city, whether granted or reserved by other provisions of the Lodi Municipal Code or as otherwise authorized by federal or state law, and no action, proceeding, or exercise of a right by the city of Lodi shall affect any other rights which may be held by the city of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
5.17.240 - Compliance with law. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to exempt a state franchise holder from compliance with all applicable ordinances, rules, or regulations of the city of Lodi now in effect or which may be adopted that are not inconsistent with this chapter or California Public Utilities Code Section 5800 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1826, § 1, 11-18-2009)  
Chapter 5.20 - PAWNBROKERS, JUNK AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 
Sections: 
 
5.20.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Junk collector" means a person not having a fixed place of business in the city who goes from house to house or place to place gathering, collecting, buying, selling or otherwise dealing in rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or any other articles commonly known as junk. 
B.  "Junk dealer" means a person having a fixed place of business in the city and engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in either at wholesale or retail, rags, sacks, bottles, cans, paper, metal or other articles commonly known as junk. 
C.  "Pawnbroker" means a person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of pawnbroking or the business of loaning money for himself or any other person upon pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to resell such articles to the vendors, or their assignees, at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase. 
D.  "Pawnshop" means any room, store or place in which any business mentioned in subsection C of this section is engaged in, carried on or conducted. 
E.  "Secondhand dealer" means a person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of buying, selling or otherwise dealing in secondhand goods, wares or merchandise; provided, however, that any person who is engaged in the business of selling genuine antique articles which are purchased by such person directly from a wholesale dealer in such articles, or which are imported into the United States of America by such person, shall not be a "secondhand dealer" by reason of engaging in such business. 
(Prior code § 16-1)  
5.20.020 - Permit—Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct, manage or carry on the business of a pawnbroker, or the business of buying gold, silver or jewelry, or the business of a secondhand dealer, or the business of a junk dealer or junk collector, without first applying for and receiving a permit therefor, in writing, from the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 16-2)  
5.20.030 - Permit—Application. 
Any person desiring to obtain a permit required by Section 5.20.020 shall file with the chief of police an application, in writing, therefor signed by the applicant and specifying by street and number the place where such business is proposed to be conducted or carried on and the residence address of the applicant. 
(Prior code § 16-3)  
5.20.040 - Permit—Fingerprints and photograph. 
The fingerprints and a photograph of each applicant for a permit under this chapter shall be taken by the chief of police and affixed to the application to become a part thereof. 
(Prior code § 16-4)  
5.20.050 - Permit—Disqualifications. 
No permit required by this chapter shall be granted by the chief of police to any person who fails, refuses or neglects to comply with all laws and ordinances of the city relating to and regulating the business for which such permit is sought, or to any person who has been convicted of an offense involving the theft of property. 
(Prior code § 16-5)  
5.20.060 - Permit—Appeal of denial. 
A.  If any person is aggrieved by any ruling of the chief of police upon any application filed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he may file a petition with the city manager, setting forth the full content of the application filed with the chief of police, the action taken thereon by the chief of police and the reasons why it is believed the chief of police acted improperly or failed to act properly. 
B.  The city manager shall within not less than five days from the date on which such appeal is filed with him hear the appellant and his witnesses and shall determine the same. The ruling of the city manager thereon shall be final. 
(Prior code § 16-6)  
5.20.070 - Permit—Display. 
A copy of the permit issued by the chief of police under this chapter, to which shall be affixed a copy of the photograph referred to in Section 5.20.040, shall be kept conspicuously posted in the place of business of every pawnbroker, secondhand dealer, junk dealer and gold, silver and jewelry buyer. 
(Prior code § 16-7)  
5.20.080 - Permit—Revocation. 
In the event that any person holding a permit under this chapter violates or causes to be violated any provision of this chapter or any provision of any other ordinance of the city or of any law relating to or regulating any such business, the chief of police shall revoke the permit and, in such event, no further permit shall be granted to any such person within twelve months after such revocation. Before any permit shall be revoked, the chief of police shall direct a registered letter to the permittee at the address given on the permit, stating that the permit shall become null and void on and after the fifth day from the date on which the letter is deposited in the United States Post Office in the city. Such permit shall become null and void on the date named in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 16-8)  
5.20.090 - Holding period for goods. 
It is unlawful for any person conducting or carrying on any business named in Section 5.20.020, or for any agent or employee of any such person, to alter, deface, sell or otherwise dispose of any article or thing within twenty-one days after such article or thing has been received or purchased by such person. 
(Prior code § 16-9)  
5.20.100 - Storage of goods. 
All goods and articles purchased or received for pawn, pledge or deposit shall be, until sold or disposed of, kept in separate containers on the outside of which is written in ink the number corresponding to the number of the report made in accord with Section 5.20.120 and the date of purchase. 
(Prior code § 16-10)  
5.20.110 - Records. 
Every person required to have a permit under this chapter shall keep a complete record and description of all goods, wares, merchandise or things pledged to or purchased or received by him, which record shall contain all information required by Section 5.20.120. Such record shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of the chief of police or any police officer of the city. 
(Prior code § 16-11)  
5.20.120 - Reporting. 
Every person having a permit under this chapter shall comply with reporting requirements as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 21628 as worded as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section derives or as thereafter amended. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(4)(B), 1984: prior code § 16-12)  
5.20.130 - Minors. 
It is unlawful for any person holding a permit issued under this chapter to buy from or loan money to, upon a pawn or pledge, or to receive as a deposit, goods, wares or merchandise from any person under the age of twenty-one years. 
(Prior code § 16-13)  
5.20.140 - Stolen property. 
A.  In all cases where a claim is made to property pawned with or sold to a person holding a permit issued pursuant to this chapter, by a person claiming to be the owner of the property and asserting that the property was stolen, the chief of police shall, after a hearing upon notice, determine the validity of such claim and the immediate disposition which should be made as to the possession of the claimed property. If the chief of police determines that such property was stolen, that the claimant is the owner of the property, and that there is no collusion between the claimant and the person by whom such property was stolen, the chief of police shall direct that such property be returned forthwith to the claimant without compensation of any kind being paid therefor. In the event such direction is disobeyed, the permit may be revoked or suspended by the chief of police without further hearing. 
B.  The chief of police may designate any member of the police department to hear the evidence at any or all hearings that may be held under this section and to report his findings thereon to the chief of police. In all cases, the chief of police shall determine the disposition of the property. 
C.  If prior to the determination by the chief of police upon any claim made under this section, an action at law is brought by or against the person in possession of the property to establish the ownership of, or the right to possession of the property, the chief of police shall, upon notice thereof, suspend proceedings upon the claim. 
(Prior code § 16-14)  
5.20.150 - Exempt businesses. 
The provisions contained in Sections 5.20.090 through 5.20.120 shall not apply to the purchase or sale by junk dealers or junk collectors of rags, bottles (other than milk or cream bottles), barrels, books, cans, shoes, secondhand sacks or bags (other than cement sacks or bags), lamps, stoves, household furniture (other than sewing machines and musical instruments), or scrap metals when bought and sold for scrap; or to the purchase or sale by secondhand dealers of household furniture (other than musical instruments) or books or to the purchase or sale of sacks, bags or rags (other than cement sacks or bags), or to the collection of such articles by religious, charitable or educational organizations; or to the purchase or sale of any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer which has been registered in the state as required by law. 
(Prior code § 16-15)  
Chapter 5.24 - TAXICAB TRANSPORTATION SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1930, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 5.24, §§ 5.24.010—5.24.180, and enacted a new Ch. 5.24 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.24 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1626, § 1(part), adopted 1996. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
5.24.010 - Definitions. 
The following terms, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows, unless the particular provision or context requires otherwise: 
"Operate within the city" or "operate within the corporate limits of the city" means the soliciting, accepting, picking up, or embarking within the city of a passenger or passengers for transportation or conveyance to any point within or without the city. Prepaid round trips which originate outside the city limits shall not constitute a defined operation under this subsection. 
"Owner" means the corporation, business entity, or person who is registered with the Department of Motor Vehicles as the owner of the vehicle, or who has a legal right to possession of the vehicle pursuant to a lease or rental agreement. 
"Taxicab" means every vehicle operated over the public streets of the city, the vehicle being routed under the direction of the passenger and which, in addition to such specifications, is of a distinctive color and appearance such as is commonly used in this state for taxicabs, and is operated at rates per mile, or for waiting time, or both. The following types of transportation services are not taxicabs for the purpose of this chapter: limousines, transportation network companies, and charter or scheduled bus transportation, as each is defined in the California Public Utilities Code; paratransit services as defined in the California Vehicle Code; and airport shuttles and wine tour operators operating on a prearranged contract basis. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.020 - Compliance with chapter. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be observed by all persons operating taxicabs within the city, and it is unlawful to operate any taxicab in violation of any of such provisions. 
All applications submitted pursuant to this chapter shall be on a form prescribed by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Article II. - Owners 
 
5.24.030 - Owner's permit—Taxicabs. 
No individual or company shall operate any taxicab on or over any streets of the city without having first obtained approval from the city clerk. 
Every vehicle used by an owner in transportation for compensation shall be licensed, inspected, and insured annually as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.040 - Owner's permit—Fee. 
The owner or lessee of any taxicab obtaining any permit under this chapter shall pay unto the city clerk a permit fee as prescribed by the city. No permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be valid until the city clerk endorses thereon an acknowledgment of the payment of the fee for the current year. Such fee shall be due and payable to the city clerk on the first day of January of each year and delinquent thirty days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.050 - Owner's permit—Expiration. 
Any permit issued under this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued; provided, that the fee therefor is paid in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Unless suspended or revoked, it shall be renewed upon application for renewal as set forth in Section 5.24.230. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.060 - Owner's permit—Qualifications. 
The owner's permit required by this chapter shall be granted in writing by the city clerk, upon a satisfactory showing by the applicant that: 
A.  Applicant has submitted a financial statement which has been reviewed by the finance director. The purpose of this requirement is to insure that the applicant or permit holder makes use of the permit and that the permit is obtained and used by the person or entity identified in the application documents rather than an undisclosed third party. 
Initial applications shall include: 
1.  A statement of all assets, liabilities, and equities of the taxicab business or owner; and 
2.  A statement of the expected revenues and expenses of the taxicab business operation for the next year. 
Renewal applications shall include: 
1.  A statement of all assets, liabilities, and equities of the taxicab business as of the application date; 
2.  A statement of the actual revenues and expenses of the taxicab business for the past year; and 
3.  A statement of the expected revenues and expenses of the business for the next year. 
B.  Applicant has submitted evidence of insurance coverage as set forth in Section 5.24.080 
C.  The applicant's vehicle or vehicles are possessed of the following qualifications as determined by the chief of police: 
1.  The vehicle must meet all requirements of the Vehicle Code of the state in regard to equipment and mechanical condition. Further, it must be maintained in a safe, clean, and sanitary condition throughout as set forth in Sections 5.24.250 through 5.24.310. 
2.  The vehicle must bear, visibly painted in a distinctive color, in figures at least three inches high, a number of one or two digits, which number shall not be the number of any other vehicle earlier granted a vehicle permit under this chapter. The number shall be specified in the application and noted on the permit. The vehicle must also bear, visibly painted in a distinctive color, in letters at least one and one-half inches high, the name of the owner or lessee thereof. 
3.  The vehicle must carry in a conspicuous position within its passenger compartment a clear, intelligible, and legible statement of the fares or charges to be made in connection with the use of the vehicle. A copy of such fares and charges shall be filed with the city clerk as well. 
4.  A taxicab over the entire exterior normally covered with paint must be painted in a distinctive color or system of colors; and the color or system of colors shall be so selected that the vehicle may not reasonably be confused with any ordinary private vehicle. 
D.  The applicant shall provide annually a list and photograph, prepared under oath, of all vehicles to be used in transportation for compensation, and/or which have been used in transportation for compensation during the preceding year. The list shall identify each vehicle by year, make, model, license plate, and vehicle identification number. 
E.  The applicant possesses a current city of Lodi business license and/or home occupation permit as required in Section 17.36.060. 
F.  The applicant's business activities do not violate any land use or zoning laws, including, but not limited to the prohibition of parking, storing, dispatching, or repairing commercial vehicles in a residential zoning district pursuant to Sections 17.36.060(B)(2)c., 17.36.060(B)(2)(i), and 17.36.060(C)(10). 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.070 - Owner's duties. 
No person owning or leasing a taxicab shall, while such vehicle owned or leased is being operated, do the following: 
A.  Fail to maintain as to such vehicle the qualifications required for a permit for such vehicle under this chapter; 
B.  Do any act, or employ any person to do any act, which would be forbidden by Section 5.24.150 if done by a person driving or operating a taxicab; or 
C.  Rent or lend the vehicle to any person who operates it, or permit any person to operate it, except himself or his duly authorized agent. 
Prior to placing any new or additional vehicle into service, the owner shall: 
D.  Inform the city clerk in writing of the acquisition or transfer of the vehicle into taxicab operations; 
E.  Provide the date upon which such vehicle will be put into service; 
F.  Provide all information required under Section 5.24.060D.; 
G.  Provide proof of inspection as required in Section 5.24.250; 
H.  Provide proof of insurance as required in Section 5.24.080; and 
I.  Provide any other information requested by the city clerk related to such vehicle, its ownership, or use in the owner's business operations. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.080 - Insurance and indemnification requirements. 
In order to ensure the safety of the public, it is unlawful for any person who owns a taxicab to allow it to be operated or driven or to obtain a permit for its operation under this chapter unless and until such person has complied with the provisions of this section. 
The owner or lessee of any taxicab must secure their ability to answer to any claim for damage to person or property which may arise by reason of the operation of any vehicle as follows: 
A.  General liability insurance in the minimum limits of not less than one million dollars for injury or death to any person and not less than two million dollars for injury or death of more than one person in the same accident; 
B.  Automobile insurance in the minimum limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars; 
C.  Insurance for property damage in the minimum limits of not less than fifty thousand dollars; and 
D.  A certificate evidencing such insurance shall be filed with the city's risk manager and shall name the city, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds. 
Any person or entity issued a permit pursuant to this chapter shall, and by acceptance of the permit does, to the maximum extent permitted by law, agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Lodi, its officers, employees, and agents from any and all damages, claims, liabilities, costs, suits, or other expense resulting from and arising out of the permit holder's operations. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.090 - Owner's permit—Revocation—Grounds. 
The owner's permit required by this chapter may be revoked or suspended if one or more of the following conditions exist: 
A.  The qualifications required for the granting of the owner's permit are no longer met by the permittee or the permittee's vehicle or vehicles; 
B.  The permittee has been convicted of any violation of restrictions imposed upon the permittee as owner or lessee under this chapter, or the permittee has become bankrupt; 
C.  The permittee has failed to maintain his/her vehicle or vehicles as required in Sections 5.24.250 to 5.24.310; or 
D.  The permittee is in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.100 - Owner's permit—Revocation—Investigation and Hearing. 
For the purpose of ascertaining whether any cause exists for the suspension or revocation of an owner's permit under this chapter, the chief of police may, and on direction of the city council or upon complaint shall, cause strict inquiry to be made into the conduct of the permittee, the sufficiency and validity of the permittee's security, and the conditions of the permittee's vehicle or vehicles. 
An owner's permit may be revoked for any cause which would have warranted denial thereof in the first instance, for a failure to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, a failure to comply with any conditions imposed upon the owner's permit or when taxicab business operations have ceased for ten consecutive days. If an owner's permit is granted and operation of the service for which the permit is granted does not commence within four months of the date of the approval thereof, the permit shall be automatically null and void. A revocation may be appealed through the procedure set forth in Section 5.24.320. If the owner's permit is revoked, the holder of the permit shall not reapply for six months from the date of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.110 - Owner's permit—Transferability. 
Any owner's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be sold, assigned, leased, transferred or inherited as other property only upon written authorization of the city clerk. In the event a permit is transferred, the transferee must satisfy all requirements of this chapter prior to engaging in taxicab business. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Article III. - Drivers 
 
5.24.120 - Driver's permit—Required. 
No person shall drive or operate any taxicab within the city unless he/she holds a permit, to be known as a driver's permit, therefor, as provided in this chapter, and no person shall drive or operate a taxicab within the corporate limits of the city under or by virtue of any driver's permit which has been suspended or revoked as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.130 - Driver's permit—Fee. 
Every driver under this chapter shall pay unto the city clerk an annual license fee in the sum prescribed by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. Owner-drivers who pay the owner's permit fee shall have the driver's permit fee waived. The fee shall be due and payable the first day of January of each year and shall be delinquent thirty days thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.140 - Driver's permit—Qualifications—Police chief approval. 
A.  A driver's permit or renewal thereof shall be issued to each applicant complying with the provisions of this chapter; such permit shall be issued by the city clerk pursuant to a finding by the chief of police that the applicant for a permit or for renewal is a person of good character, and one who will not endanger the public interests and safety. 
Applicants shall be subject to a criminal background check prior to the issuance of a driver's permit. Thereafter a licensee shall be subject to a criminal background check upon request of the chief of police or designee. 
B.  An applicant or licensee who, within the past ten years, has been convicted of any of the below-listed offenses is not eligible to be granted or hold a driver's permit: 
1.  A felony, or of any crime under the laws of this state that would amount to a felony; 
2.  Any crime in this state or elsewhere in which fraud or intent to defraud was an element; 
3.  Unlawfully possessing or distributing controlled substances as defined in the laws of the state or elsewhere; 
4.  Any sex offense or crime involving moral turpitude; or 
5.  Driving while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
C.  The applicant must hold a valid and appropriate driver's license issued by the department of motor vehicles of the state, under the Vehicle Code of the state. 
D.  The applicant, or licensee upon request, must be fingerprinted by the Lodi Police Department. 
E.  Any person having been denied a driver's permit may appeal such decision as set forth in Section 5.24.320. 
F.  Drivers operating as an independent contractor shall submit proof of a current city of Lodi business license and/or home occupation permit as required in Section 17.36.060 and ensure that their business activities do not violate any land use or zoning laws. 
G.  It shall be sufficient grounds to deny or revoke a driver's permit if any person fails to disclose any relevant information, or provides false or misleading information pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.150 - Driver's duties. 
No person driving or operating a taxicab shall, while operating such vehicle, do the following: 
A.  Fail to maintain the qualifications required for an operator's permit under this chapter; 
B.  Refuse without good cause to accept as a passenger any person desiring transportation who shall tender money sufficient to pay the fare to their stated destination; 
C.  Transport passengers to their stated destination over an unnecessarily circuitous route; 
D.  Refuse to load and unload for any passenger such hand baggage as may not exceed the reasonable internal capacity of the vehicle, and such other baggage as may not reasonably exceed its capacity in trunk or top; or, after being requested, refuse to carry such baggage to or from such buildings as the passenger may enter or leave; 
E.  Make false representations by word, act, conduct, or appearance regarding the name or identity of persons owning or leasing the taxicab he operates, or regarding his own identity; or refuse to give his name and the number of his vehicle to any person requesting them; 
F.  Refuse or fail, after being requested, to give a receipt for any fare paid; 
G.  Fail or neglect to report to the police department within twenty-four hours all property left in his vehicle by any passenger; or 
H.  Charge passengers in excess of the posted rate or fee. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.160 - Driver's drug and alcohol testing. 
No person shall be issued, or have renewed, a driver's permit until they have presented certification to the city clerk that they have tested negative for alcohol (breath alcohol concentration of less than 0.02 percent) and each of the controlled substances specified in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The date of testing shall be within ten days of the date of issuance or renewal of a driver's permit. Test results are confidential and shall not be released without the consent of the applicant, except as authorized or required by law. Cost for such testing is the obligation of the applicant or employer of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.170 - Testing procedures. 
Applicant shall show a valid California driver's license at the time and place of testing. Testing procedures shall be substantially as set forth in Part 40 (commencing with Section 40.1) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations. The city may at random require a permitted driver to be retested. If such a test is required by city, city shall pay the cost for such testing. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.180 - Information request. 
Upon the request of a driver applying for a permit, or renewal, the city clerk shall give the applicant a list of the consortia certified pursuant to Part 382 (commencing with Section 382.101) of Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations that the city clerk knows offers tests in or near the city. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.190 - Reporting of subsequent conviction and driver's license status. 
Any person issued a taxicab driver's permit who subsequently is convicted of any felony or misdemeanor offense, or who ceases to possess a valid state of California driver's license of the class required by state law for the type of motor vehicle such person drives, shall immediately so inform the chief of police and his or her employer. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.200 - Revocation or suspension of taxicab driver's permit. 
A.  The chief of police may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty days, and may revoke a driver's permit if the permittee: 
1.  Misrepresents facts relevant to the fitness of the driver if such misrepresentation becomes known after a permit has been issued; 
2.  Violates the traffic laws of the city, county or state; 
3.  Is convicted for misdemeanor reckless driving; 
4.  Drives a taxicab known to the operator not to be in good order and repair; 
5.  Knowingly falsifies material and relevant facts on an application for a taxicab permit; 
6.  Is convicted or pleads nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving alcohol; 
7.  Is convicted or pleads nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving moral turpitude; 
8.  Operates any vehicle in a manner which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state of California; or 
9.  Repeatedly fails to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations prescribed by the chief of police. 
B.  The chief of police shall immediately suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty days, and may revoke a taxicab driver's permit of any driver upon the receipt of information reasonably sufficient and reliable to establish that the driver has committed a violation of law involving: 
1.  A felony; 
2.  A sex offense; 
3.  Soliciting for prostitution; 
4.  A narcotics offense; or 
5.  Has had a license to drive issued by the state of California either suspended or revoked by the state. 
C.  The chief of police shall immediately revoke the taxicab driver's permit if that driver has been found guilty by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of the law involving: 
1.  A felony; 
2.  A sex offense; 
3.  Soliciting for prostitution; or 
4.  A narcotics offense. 
D.  Upon suspension or revocation, the driver shall immediately surrender the taxicab driver's permit to the chief of police. In the event of suspension, the chief of police shall return the taxicab driver's permit to its driver immediately after termination of the suspension period. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.210 - Hearing—Revocation or suspension of taxicab driver's permit. 
Every taxicab driver whose permit has been suspended or revoked shall have the right to appeal such decision as provided in Section 5.24.320. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.220 - Return of taxicab driver's permit. 
Taxicab driver's permits shall become void upon termination of employment. The employer shall notify the city upon termination of employment. Taxicab driver permits shall be returned to the city upon termination of employment or a determination of revocation. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Article IV. - Renewal Procedure 
 
5.24.230 - Owner's permit renewal. 
A permit holder must submit a renewal application along with the following items, and any other information deemed necessary by the city clerk or chief of police, no later than thirty days prior to the end of the calendar year in which the current permit was issued: 
A.  Renewal fee, as set forth in Section 5.24.040; 
B.  Proof a current city of Lodi business license and/or home occupation permit, as set forth in Section 5.24.060; 
C.  Financial statement, as set forth in Section 5.24.060; 
D.  Proof of insurance, as set forth in Section 5.24.080; 
E.  A list and photograph, prepared under oath, of all vehicles to be used in transportation for compensation, and/or which have been used in transportation for compensation during the preceding year, as set forth in Section 5.24.060D.; 
F.  Proof of a mechanic's inspection, as set forth in Section 5.24.250; and 
G.  Proof of passing drug and alcohol testing, as set forth in Section 5.24.160. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.240 - Driver's permit renewal. 
A permit holder must submit a renewal application with the following items, and any other information deemed necessary by the city clerk or chief of police, no later than thirty days prior to the end of the calendar year in which the current permit was issued: 
A.  Renewal fee, as set forth in Section 5.24.130; 
B.  Proof of a current valid driver's license, as set forth in Section 5.24.140C.; 
C.  Proof of a current city of Lodi business license, as set forth in Section 5.24.140F.; and 
D.  Proof of completion of a drug and alcohol test, as set forth in Section 5.24.160. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Article V. - Maintenance and Inspection of Taxicabs 
 
5.24.250 - Annual inspection of taxicabs. 
To ensure continued maintenance of safe operating conditions, taxicabs, and their equipment, operating or used pursuant to this chapter shall be inspected annually by a licensed automobile mechanic. The costs of inspections shall be paid by the vehicle owner. Proof of inspection shall be submitted annually with a renewal application and shall include a statement by a licensed automobile mechanic certifying that the vehicle is free of any defects or conditions identified in Section 5.24.280. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.260 - Police department taxicab inspection authority. 
The chief of police, or any member of the police department under his/her direction, shall have the authority, at any time after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any taxicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions set forth herein are being violated. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.270 - Unsafe or unsuitable taxicabs. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for the owner of any taxicab licensed pursuant to this chapter to maintain a taxicab in an unsafe or unsuitable condition. Any taxicab which is found to be unsafe or in any way unsuitable for taxicab service shall be immediately ordered out of service, and before again being placed in service, the owner shall provide evidence to the chief of police, or any member of the police department under his/her direction, that the vehicle is safe, and shall submit the vehicle to inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.280 - Things deemed to make a taxicab unsafe or unsuitable. 
For the purposes of this section, the existence of the following named things, but not to the exclusion of other things, shall be deemed to make a taxicab unsafe or unsuitable for taxicab service: 
A.  Excessive leakage of oil, grease, gas or any other substance from any part of the taxicab; 
B.  Defects in the frame or structural body of the taxicab; 
C.  The failure of any movable parts of the car, including doors, window, hoods, trunk, lights, etc., to function in the proper working order; 
D.  The failure to maintain the tires, lights, turning signals, or brakes in safe operating condition; 
E.  The failure to maintain the motor or other mechanical parts of the car in good and safe operating condition; 
F.  The failure to have an exhaust system properly installed and in good working condition that complies with state law; 
G.  Large or excessive dents or scratches in the body of the taxicab; 
H.  Improper maintenance of the exterior paint in the proper color scheme; 
I.  Excessive wear and tear on the upholstery, floor mats and other parts of the interior of the taxicab; 
J.  The failure to have adequate interior lighting in proper working condition; or 
K.  The excessive emission of odors such as tobacco/smoke products from the interior of the taxicab. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.290 - Cleaning of interior. 
The interior of every taxicab in service shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.300 - Cleaning of exterior. 
The exterior of every taxicab in service shall be kept in a clean condition at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.310 - Age of vehicle. 
Taxicabs in service shall be no older than seven years from the manufacture date indicated on the vehicle by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Article VI. - Appeals 
 
5.24.320 - Right of appeal from denial of issuance or renewal of taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit. 
A.  The city clerk or chief of police shall notify the applicant that the issuance or renewal of his or her taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit has been denied. The city clerk or chief of police shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal the denial to the city manager. 
B.  Any written appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days of transmittal of the written notice to the person affected by such decision. Service shall be by regular postal service or personal delivery. 
C.  A denial of issuance or renewal shall remain in effect until a duly-filed appeal is heard as set forth in Section 5.24.330. 
D.  If no appeal is filed within the time allowed, the city's decision to not issue or renew the taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit shall be considered final. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.24.330 - Procedure upon appeal. 
A.  An applicant or permittee shall file an appeal within ten calendar days from the service of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation from the city clerk or chief of police. 
B.  Appeals to the city manager: 
1.  Any decision of the city clerk or chief of police which is a denial to issue or renew, or a suspension or revocation of a taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit, shall not become final until ten calendar days after the date of transmittal of the written notice to the person affected by such decision, during which period the party to the action may appeal the decision in the manner provided herein at any time prior to the expiration of the ten-day period. If no appeal is taken before the expiration of the ten-day period, the decision of the city clerk or chief of police shall be final. 
2.  The appeal of any decision shall be in writing signed by the party to the action briefly setting forth the reasons why such decision is not proper, stating an address at which the appellant will receive notices and filed with the city manager. 
3.  The city manager shall upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be an attorney or recognized mediator designated by the city attorney. The hearing shall be scheduled for not more than thirty calendar days after receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented to by the appellant. 
4.  The hearing shall not be conducted under the formal Rules of Evidence, but shall be subject to such standards of procedure and evidence as reasonable people would utilize in the conduct of serious business. 
5.  The appellant (or a representative) shall have the right to present his or her case in person. 
6.  The hearing officer shall consider the case record as well as any statements offered by interested parties. The hearing will be conducted according to administrative rules relating to evidence and witnesses as set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
7.  If the hearing officer refuses to issue or restore a taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit, the party to the action, or such party's agent, shall not file a new application within three hundred sixty five days from the date of final action by the hearing officer. 
8.  If the hearing officer suspends a taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit, the hearing officer shall impose a period of suspension of not more than thirty days. 
9.  If the hearing officer's action is to grant or restore a taxicab owner's permit or taxicab driver's permit, the hearing officer shall direct the city clerk to issue or restore the certificate or license. 
C.  Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the hearing officer may carry the matter forward under the provisions for administrative mandamus (Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5) as it now exists or may later be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1930, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Chapter 5.25 - PEDICABS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1931, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 5.25, §§ 5.25.010—5.25.340, and enacted a new Ch. 5.25 as set out herein. The former Ch. 5.25 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1783, § 1(part), adopted 2006. 
 
5.25.010 - Purpose. 
The city council finds that regulations governing pedicabs, operators, and owners are necessary to protect the general safety and welfare of passengers using pedicabs for hire and pedestrians within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.020 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows: 
"City clerk" means the city clerk for the city of Lodi or his or her designee. 
"Decal" means the numbered decal issued by the city of Lodi to a pedicab owner for display on the pedicab to indicate that the pedicab is permitted to operate. 
"Identification badge" means a badge that identifies the operator with a color passport-size photo. 
"Operates within the city" means the soliciting, accepting, picking-up, or embarking within the city of a passenger or passengers for transportation or conveyance to any point within or without the city for receipt of any form of consideration. 
"Operator" means any individual who operates a pedicab whether as an owner, an employee of the owner, or as an independent contractor within the city of Lodi. 
"Owner" means any person who owns, leases, or otherwise has possession of a pedicab. 
"Pedicab" means a pedicab as defined in California Vehicle Code Sections 467.5(a) and (b): 
1.  A bicycle (as defined by the California Vehicle Code) that has three or more wheels, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the bicycle, that is operated by a person, and that is being used for transporting passengers for hire; or 
2.  A bicycle (as defined by the California Vehicle Code) that pulls a trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that transports, or is capable of transporting, passengers on seats attached to the trailer, sidecar, or similar device, that is operated by a person, and that is being used for transporting passengers hire. 
This section does not authorize the operation of any devices satisfying the definition of California Vehicle Code Section 467.5(c), which are commonly known as "beer bikes" and defined as a four-wheeled device that is primarily or exclusively pedal-powered, has a seating capacity for eight or more passengers, cannot travel in excess of fifteen miles per hour, and is being used for transporting passengers for hire. Such devices must be operated as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 21215 and are therefore prohibited from operating within the city. 
"Pedicab operating permit" means a written permit issued by the city of Lodi authorizing a person to operate a pedicab. 
"Person" means both singular and plural, and shall mean any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership, or society exclusive of public agencies. 
"Police chief" means the chief of police for the city of Lodi or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.030 - Permit requirement to operate pedicab. 
It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab within the city without first having obtained a pedicab operating permit issued by the city pursuant to this chapter. Pedicab operating permits are the property of the city and are not transferable to any other operator. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.040 - Application for pedicab operating permit. 
A.  Before operating a pedicab, an applicant shall apply for a pedicab operating permit in person. 
B.  The pedicab operating permit application form shall be in a form prescribed by the city clerk. 
C.  The applicant shall provide the following information to complete the application under oath or affirmation: 
1.  The applicant's full name and residence address; 
2.  The applicant's date of birth; and 
3.  The applicant's valid California driver's license. 
D.  The applicant shall provide the following material to complete the application: 
1.  Proof that the applicant is eighteen years or older; 
2.  Proof of ability to drive lawfully in the United States; 
3.  Proof of a valid city of Lodi business license; 
4.  A complete set of fingerprints; 
5.  Two recent color passport-sized photographs; and 
6.  Such other material as the city clerk may require to evaluate the fitness of the applicant to be granted a pedicab operating permit. 
E.  Each applicant must sign the application which shall contain a warning that the application may be denied or the permit suspended or revoked if the applicant misrepresents, or fails to disclose, facts relevant to the fitness of the applicant to be granted a pedicab operating permit. 
F.  The city clerk shall investigate the facts stated in an application for a pedicab operating permit and other relevant data. 
G.  When an application has been denied, the applicant may not reapply for a pedicab operating permit within three hundred sixty five days from the date of denial, unless denial is without prejudice. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.050 - Pedicab operating permit fee. 
The city shall charge a nonrefundable fee to recover the cost of activities associated with the administration, regulation, and issuance of pedicab operating permits as may from time to time be determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.060 - Duration of validity of pedicab operating permit. 
Any permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which it is issued and must be renewed within thirty days of the date of expiration. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.070 - Pedicab operating permit renewal. 
Pedicab operating permits shall be renewable annually upon filing and approval of a new application and payment of a pedicab operating permit fee as determined by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.080 - Denial of pedicab operating permit. 
The city clerk may deny issuance of a pedicab operating permit if an applicant: 
A.  Fails to comply with the requirements of this chapter; 
B.  Misrepresents, or fails to disclose, facts relevant to the fitness of the applicant; 
C.  Does not possess a valid driver's license issued by state of California; 
D.  Has any type of driving restrictions issued by the state of California; 
E.  Is currently required to register pursuant to California Penal Code Section 290; 
F.  Has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or narcotics; or 
G.  Has been convicted for hit and run, driving a vehicle recklessly or while under the influence of intoxicating alcohol or drugs within the seven years immediately preceding application for a pedicab operating permit. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.090 - Suspension or revocation of pedicab operating permit. 
A.  The city clerk may suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty days, and may revoke a pedicab operating permit if the operator: 
1.  Misrepresents, or fails to disclose, facts relevant to the fitness of the operator if such misrepresentation becomes known after a permit has been issued; 
2.  Violates the traffic laws of the city, county or state; 
3.  Is convicted for misdemeanor reckless driving; 
4.  Drives a pedicab known to the operator not to be in good order and repair; 
5.  Knowingly falsifies material and relevant facts on an application for a pedicab operating permit; 
6.  Is convicted or pleads nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving alcohol; 
7.  Is convicted or pleads nolo contendere to the violation of any law involving moral turpitude; 
8.  Operates any vehicle in a manner which constitutes a misdemeanor under the laws of the state of California; or 
9.  Repeatedly fails to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter or the rules and regulations prescribed by the city clerk. 
B.  The city clerk shall immediately suspend, for a period not to exceed thirty days, and may revoke a pedicab operating permit of any operator upon the receipt of information reasonably sufficient and reliable to establish that the operator has committed a violation of law involving: 
1.  A felony; 
2.  A sex offense; 
3.  Soliciting for prostitution; 
4.  A narcotics offense; or 
5.  Has had a license to drive issued by the state of California either suspended or revoked by the state. 
C.  The city clerk shall immediately revoke the pedicab operating permit if that operator has been found guilty by final judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction of a violation of the law involving: 
1.  A felony; 
2.  A sex offense; 
3.  Soliciting for prostitution; or 
4.  A narcotics offense. 
D.  Upon suspension or revocation, the operator shall immediately surrender the pedicab operating permit to the city clerk. In the event of suspension, the city clerk shall return the pedicab operating permit to its operator immediately after termination of the suspension period. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.100 - Identification badges issued to pedicab operators with a pedicab operating permit. 
A.  The city shall issue an identification badge to an individual after that individual has been issued a pedicab operating permit. 
B.  While the pedicab is in operation, the pedicab operator shall wear the identification badge at all times on his or her person, in a manner clearly visible to the public. 
C.  It is unlawful for a pedicab operator to fail to wear an identification badge, in a manner clearly visible to the public, while operating a pedicab. 
D.  Identification badges are the property of the city and are not transferable to any other operator. In the event that an operator's pedicab operating permit is suspended or revoked, the operator shall also immediately surrender the identification badge to the city clerk. In the event of a suspension, the city clerk shall return the identification badge to its holder immediately after termination of the suspension period. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.110 - Pedicab decal. 
A.  It is unlawful for any owner to lease, rent, or allow a pedicab to be operated for hire within the city without first having obtained a decal issued pursuant to this chapter. The decal shall be affixed to the pedicab on the rear or back side of the pedicab in a manner clearly visible to the public. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to operate a pedicab that does not have a valid decal affixed to it. 
C.  Decals are the property of the city and are not transferable to any other pedicab. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.120 - Application for pedicab decal. 
A.  Before allowing a pedicab to be operated for hire, an owner shall obtain a pedicab decal. 
B.  The pedicab decal application form shall be prescribed by the city clerk. 
C.  The applicant shall provide the following information to complete the application: 
1.  The full name and address of the applicant; 
2.  The name and address of all legal and registered owners of the pedicab; 
3.  A description of the pedicab, including trade name, if any, serial number or owner identification number, and body style; 
4.  Seating capacity of the pedicab; 
5.  Route(s) or area(s) over which the applicant proposes to operate the pedicab; and 
6.  Proof of insurance in accordance with Section 5.25.250 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.130 - Requirements for issuance of pedicab decal. 
Pedicab decals will be issued only when a pedicab meets all of the following requirements: 
A.  A battery-operated headlight capable of projecting a beam of white light for a distance of three hundred feet shall be permanently affixed to the pedicab; 
B.  Battery-operated taillights shall be permanently affixed on the right and the left, respectively, at the same level on the rear exterior of the passenger compartment. Taillights shall be red in color and plainly visible from all distances within five hundred feet to the rear of the pedicab; 
C.  Side-mounted rearview mirrors affixed to the right and left side of the pedicab so located as to reflect to the driver a view of the street for a distance of at least two hundred feet to the rear of the pedicab; 
D.  Seat belts for each available passenger seat; 
E.  Those requirements related to bicycles as set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 21201; and 
F.  A statement by a bicycle mechanic, technician, or repair shop certifying that the pedicab complies with the requirements set forth herein. 
The chief of police, or any member of the police department under his/her direction, shall have the authority, at any time after displaying proper identification, to enter into or upon any pedicab for the purpose of ascertaining whether or not any of the provisions set forth herein are being violated. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.140 - Pedicab decal fee. 
The city shall charge a nonrefundable fee to recover the cost of activities associated with the administration, regulation, and issuance of pedicab decals. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.150 - Duration of validity of pedicab decal. 
Pedicab decals shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which they were issued. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.160 - Pedicab decal renewal. 
Pedicab decals shall be renewable annually upon filing of a renewal application on a form prescribed by the city clerk and submittal of the following: 
A.  Decal renewal fee; 
B.  Proof of ability to drive lawfully in the United States; 
C.  Proof of a valid city of Lodi business license; 
D.  Proof of insurance in accordance with Section 5.25.250 of this chapter; and 
E.  A list of all pedicabs to be used in operation and proof of inspection for each, in accordance with Section 5.25.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.170 - Denial of pedicab decal for failure to comply with chapter. 
The city may deny issuance of a pedicab decal if the city clerk determines that the pedicab does not meet the requirements of this chapter or applicable state law. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.180 - Suspension or revocation of pedicab decal. 
A.  Decals may be suspended by the city clerk for a period of one to thirty days or revoked at any time if the owner: 
1.  Fails to comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter; 
2.  Fails to maintain insurance as required by Section 5.25.250; 
3.  Fails to notify the city clerk thirty days prior to the effective date of liability insurance cancellation or change of insurer; 
4.  Fails to maintain pedicabs in good order and repair as prescribed herein; 
5.  Provides false statements on an application for a decal; 
6.  Fails to pay any fees or damages lawfully assessed upon the ownership or operation of any pedicab licensed under this chapter; or 
7.  Violates any of the provisions of this chapter or any applicable city, state, or federal laws, rules, or regulations. 
B.  Decals which have been suspended shall forthwith be surrendered to the city clerk for a period covering the term of suspension. The city clerk shall return the decal to its holder immediately after termination of the suspension period. 
C.  Decals which have been revoked shall forthwith be surrendered to the city clerk by the holder thereof. 
D.  The city clerk shall notify in writing and by certified mail, any decal holder whose permit has been suspended or revoked. Such notice shall state any and all reasons for such action, as well as all laws or regulations violated by the decal holder. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.190 - Other laws applicable to pedicab owners and operators. 
Pedicab owners and operators are subject to all applicable city, county, State, and Federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.200 - Report of accidents. 
Each holder of a pedicab decal and pedicab operating permit involved in any accident resulting in property damage or personal injury of any kind, shall within forty-eight hours thereof give written report thereof to the city clerk. A copy of a report required under state law shall be deemed sufficient for such purposes; otherwise, such report shall contain all information required with respect to reports otherwise required under state law. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.210 - Minimum age for pedicab operators. 
It is unlawful for any individual under the age of eighteen to operate a pedicab. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.220 - Driver's license requirement to operate pedicab. 
A.  It is unlawful for any individual without a motor vehicle driver's license issued by the state of California to operate any pedicab within the city. 
B.  While the pedicab is in operation, the pedicab operator shall have his or her valid driver's license on his or her person at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.230 - Business license requirement to operate pedicab. 
It is unlawful for a person to operate a pedicab without first obtaining a business license from the city. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.240 - Equipment regulations for the operation of pedicabs. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to operate, or cause to be operated, a pedicab which fails to meet the equipment requirements of Section 5.25.130 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.250 - Insurance requirements. 
In order to ensure the safety of the public, it is unlawful for any person who owns a pedicab to allow it to be operated or driven or to obtain a permit for its operation under this chapter unless and until such person has complied with the provisions of this section. 
A.  The owner or operator of any pedicab operated under this chapter must secure his or her ability to answer to any claim for damage to person or property which may arise against him or her by reason of the operation of the pedicab as follows: 
1.  Public liability insurance in the minimum limits of one hundred thousand dollars for injury or death to any person and three hundred thousand dollars for injury or death of more than one person in the same accident; 
2.  Public liability insurance for property damage in the minimum amount of fifty thousand dollars for any one occurrence; 
3.  The policy of insurance is endorsed to provide a hold harmless clause in favor or the city; 
4.  The policy provides that thirty-days' notice of cancellation of insurance be sent to the city clerk; and 
5.  A certificate evidencing insurance shall be filed with the city clerk and the risk manager for the city, and must name the city, its officers, agents, and employees as additional insureds. 
B.  The insurance required under this section shall remain in full force, at a level at least equal to the minimum requirements set forth above, or the pedicab decal will be subject to revocation or suspension pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.260 - Fare schedule. 
A.  Every pedicab shall have permanently affixed to the outside thereof, in a place readily to be seen by passengers, a frame covered with clear plastic, or similar material, enclosing a card upon which shall be printed in plain, legible letters the schedule of rates authorized for carriage in such pedicab. 
B.  It is unlawful for an operator to deceive any passenger who rides in the vehicle, or who expresses a desire to ride in such vehicle, as to that passenger's destination or the rate to be charged. 
C.  It is unlawful for any operator to demand from a passenger a fare greater than the fare contained in the posted fare schedule. 
D.  Section 5.25.260C. does not apply to fares for special tours, provided that the fare for the special tour is agreed upon between the passenger and the operator prior to the beginning of the tour. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.270 - Right of appeal from denial of issuance of pedicab operating permit or decal. 
A.  The city clerk shall notify the applicant that the issuance of his or her pedicab operating permit or decal has been denied. The city clerk shall also notify the applicant of the right to appeal the denial to the city manager. Any written appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days after service of notice of denial. Service shall be by regular postal service or personal delivery. The applicant shall set forth in the appeal the reason why the denial is not proper. 
B.  If no appeal is filed within the time allowed, the decision of the city clerk to not issue the pedicab operating permit or decal shall be considered final. 
C.  The city manager shall direct an appeal to be heard within fifteen days after a notice of appeal is filed with the city clerk as required by this section. 
D.  A denial shall remain in effect until a duly filed appeal is heard by a hearing officer under the procedures set forth in Section 5.25.290. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.280 - Right of appeal from suspension or revocation of pedicab operating permit or decal. 
A.  The city shall notify the pedicab operator or owner that his or her pedicab operating permit or decal has been suspended or revoked. The city clerk shall also notify the pedicab owner or operator of the right to appeal the suspension or revocation to the city manager. Any written appeal shall be filed within ten calendar days after service of notice of suspension or revocation. The pedicab operator or owner shall set forth in the appeal the reason why the suspension or revocation is not proper. 
B.  If no appeal is filed within the time allowed, the pedicab operating permit or decal shall be considered suspended or revoked and the pedicab operator or owner shall immediately surrender the pedicab operating permit or decal to the city clerk in the manner prescribed by the city clerk. 
C.  Once a timely appeal is filed, the suspension or revocation of the operating permit or decal shall be stayed pending the final determination by the hearing officer as set forth in Section 5.25.290 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.290 - Procedure upon appeal. 
A.  If an applicant served with a notice of denial, suspension, or revocation chooses to appeal, he or she shall file an appeal within ten calendar days from the service of the notice from the city clerk. 
B.  Appeals to the city manager: 
1.  Any decision of the city clerk which is a denial to issue or a suspension or revocation of any pedicab operating permit or decal shall not become final until fifteen days after the date of transmittal of the written notice to the person affected by such decision, during which period the party to the action may appeal the decision in the manner provided herein at any time prior to the expiration date of the fifteen-day period. If no appeal is taken before the expiration of the fifteen-day period, the decision of the city clerk shall be final. 
2.  The appeal of any decision shall be in writing signed by the party to the action briefly setting forth the reasons why such decision is not proper, stating an address at which the appellant will receive notices and filed with the city clerk. 
3.  The city clerk shall upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be an attorney or recognized mediator designated by the city attorney. The hearing shall be scheduled for not more than thirty calendar days after receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented to by the appellant. 
4.  The hearing shall not be conducted under the formal Rules of Evidence but shall be subject to such standards of procedure and evidence as reasonable people would utilize in the conduct of serious business. 
5.  The appellant (or a representative) shall have the right to present his or her case in person. 
6.  The hearing officer shall consider the case record, as well as any statements offered by interested parties. The hearing will be conducted according to administrative rules relating to evidence and witnesses as set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
7.  If the hearing officer refuses to issue or restore a pedicab operating permit or decal, the party to the action, or such party's agent, shall not file a new application within three hundred sixty five days from the date of final action by the hearing officer. 
8.  If the hearing officer suspends a pedicab operating permit or decal, the city clerk shall determine a period of suspension of not more than thirty days. 
9.  If the hearing officer's action is to grant or restore a decal or permit, the hearing officer shall direct the city clerk to issue or restore the certificate or license. 
C.  Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the hearing officer may carry the matter forward under the provisions for administrative mandamus (Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5) as it now exists or may later be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.300 - Enforcement authority. 
The city is authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The city may exercise any enforcement powers as provided in this code. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.310 - Enforcement remedies. 
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction, unless otherwise noted, punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this code. The city attorney may also seek injunctive relief and civil penalties in the superior court for violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.320 - Strict liability offenses. 
Violations of this chapter shall be treated as strict liability offenses. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.330 - City held harmless. 
A decal holder shall, and by acceptance of the decal does, to the maximum extent permitted by law, agree to indemnify and hold harmless the city of Lodi, its officers, employees and agents from any and all damages, claims, liabilities, costs, suits, or other expense resulting from and arising out of the decal holder's operations. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
5.25.340 - General pedicab operation. 
A.  Any pedicab permitted by the city as a pedicab shall be operated according to the pedicab provisions of this chapter and the applicable provisions of the California Vehicle Code governing the operation of bicycles. 
B.  Each operator shall carry in the vehicle a current map of the city. Upon request, the operator shall make the map available to the passenger. 
C.  Every pedicab while in operation for the solicitation or transportation of passengers shall be attended by the operator at all times except when such operator is actually engaged in loading or unloading the vehicle, or in answering telephones in connection with the business. 
D.  An operator shall not leave the pedicab operating permit in an unattended or unsecured pedicab. 
E.  No owner or operator of a pedicab shall knowingly permit such pedicab to be used for unlawful purposes or knowingly to transport persons therein to places for such purposes. Violation of this provision is a misdemeanor under this chapter. 
F.  Every pedicab operating under this chapter must be inspected by the police department for the city at such intervals as may be established by the chief of police, to insure the continued maintenance of safe operating conditions. 
G.  Every person owning or operating, or causing to be operated, any pedicab under this chapter must thoroughly wash each pedicab, when so operated, at least once a week, and shall also sweep and clean each of the pedicabs daily. 
H.  It is unlawful for any person operating, or causing to be operated, any pedicab to permit the same to remain standing upon the street for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers unless the side of the pedicab is within a legal parking stall or other designated loading zone. 
(Ord. No. 1931, § 1, 10-19-2016)  
Chapter 5.28 - PRIVATE PATROL SYSTEMS 
Sections:  
Article I. - Generally 
 
5.28.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Private patrol system" means any business which purports to furnish or does furnish any private policemen, watchman or guard to patrol any territory or to guard or watch property of another person, in the city. 
B.  "Private patrol watchman" means any individual who patrols any territory or guards or watches property of another person within the city, and who is employed by a person holding a private patrol system permit or who himself holds a permit to operate a private patrol system, and who holds a permit as required by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19-1)  
5.28.020 - Uniforms. 
It is unlawful for any person to wear, or cause or permit to be worn, any uniform in the operation of a private patrol system that is similar to the uniform used by the police or fire departments, and no uniform shall be worn unless it has first been approved by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-2)  
5.28.030 - Badges and insignia—Use—Approval. 
It is unlawful for any person to wear or display, or cause to be worn or displayed, any badge or insignia similar in design to that used by the city police or fire departments, and no badge or insignia shall be worn, displayed or used in any manner, unless the same has been first approved by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-3)  
5.28.040 - Badges and insignia—Sale. 
It is unlawful for any person to sell, for use in the city, any badge of a like or similar design to that used by the city police department or fire department; or, to sell any badge to be used by a private patrol system or private patrol watchman in the city, except upon the written order of the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-4)  
5.28.050 - Rank insignia. 
It is unlawful for any person to use, wear or exhibit any rank or insignia of rank, or cause or permit to be used, worn or exhibited any rank or insignia of rank, by any person operating or employed by a person operating a private patrol system, except such as may be approved, in writing, by the chief of police. 
(Prior code § 19-5)  
5.28.060 - Complaints to state. 
The chief of police is directed to file, or cause to be filed, with the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state, a complaint against any person holding a permit to carry on the business of private detective issued by such department of professional and vocational standards, whenever he believes good cause exists therefor. 
(Prior code § 19-6)  
5.28.070 - Payment of license fees. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to permit any person to operate a private patrol system unless such person has first paid any license that may be required by this code or other ordinance of the city, and nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a waiver of any such license. 
(Prior code § 19-7)  
5.28.080 - Notice service. 
Any notice required by this chapter must be in writing and may be given by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail, the notice must be deposited in the United States Post Office, in a sealed envelope, with postage prepaid, addressed to the person on whom it is to be served, at his last-known address as the same appears from the files of the director of finance. The service is completed at the time of the deposit in the post office. 
(Prior code § 19-8)  
5.28.090 - Appeals. 
Any holder of a private patrol system permit, or a private patrol watchman permit, excepting to any denial, suspension or revocation of a permit applied for or held by him, or to any action taken by any official of the city concerning such permit, may appeal in writing to the city council by filing with the city clerk a written notice of such appeal setting forth the specific grounds thereof. Such notice must be filed within fourteen days after notice of such action appealed from, but in no event later than thirty days after date of such action. The city clerk shall forthwith set the matter for hearing before the council and cause notice thereof to be given to the appellant not less than five days prior to such hearing. At such hearing the appellant shall show cause, on the grounds specified in the notice of appeal, why the action excepted to should not be approved. Such hearings may, by the council, be continued over from time to time, and its findings on the appeal shall be final and conclusive in the matter. 
(Prior code § 19-9)  
Article II. - System Permit 
 
5.28.100 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as principal, or agent or otherwise, to engage in the business of operating a private patrol system without first obtaining a permit therefor as provided by this article. 
(Prior code § 19-10)  
5.28.110 - Application—Filing. 
Any person desiring a permit to engage in the business of operating a private patrol system shall file with the director of finance a written application in triplicate, addressed to the city manager, setting forth the information required by this article and shall pay to the director of finance a filing fee of fifteen dollars. If such applicant is an individual, he shall sign the application personally. If the applicant is an association, firm or copartnership, such application shall be signed personally by each person composing or intending to compose such association, firm or copartnership. If the applicant is a corporation, such application shall be signed by each member of its board of directors. Such application shall be sworn to by all persons signing the same before some person authorized to administer oaths. 
(Prior code § 19-11)  
5.28.120 - Application—Contents. 
An application for a permit to operate a private patrol system shall be accompanied by the applicant's fingerprints and a photograph not over six months old and shall be on a form to be supplied by the director of finance and shall set forth the following information: 
A.  The full name and home address of each person signing the application; 
B.  The name under which it is proposed to operate the intended private patrol system; 
C.  The business or occupation for the five years last past of each person signing the application, giving the name and address of each employer, the date of commencement and termination of employment, and the nature of the services performed by each such person; 
D.  The territory of the city in which it is desired to operate the proposed private patrol system; 
E.  The hours during which it is proposed to patrol such territory or render guard or watchman service; 
F.  The address of the principal place of business of the applicant, or the proposed principal place of business, and all existing or proposed branch offices; 
G.  The date of the issuance of the license held by the applicant, issued by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state pursuant to the laws of the state, as a private detective, and the name and address of his surety or sureties; 
H.  Whether any person signing the application has ever been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony or a charge involving moral turpitude at any time, or arrested for any reason within the five years last past, giving full details; 
I.  The name and address of the person or persons who will have the active operation and management of the business; 
J.  If the applicant is a corporation, the application shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the resolution or minutes authorizing the application; and 
K.  Such other information as the chief of police or the city manager may require. 
(Prior code § 19-12)  
5.28.130 - Application—Administrative distribution. 
Immediately upon the receipt of an application for a private patrol system permit, the director of finance shall forward one copy thereof to the chief of police, one copy to the city manager and file with the permanent records of his office the original application. The director of finance shall maintain a permanent file to be known as "Applications and Permits for Private Patrol Systems," wherein he shall maintain separately all records and documents of his office pertaining to each private patrol permit application and private patrol watchman permit. 
(Prior code § 19-13)  
5.28.140 - Investigation of applicant. 
Upon receipt from the director of finance of a copy of an application for a permit to operate a private patrol system the chief of police shall forthwith make an investigation and written report to the city manager as to the truthfulness of the facts therein set forth, and the reputation and character, competency and integrity of each person signing the application, and whether the management, conduct and operation of such proposed private patrol system will or will not comport with the public welfare, and for this purpose shall consider any facts or evidence bearing on the moral fitness and reputation of those who will be in charge of such private patrol system and any other evidence or fact tending to assist in enlightening the city manager in this respect. 
(Prior code § 19-14)  
5.28.150 - Hearing. 
Upon receipt of the written report of the chief of police, the director of finance shall forthwith set the application for public hearing before the city manager at a date not less than five days after its receipt. The director of finance shall give written notice to the applicant and to such other persons as may in writing request notice, of the day, time and place of such hearing not less than two days prior to such hearing. 
(Prior code § 19-15)  
5.28.160 - Issuance or denial. 
The city manager shall grant or deny a permit under this article to the applicant within ten days after the completion of such hearing; provided, however, that the city manager shall deny an application if it appears: 
A.  That any person signing the application has ever been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or 
B.  That any person signing the application does not have a good reputation for honesty or character or integrity or sobriety, or is not a responsible person; or 
C.  For any reason, within his sound discretion, that a private patrol system is not needed within the territory set forth in the application, or for any other reason which would not comport with the public welfare. 
(Prior code § 19-16)  
5.28.170 - Bond. 
Any person who has made application for a private patrol system permit under this article and who does not hold a valid permit issued by the Department of Professional and Vocational Standards of the state to carry on the business of a private detective shall, before any permit is issued to him, deliver to and file with the director of finance a surety bond, executed by a surety company authorized to do business in the state, in the sum of five thousand dollars, conditioned for the faithful and honest conduct of such business by such applicant, which bond shall be upon a form provided by the director of finance and approved as to its form and execution by the city attorney. Such bond shall be taken in the name of the people of the city and every person injured by the wilful or malicious or negligent or wrongful act of the principal, his agents or employees may bring an action on such bond in his own name to recover damages suffered by reason of the wilful or malicious or negligent or wrongful act. A surety bond filed as required in this section may be canceled only by service of a written notice upon the director of finance not less than five days prior to the effective date of such cancellation, and the holder of a private patrol system permit and his private patrol watchmen thereby secured shall be, ipso facto, suspended upon the cancellation of the bond until such time as another bond is filed as is required in the first instance. 
(Prior code § 19-17)  
5.28.180 - Conditions. 
Any permit for a private patrol system shall be issued upon the following terms and conditions: 
A.  That such private patrol system shall be operated and conducted subject to the general supervision of the chief of police; and 
B.  That the holder of such permit will require each private patrol watchman employed by him to: 
1.  Report by telephone to such places and at such intervals as the chief of police may require, 
2.  Report by telephone to the nearest police station immediately upon receipt of any police signal system, and 
3.  Aid, assist and cooperate with the city police department in the detention or apprehension of persons suspected of violating the law. 
(Prior code § 19-18)  
5.28.190 - Revocation. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this article for the operation of a private patrol system may be revoked by the city manager for any reason for which the granting of such permit might be lawfully denied, or for the violation of any provision of this article, or for any other good cause. Such revocation shall be made only after a hearing granted to the holder of such permit before the city manager, after five days' notice to the permit holder, setting forth the grounds of complaint against him and stating the time and place where such hearing will be held. Such hearing may be continued over from time to time as the circumstances may require. Upon revocation of any permit, such permit shall be forthwith surrendered to the city manager. The revocation of any permit shall be in addition to any other penalties otherwise provided in this code. 
(Prior code § 19-19)  
5.28.200 - Transfer. 
No private patrol system permit may be transferred without the written consent of the city manager obtained upon application in the same manner as provided by this article for the original application for such permit. 
(Prior code § 19-20)  
Article III. - Watchman's Permit 
 
5.28.210 - Required. 
It is unlawful for any person to act as a private patrol watchman, or for any person holding a private patrol system permit to employ or permit to act as a private patrol watchman, any person, unless such person holds an unrevoked permit to so act as provided in this article. 
(Prior code § 19-21)  
5.28.220 - Application—Filing. 
The holder of a permit for a private patrol system may file with the director of finance an application, in triplicate, requesting that a permit to act as a private patrol watchman be issued to the person named in the application. The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee of five dollars, and shall be upon a form supplied by the director of finance and shall be sworn to before a person authorized to administer oaths, and must state the length of time that the affiant has known such person, that he has investigated such person and believes him to be a man of good character, honesty and reputation, competency and integrity, and physically and mentally capable of performing the duties of private patrol watchman, and that he will require such person, if a permit is granted to him, to conform to and abide by all requirements of this chapter. If the applicant is the holder of a private patrol system permit, he need only file the written statement required by Section 5.28.230. 
(Prior code § 19-22)  
5.28.230 - Application—Accompanying statement. 
An application for a private patrol watchman permit shall be accompanied by a written statement, in triplicate, upon a form supplied by the director of finance, sworn to by the person to whom it is desired that a permit be issued, before a person authorized to administer oaths, setting forth the following information: 
A.  The full name and home address of such person; 
B.  The business or occupation, for the five years last past, of such person, giving the name and address of each employer, the date of commencement and termination of employment and the nature of the services performed; 
C.  If he has ever been arrested on a charge of the commission of a felony or charge involving moral turpitude at any time, or arrested for any reason within five years last past, giving full details; 
D.  That he is able to read, write and speak the English language; 
E.  Such other information as the city manager or chief of police may require. 
(Prior code § 19-23)  
5.28.240 - Application—Administrative distribution. 
Immediately upon the receipt of an application for a private patrol watchman permit, and the written statement, the director of finance shall forward one copy thereof to the chief of police, one copy to the city manager, and file the original with the records of his office pertaining to the permit issued to the applicant. 
(Prior code § 19-24)  
5.28.250 - Fingerprinting and photographing. 
The person named in an application for a private patrol watchman's permit shall, within three days after the filing of such application with the director of finance, present himself to the police department to be photographed and fingerprinted. The police department shall forthwith cause the person to be photographed and fingerprinted and such photograph and fingerprints shall be filed in the permanent records of the police department. 
(Prior code § 19-25)  
5.28.260 - Investigation—Issuance or denial. 
Upon receipt by the chief of police of a copy of an application and written statement as provided by this article, he shall forthwith investigate the truthfulness of the facts therein set forth, the moral fitness and reputation, character, integrity and competency of the person who made such statement, and if, upon the completion of such investigation, he concludes that such statements are true and that he is a qualified and fit person to act as a private patrol watchman, he shall issue a permit to such person granting him the right to act as a private patrol watchman for the person making the application; provided, however, that such application must be denied if it appears: 
A.  That such person has been convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, or a violation of any liquor or narcotic law; or 
B.  That he does not have a good reputation for honesty or character or integrity, or is not a responsible person, or does not have the necessary mental or moral or physical qualifications to perform the duties of a private patrol watchman; or 
C.  That he cannot read, write or speak the English language. 
(Prior code § 19-26)  
5.28.270 - Revocation. 
Any permit granted pursuant to this article for a private patrol watchman may be revoked by the chief of police, after an opportunity to be heard has been granted to the person holding the permit after five days' notice of the time and place of such hearing, for the violation of any provision of this article, or whenever it appears to the chief of police that the person does not have the intelligence or courage or judgment necessary for the performance of the duties of a private patrol watchman, or has been under the influence of intoxicating liquors while performing his duties, or for any other good cause. 
(Prior code § 19-27)  
5.28.280 - Expiration. 
A permit to act as a private patrol watchman, unless previously revoked as provided by Section 5.28.270, shall expire and terminate upon the termination or revocation of the permit granted to the person who made application for his private patrol watchman permit, or upon his discharge, removal or resignation as an employee of the person who made application for his permit. 
(Prior code § 19-28)  
Chapter 5.32 - MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS 
Sections: 
 
5.32.005 - Findings and purpose. 
The city council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city of Lodi. 
B.  The city of Lodi is authorized, by virtue of the California Constitution and Section 51031 of the Government Code, to regulate massage establishments by imposing reasonable standards relative to the skill and experience of massage operators and massage technicians and reasonable conditions on the operation of massage establishments. 
C.  There is significant risk of injury to massage clients by improperly trained and/or educated massage technicians, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss. 
D.  Regulating the business of massage is necessary to preserve the health and safety of the individuals using or working in such establishments by regulating the sanitation and decency of such establishments, the maintenance of facilities, and by requiring the operator's compliance with applicable state law. 
E.  This chapter will also serve to reduce or eliminate the risk of illegal activity, which may result from a lack of regulation of massage establishments. 
F.  Issuance of a license to engage in the business of massage in the city of Lodi without adequate regulation would unduly jeopardize the health, morals, and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.010 - Definitions. 
Unless the particular provision or the context otherwise requires, the definitions and provisions contained in this section shall govern the construction, meaning, and application of words and phrases used in this chapter. 
"Chief of police" means the chief of police of the city of Lodi, or his/her designated representative. 
"City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lodi or his/her designated representative. 
"City council" means the city council of the city of Lodi. 
"Conviction" or "convicted" means a plea or verdict of guilty or a conviction following a plea of nolo contendere. 
"Client area" means areas open to customers of the massage establishment. 
"Employee" for purposes of this chapter, the term "employee" shall include independent contractors. 
"Health department" means San Joaquin County Public Health Services. 
"Manager" means the person(s) designated by the operator of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the operator in managing day-to-day operations with the same liabilities and responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, evidence that the individual has power to direct, hire, or dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policies or rules, or purchase supplies. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must meet the standards and qualifications of Section 5.32.030, et seq., to qualify as a manager and obtain a massage technician's permit. 
"Massage" means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, hygienic, relaxation, or any other reason or purpose, whether by means of pressure on, friction against, or stroking, kneading, tapping, pounding, vibrating, rubbing, stimulating, or other manner of touching the external parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance with or without supplementary aids such as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly used in the practice of massage. However, "massage" shall not include any massage of the hands, feet or calves given by a manicurist licensed by the California Board of Barbering and Cosmetology in connection with a manicure or pedicure performed in an unenclosed area of a salon. 
"Massage establishment" means any business conducted within the city of Lodi where any person, firm, association, partnership, corporation, or combination of individuals engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be conducted or carried on, for money or any other consideration, any activity set forth in the definition of "massage" in this section, and any establishment engaged in, carrying on, or permitting any combination of massage, baths, or health treatments involving massage or baths, shall be deemed a massage establishment. 
"Massage technician" means any person who administers to another person for any form of consideration whatsoever a "massage" as defined in this section. The term "massage therapist" and "massage practitioner" are included within this definition for purposes of this chapter. 
"Massage technician's permit" means the permit required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter for a massage technician. 
"Moral turpitude" means a crime, which infringes upon the moral sentiment of the community, as distinguished from acts prohibited by law. 
"Operator" means all persons who have ownership interest in the massage establishment and are responsible for its day-to-day operations. 
"Operator's permit" means the permit required pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to operate or manage a massage establishment. 
"Owner" means the individual(s) whose name appears on the city business license. 
"Person" means any individual, corporation, partnership, firm, association, or other group or combination of individuals of whatever form or character. 
"Police department" means the police department of the city of Lodi. 
"Recognized school" means any school or institution of learning, which teaches, through state certified instructors, the theory, ethics, practice, profession, or work of massage, which school or institution complies with California Education Code Section 94310 or 94311, and which requires a resident course of study before each student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation; or if said school is not located in California, has complied with the standards commensurate with those required in Section 94311 of the California Education Code. Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance shall not be deemed a recognized school. 
(Ord. 1813 § 1, 2008)  
5.32.015 - Operator's permit required. 
No person shall operate a massage establishment within the city without first obtaining an operator's permit pursuant to Sections 5.32.020 and 5.32.025 of this chapter, securing the necessary business license as required by this code, and complying with Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.020 - Application for operator's permit. 
Any person seeking an operator's permit for a massage establishment or manager's position for a massage establishment shall file a written application on the required form with the police department who shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of investigation required by this chapter. The application shall be completed and signed by the operator or manager of the proposed massage establishment, if a sole proprietorship; one general partner, if the operator is a partnership; one officer or one director, if the operator is a corporation; and one participant, if the operator is a joint venture. The application for permit does not authorize operation of a massage establishment unless and until such permit has been properly granted. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
A.  The type of ownership of the business; i.e., whether by individual, partnership, corporation, or otherwise. If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter together with the state and date of incorporation and the names and residence addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and of each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock of that corporation. If the state of incorporation is outside of California, the corporation must be qualified to conduct business in California by the Secretary of State. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall set forth the name and residence of each of the partners, including limited partners. If it is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the Secretary of State. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required for an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
B.  The precise name under which the massage establishment is to be conducted. 
C.  The complete address and all telephone numbers of the massage establishment. 
D.  A description of any other business operated on the same premises, or within the city of Lodi, which is owned or operated by the applicant. 
E.  The following personal information concerning the applicant: 
1.  Full true name and all aliases used at any time by the applicant. 
2.  Current residence address and telephone number of the applicant. The previous residence addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of eight years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
3.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age. 
4.  Height, weight, color of hair, eyes, gender, and date and place of birth, unless the applicant is a partnership or corporation, in which case this information shall be supplied for the person or persons authorized to execute the application. 
5.  Two front-faced portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size of the applicant taken within six months of the date of the application. 
6.  The applicant's complete business, occupation, and employment history for the eight years prior to the date of application, including, but not limited to, the massage or similar business history and experience of the applicant. 
7.  The name and address of the recognized school attended, the date attended, and a copy of the diploma or certificate of graduation awarded to the applicant. 
8.  The complete massage permit history of the applicant; whether such person has ever had any permit or license issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory, or state; the date of issuance of such a permit or license, whether the permit or license was denied, revoked, or suspended; or if a vocational or professional license or permit was denied, revoked, or suspended; and the reason(s) therefore. 
9.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere and ordinance violations, within the ten year period prior to the date of the application, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefore. 
10.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. 
F.  The name and address of the owner and lessor of the real property upon or in which the massage establishment is to be conducted. In the event the applicant is not the legal owner of the property, the application must be accompanied by a copy of the lease and notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on the subject property. 
G.  Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to verify the information contained in the application. 
H.  Such other identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified and required to be set forth in the application. 
I.  A statement in writing and dated by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
J.  If, during the term of a permit, the permit holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder shall notify the police department in writing of such change within ten business days thereafter. 
K.  A statement as to whether the applicant intends at any time to employ more than two massage technicians on-site performing massages simultaneously. 
L.  A statement as to whether the applicant intends to provide massage services off-premises. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.025 - Operator's permit—Issuance—Denial—Operation. 
A.  Issuance of Application. Upon receipt of the completed application, the chief of police shall have sixty days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant, including, but not limited to, any past criminal convictions as provided by the Justice Department or other legally authorized agency. The sixty day period may be extended for up to thirty additional days by the chief of police, if necessary, to complete the investigation. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall grant the permit if he/she finds: 
1.  The required fee has been paid. 
2.  The applicant conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter. 
3.  The applicant has not knowingly made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statements in the application. 
4.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his or her application. 
5.  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers, directors, or shareholders of the corporation holding more than five percent of the stock, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct, which requires registration under California Penal Code Section 290, or of conduct violating Penal Code Sections 266, 314, 315, 316, 318, 647(a), and 647(b), or any felony offense involving the sale of a controlled substance as specified in Sections 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057, or 11058 of the Health and Safety Code or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the abovementioned offenses or convicted in any state of any offense, which if committed or attempted in this state, or conspiracy to commit any of the above offenses, would have been punishable as one or more of the abovementioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit, or moral turpitude. 
6.  The massage establishment, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to zoning, fire, and safety requirements and standards. 
7.  The applicant is at least eighteen years of age. 
8.  The applicant has not engaged in conduct, which would constitute grounds for suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
B.  Denial. If an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied. 
C.  Operation. All operators and managers of massage establishments shall comply with the following operating requirements and any conditions specified by the chief of police upon issuance of a permit: 
1.  Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician or employee shall massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breasts of any female patron, nor shall any operator or manager of a massage establishment allow or permit such massage. No massage operator or designated manager while performing any task or service associated with the massage business shall be present in any room with another person unless the person's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, or the female breast(s), are fully covered. 
2.  No owner, operator, or manager will instruct or allow any person or persons to instruct or engage in, practice, or learn the art of massage on clients or other staff members at any massage establishment unless the owner, operator, or manager possesses a valid diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school and possesses a massage technician's permit issued by the city of Lodi. 
3.  No person granted a permit pursuant to this chapter shall use any name or conduct business under any designation not specified in his or her permit. 
4.  All massage establishments required to be licensed under this chapter shall have a manager on the premises at all times that the massage establishment is open. The operator of each massage establishment shall file a statement with the chief of police designating the person or persons with power to act as a manager. The operator and/or on duty manager shall post, on a daily basis, the name of each on duty manager and each on duty massage technician in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. The operator, or the manager in the operator's absence, shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this chapter. 
5.  No licensed massage establishment shall be open for business without having at least one massage technician holding a current valid permit for the specific establishment on the premises, and on duty, at all times when said establishment is open. 
6.  The operator, designated manager(s) shall ensure the massage technician's permit for each on-duty massage technician is conspicuously displayed in a public place in the lobby and that each massage technician is wearing or has on their person the identification required by Section 5.32.040(C)(3) at all times when in the massage establishment is open. Such identification shall be provided to city regulatory officials upon demand. 
7.  An operator and/or on duty manager shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while the employees are on the premises. Any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the operator for purposes of determining whether the operator's permit shall be revoked, suspended, denied, or renewed. 
8.  No operator or manager shall employ any person as a massage technician who does not have a valid massage technician's permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Every operator or manager shall report to the chief of police any change of employees, whether by new or renewed employment, discharge or termination, on the form and in the manner required by the chief of police. The report shall contain the name of the employee and the date of hire or termination. The report shall be made within five days of the date of hire or termination. The operator shall deliver the permit and photo identification card of any massage technician no longer employed by the operator to the chief of police within five days of the termination of employment. 
9.  All persons employed in the massage establishment shall be fully clothed at all times. Clothing shall be a fully opaque, non-transparent material and shall provide complete covering from mid-thigh to no more than three inches below the collar bone, and provide complete coverage of the genitalia and female breasts. 
10.  The operator shall comply with all provisions of this chapter and any applicable provisions of this code. 
11.  No operator, owner, massage technician, or other employee shall have on the premises: (a) any videos, pictures, or magazines depicting pornographic material; (b) condoms; or (c) other sexual devices. 
12.  All persons employed at any massage establishment must be a United States citizen or be a lawful resident of the United States pursuant to Title 8 of the United States Code. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.030 - Massage technician's permit. 
No person shall perform or administer a massage, or advertise to provide massage services in the city of Lodi, unless such person has in effect a valid massage technician's permit issued pursuant to Sections 5.32.035 and 5.32.040 of this chapter, and securing the necessary business license as required by this code. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.035 - Application for massage technician's permit. 
A.  Any person seeking a massage technician permit shall file a written application on the required form with the police department, which shall conduct an investigation. The application shall be accompanied by the appropriate filing fee established from time to time by resolution of the city council to defray the cost of investigation required by this chapter. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  A statement of the location at which the applicant will be working as a massage technician, including the full street address and all telephone numbers associated with said location; 
2.  Full true name and all aliases used at any time by the applicant, along with current residence address and telephone number; 
3.  All previous residential addresses, if any, for a period of eight years immediately prior to the application and the dates of residence at each; 
4.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen years of age; 
5.  Height, weight, color of hair and eyes, gender, and date and place of birth; 
6.  Two front-faced portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches in size of the applicant taken within six months of the date of the application; 
7.  The business, occupation, and employment history of the applicant for the eight years prior to the date of the application; 
8.  The complete permit history of the applicant, including whether the applicant has ever had any license or permit, issued by any agency, board, city, or other jurisdiction, denied, revoked, or suspended and the reason(s) therefore. 
9.  All criminal convictions, including pleas of nolo contendere and ordinance violations, within the ten years prior to the date of the application, including those dismissed or expunged pursuant to Penal Code Section 1203.4, but excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefore. 
10.  A complete set of fingerprints taken by the police department. 
B.  Such other information and identification as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified and required to be set forth in the application. 
C.  Authorization for the city, its agents, and employees to verify the information contained in the application. 
D.  A statement in writing, and dated, by the applicant that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct. 
E.  If, during the term of a permit, a permit holder has any change in information submitted on the original or renewal application, the permit holder shall notify the police department in writing of such change within ten business days thereafter. 
F.  Each applicant must furnish an original or certified copy of a diploma or certificate and certified transcript of graduation for completion of two hundred hours of instruction from a recognized school. 
1.  The chief of police may consider an applicant's study of massage completed outside the state of California if proof of completion from a formalized course of study in massage practice, anatomy, and/or physiology is provided with the application. Proof of completion shall include dates of study and the name, address, and phone number of the school attended. 
2.  Any outside course of study submitted for approval shall meet the state of California's Office of Post-Secondary Education's minimum requirements and applicant shall have completed two hundred hours of training. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.040 - Massage technician's permit—Issuance—Denial—Operation. 
A.  Issuance. The chief of police shall have sixty days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant, including, but not limited to, any past criminal convictions as provided by the Justice Department or other legally authorized agency. The sixty day period may be extended for up to thirty additional days by the chief of police, if necessary, to complete the investigation. Upon completion of the investigation, the chief of police shall grant the permit if, in addition to the finding that the applicant will work in a massage establishment, which complies with Section 5.32.050 of this chapter, the following requirements have been met: 
1.  The applicant has graduated from a recognized school of massage prior to issuance of the permit and furnished an acceptable diploma or certificate of graduation. 
2.  The applicant has not had a massage establishment permit or massage technician's permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by a licensing authority or by any city, county or state within three years prior to the date of application. 
3.  The applicant has met the following requirements: 
a.  Completed two-hundred hours of instruction in a massage specialty (therapeutic approach) at a recognized school of massage; or 
b.  Completed two-hundred documented hours of practical experience in a massage specialty at: 
i.  a primary office of and under the direct supervision of a medical professional licensed by the state of California, specifically a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, physical therapist or nurse, while such medical professional is performing activities encompassed by such license and is physically on the premises where the massage therapy is being administered; and 
ii.  Two hundred additional hours of continuing education classes or seminars in the field of massage therapy offered by a recognized school of massage. 
4.  The applicant has not been convicted of any of the offenses listed in Section 5.32.025(A)(5) within the last five years. 
B.  Denial. If the application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for a period of six months from the date the application was denied. 
C.  Operation. All massage technicians shall comply with the following conditions and any other conditions specified by the chief of police on issuance of the massage technician's permit. 
1.  Except to the extent required, in writing, by a state licensed medical practitioner, no massage technician, massage technician aide, or employee shall massage the genitals, gluteal fold, or anal area of any patron or the breast(s) of any female patron. No massage technician, massage technician aide, or employee, while performing any task or service associated with the massage business, shall be present in any room with another person unless the person's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, or female breast(s) are fully covered. 
2.  No massage technician shall massage any patron unless the person's genitals, gluteal fold, anus, or female breast(s) are fully covered at all times while the technician or other employee is present in the same room as the patron. 
3.  The massage technician shall wear or have on their person a photo identification card prepared and issued by the city at all times when present in the massage establishment, or have the photo identification card posted in a conspicuous location within the room in which the massage technician will perform a massage. Such identification shall be provided to city regulatory officials upon demand. If a massage technician changes his or her business address, he or she shall, prior to such change, obtain from the chief of police a new photo identification card and advise the police department, in writing, of the new business address. 
4.  Massage technicians shall not perform any massage at any location other than the location specified on the permit, unless performing an off-premises massage pursuant to permit and this chapter. 
5.  While on duty the massage technician shall not use any name other than that specified on the photo identification card. 
6.  Massage technicians shall be fully clothed at all times. Clothing shall be of a fully opaque, non-transparent material and provide complete covering from mid-thigh to no more than three inches below the collarbone and shall completely cover the genitalia and female breast(s). 
7.  The massage technician consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the city's building and safety, fire department, and police department and the health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. The massage technician consents to the inspection of the occupied massage rooms by the police department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in Section 5.32.050(B)(18), which would require the posting of the notice of all patrons as described therein. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.045 - Off-premises massage permit. 
A.  For purposes of this chapter, a massage performed or administered off-premises and requiring an off-premises massage permit shall be one performed or administered for money or any other consideration by a licensed massage technician at a location other than a massage establishment. 
B.  No person shall perform or administer a massage off the premises of a massage establishment, for money or any other consideration, without obtaining a massage technician permit under Sections 5.32.035 and 5.32.040 in conjunction with a valid operator's permit and an off-premises massage permit under this chapter. Any person desiring an off-premises massage permit shall file a written application on the required form with the police department, which shall conduct an investigation. The applicant shall accompany the application with the appropriate filing fee. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information: 
1.  The complete name, including all aliases used at any time, residence and business address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
2.  The precise name and complete address and telephone number of each person receiving the off-premises massage. 
3.  The complete address at which the off-premises massage is to be conducted. 
4.  The specific reasons necessitating the performance of the massage at a location other than a massage establishment. If the off-premises massage is to be conducted at a commercial business during normal business hours while patron remains fully clothed, a letter from the commercial business confirming these conditions shall accompany the application. 
5.  Such other information deemed necessary by the chief of police. 
C.  Upon receipt of a written application for an off-premises massage permit, the chief of police shall initiate an investigation to ascertain whether such permit should be issued as requested. Within ten days of the filing of an application, the chief of police shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the application. The chief of police shall issue the permit unless he or she finds that it is not reasonably necessary to perform or administer the massage at a location other than the massage establishment. The chief of police may specify conditions of the issuance of the off-premises massage permit that are reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter, city ordinances, and applicable state law. 
An off premises permit for chair massage only shall be valid for a period of one year. Chair massage is where a patron received a massage while fully clothed in a public or semi public area. The areas massaged are the head, neck, back, and arms only. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.050 - Massage establishment facilities and operations. 
A.  Facilities. 
1.  Structure. Massage shall be carried on in a structure, which is located in a zoning district which permits such use. When a new massage establishment is constructed, three sets of plans shall be submitted to the city of Lodi community development department for approval and shall be accompanied by the appropriate fees. The structure must comply with all applicable provisions of Titles 15 and 17 of this code. 
2.  Signs. Subject to applicable provisions of this code, each operator shall post and maintain, adjacent to the main entrance and the front of the business, a legible sign identifying the premises as a massage establishment. Each operator and/or duty manager shall display the operator's permit in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the massage establishment. The hours of operation of the establishment must be posted in the front window and clearly visible from the outside. The operator and/or on duty manager must also post, on a daily basis in a conspicuous public place in the lobby of the establishment, the name of the operator and/or on duty manager. 
3.  Services List. Each operator shall post and maintain a list of services available and the cost of such services in a conspicuous public place within the premises. No operator or responsible managing employee shall permit, and no massage technician shall offer to perform, any service other than those posted. 
4.  Lighting and Ventilation. Each operator shall provide in each room where massage is given sufficient lighting and ventilation that complies with the Uniform Building Code. 
5.  Toilet and Wash Basin Facilities. A minimum of one toilet and one wash basin shall be provided for patrons in each massage establishment, which wash basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within close proximity to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. A permanently installed soap dispenser, filled with soap, and a single service towel dispenser shall be provided at the wash basin. Bar soap shall not be in the washroom. A trash receptacle shall be provided in each toilet room. 
6.  Maintenance. All facilities of the massage establishment must be in good repair and shall be thoroughly cleaned and sanitized each day the business is in operation. All walls, floors, and ceilings of each restroom shall be made smooth and easily cleanable. No carpeting shall be installed in restrooms. 
7.  Massage Table. A massage table shall be provided in each massage room and the massage shall be performed on the massage table. The tables shall have a minimum height of eighteen inches. Two inch thick foam pad with a maximum width of four feet and must be covered with durable, washable plastic or other waterproof material. Beds, floor mattresses, and waterbeds shall not be on the premises. 
8.  Linen Storage. Closed cabinets shall be provided and utilized for storage of clean linens and towels. Receptacles shall be provided for the deposit of soiled linens and towels. 
B.  Operations. 
1.  Equipment. Each operator and/or duty manager shall provide and maintain on the premises adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in massage. 
2.  Inspections. The operator and/or duty manager consents to the inspection of the massage establishment by the city's community development department, fire department, and police department and the county health department for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter or other applicable laws or regulations are met. 
a.  The city's community development department, fire department, and police department and the county health department may, from time to time, make an inspection of each massage establishment for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter, state law, or other applicable laws or regulations are met. The police department may inspect the occupied massage rooms for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this chapter are met upon occurrence of any of the conditions described in Section 5.32.050(B)(18), which would require the posting of the notice to all patrons as described therein. During an inspection, the police department may verify the identity of all on-duty employees. 
b.  Inspections of the massage establishment shall be conducted during business hours unless it appears that the massage establishment is operating after the posted hours of operation. 
c.  All areas located within or attached to the massage establishment are subject to inspection. Searchable areas include but are not limited to massage rooms, bath and/or restrooms, closets, offices, cabinets, drawers, kitchens, basements, garages, and lobby areas. 
d.  Any massage establishment that offers services other than massages, such as, but not limited to a tanning studio, acupressure, mud baths, or nail salon is subject to inspection if these services share the same building and are accessible from the massage establishment. 
e.  A person who operates a massage establishment or his or her agent, servant, or employee shall permit a lawful inspection of the premises by a representative of the police department at anytime it is occupied or open for business. 
3.  Towels and Linens. Towels and linens shall not be used on more than one patron until they have been laundered and disinfected. Disposable towels and coverings shall not be used on more than one patron. 
4.  Living Prohibited. No person or persons shall be allowed to live inside the massage establishment at any time. All living quarters shall be separate from the massage establishment. No food of any kind shall be prepared for sale or sold in the establishment unless an appropriate food-vending permit has been issued. 
5.  Alcoholic Beverages/Drugs. Massage establishment personnel shall not sell, serve, or furnish alcoholic beverages in the massage establishment unless the massage establishment has a valid license issued by the state of California, Alcoholic Beverage Control (ABC). Alcoholic beverages shall not be consumed, and massage establishment personnel must not allow a person to consume an alcoholic beverage in a massage establishment unless the establishment has complied with all applicable ABC requirements and the person consumes the alcoholic beverage in designated areas away from any rooms where massage services are performed. Controlled substances must not be consumed in a massage establishment unless the person has a prescription for the controlled substance. 
6.  Recordings. No electrical, mechanical, or artificial device shall be used by the operator or any employee of the massage establishment for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, or the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms without the knowledge or consent of the patron. 
7.  Roster. The owner, operator, or on duty manager of the massage establishment shall keep a complete and current list of the names and residence addresses of all massage technicians and employees of the massage establishment and the name and residence addresses of the manager or managing employee purported to be principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment. This roster shall be kept on the premises and be available for inspection by any official of the city charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
8.  Coverings. Each massage establishment shall provide to all patrons clean, sanitary, and opaque coverings capable of covering the patrons including the genitals, gluteal fold, anus, and female breast(s). No common use of the coverings shall be permitted and re-use is prohibited unless the covering has been laundered and disinfected. 
9.  Hours of Operation. The owner must advise the city, in writing, at the time of the application for a permit of the business hours and any changes in hours. No person shall operate a massage establishment or administer a massage in any massage establishment or administer a massage pursuant to an off premises massage permit between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. A massage begun any time before ten p.m. must nevertheless terminate at ten p.m. Except during the hours of operation, all customers, patrons and visitors shall be excluded from the massage establishment. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in the front window clearly visible from the outside. It is unlawful for a massage to be conducted, or for the massage establishment to be open, between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. 
10.  Advertising. No massage establishment granted a permit under this chapter shall place, publish, or distribute or cause to be placed, published, or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective customers or clients that any service is available other than those described in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of such advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services authorized by this chapter. This subparagraph (10) is regulatory only. 
11.  Insurance. The owner or operator must provide worker's compensation insurance to all employees pursuant to California Labor Code Sections 3710.1 and 3710.2. The massage establishment will be immediately closed pending verification of worker's compensation insurance with the California Labor Commission. This section does not apply to an owner or operator who does not have employees. 
12.  Handicapped Access. All massage establishments must comply with all state and federal laws and regulations for handicapped customers. 
13.  Compliance. Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this code shall be provided upon request to any officials of the city charged with enforcement of this chapter. 
14.  Doors. All front, reception, hallway, massage room doors, and exterior doors used by patrons to gain access to the establishment shall remain unlocked during business hours. No massage may be given within any cubicle, room, booth, or any area within a massage establishment, which is fitted with a door capable of being locked, unless the only door is an exterior door. No door to any room shall be obstructed by any means. 
15.  Access. No person(s) other than valid permit holders under this chapter and patrons shall be allowed anywhere in the massage establishment other than the lobby/reception area during hours of operation. 
16.  Loitering. Any persons convicted of any violations specified in Section 5.32.025(A)(5) in this chapter or who have been denied a permit from the city of Lodi will be forbidden to work, loiter, volunteer, or be present on the premises of any massage establishment. 
17.  Discrimination. No massage establishment may discriminate or exclude patrons on the basis of race, sex, religion, age, or physical disability. 
18.  Notices. The chief of police shall require the following notice be posted in the event that any employee of the massage establishment or any person who has been aided and abetted by an employee of the massage establishment has been found, after full hearing by administrative proceeding or state court, to have violated any of the provisions listed in Section 5.32.025(C) or 5.32.040(C): 
NOTICE TO ALL PATRONS 
THE MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY THE LODI POLICE DEPARTMENT WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE. 
a.  The notice set forth above shall be prepared and issued by the chief of police. The expense incurred for the notice will be paid by the operator. 
b.  The notices shall be conspicuously posted in a location within the massage establishment that is easily visible to any person entering the premises and in each room. The notice shall be posted for twelve months following the violation of any of the offenses described above. 
c.  The requirement for posting the notice described in this section is cumulative and in addition to all other remedies, violations, and penalties set forth in this chapter, or in the ordinance, laws, rules, or regulation of the city of Lodi, county of San Joaquin, and the state of California. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.055 - Change of business. 
Every massage establishment operator shall report immediately to the police department any and all changes of ownership or management of the massage establishment, including, but not limited to: changes of manager or other person principally in charge; stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock of the corporation; officer, directors and partners in any and all changes of name, style, or designation under which the business is to be conducted; and all changes of address or telephone numbers of the massage establishment. A change of location of the massage establishment will be approved by the chief of police provided there is compliance with all applicable regulations of the city of Lodi. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.060 - Fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees for the administration of this chapter. Fees required by this chapter shall be in addition to any required under any other chapter of this code. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.065 - Exemption—Existing permittees. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the following classes of individuals or groups while engaged in performing the duties of their respective professions: Exemptions do not apply to employees unless: (1) the conduct of the employee is regulated by state law pertaining to physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists, and (2) the employee and employer are performing their duties in accordance with state law. 
1.  Physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, acupuncturists, and physical therapists duly licensed to practice in the state of California. 
2.  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, provided that all times such physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, and physical therapists are acting in adherence with the provisions of the state law which govern this field. 
3.  Nurses duly registered by the state of California. 
4.  Barbershops and beauty parlors, barbers, and beauticians when engaged in the practice for which they are licensed by the state of California. 
5.  Accredited high schools and colleges and coaches and trainers employed therein while acting within the scope of their employment. 
6.  Trainers of any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete, or athletic team. 
B.  Commencing on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, all permits are to be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to persons engaged in the businesses regulated by this chapter prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and to persons employed as massage technicians prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, such persons shall file for the permits required by this chapter within one hundred eighty days from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Failure to do so shall make the continued operation of the businesses or the continued employment as a massage technician a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.070 - Transfer and duration of permits. 
A.  No massage technician permit issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person or establishment, provided however, an additional location or change of location of a massage technician permit will be allowed upon prior written notice to the chief of police and payment of the appropriate fee. 
B.  Permits for massage operators, managers, and technicians shall be renewed every two years provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. 
C.  Applications for renewing a permit required under this chapter shall be filed with the chief of police before the expiration of the existing permit. Temporary permits will not be issued and a renewal application must be filed no later than sixty days prior to the expiration of the existing permit to prevent a lapse of said permit. 
D.  Renewal applications shall include at a minimum, the information required on the initial application and such other information as may be required by the chief of police to update the information contained in the original permit application. The applicant shall accompany the application for renewal with the appropriate filing fee as set forth in Section 5.32.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.075 - Suspension, revocation, denial, and appeal. 
A.  Violation and Non-Compliance. The chief of police may refuse to renew a permit or may revoke or suspend an existing permit on the grounds that the applicant or permit holder has failed to comply with the permit conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If a suspended permit lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any case, the applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Revocation and Suspension of Operator's Permit. 
1.  The chief of police may revoke or refuse to renew an operator's permit if he or she makes any of the findings sufficient for denial of a permit under Section 5.32.025(A), Section 5.32.025(B), or upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within one year following prior suspension under subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
2.  The chief of police may suspend an operator's permit for a period of thirty days for each violation of Section 5.32.025 not listed above, Section 5.32.045(B), or Section 5.32.050. 
3.  The chief of police's decision to suspend or revoke a license upon two or more violations during any twelve month period as long as the elements of such violation can be proven by a preponderance of credible evidence. 
C.  Revocation and Suspension of Massage Technician's Permit. 
1.  The chief of police may revoke or refuse to renew a massage technician's permit if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a permit under Section 5.32.040(A), 5.32.040(B) 1, 2, or 6, or upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within one year following a suspension under subsection (C)(2) of this section. 
2.  The chief of police may suspend a massage technician's permit for a period of thirty days for each violation of Section 5.32.040(B) not listed above, Section 5.32.045(B), or Section 5.32.050. 
3.  The chief of police may suspend or revoke a massage technician's permit upon two or more violations of this chapter, whether it resulted in a criminal conviction or not, during any twelve month period as long as the elements of such violation can be proven by a preponderance of credible evidence. 
D.  Notice. 
1.  When the chief of police concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation, or refusal to renew a permit exists, the chief of police shall serve the applicant or permit holder, either personally or by certified mail addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or permit holder, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew permit. This notice shall state the reason(s) for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision, the right of the applicant or permit holder to appeal the decision as set forth below, and that the decision will be final if no appeal is filed within the time permitted. 
E.  Appeal. 
1.  Any applicant/permittee dissatisfied with the action of the chief of police or designee under this chapter, may appeal such decision by delivering to the city clerk not more than ten days after the effective date of such decision, a notice of appeal, along with a brief description of the reasons therefore. The clerk shall immediately forward such request to the city manager for handling. 
2.  The city manager shall upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be an attorney or recognized mediator designated by the city manager. The hearing shall be scheduled for not more than thirty days after receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented to by the appellant. The hearing shall not be conducted under the formal Rules of Evidence, but shall be subject to such standards of procedure and evidence as reasonable people would utilize in the conduct of serious business. 
3.  The hearing officer shall, within fifteen days of the conclusion of the hearing, make a written finding and decision, which shall be delivered to the city manager and the appellant by first class mail. 
4.  The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.080 - Compliance with this chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city of Lodi, the application of massage or the operation of a massage establishment in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.085 - Operation with revoked permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city of Lodi, the application of massage or the operation of a massage establishment if such person's permit has been revoked. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.090 - Massage technician compliance with this chapter. 
It is unlawful for any person to act as a massage technician in violation of the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.095 - Violation and penalty. 
In addition to the revocation/suspension provisions of Section 5.32.075, violations of this chapter may be enforced pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 1.08 of this code. Violations of the provisions of this chapter, unless otherwise noted, are prosecuted as misdemeanors. Those provisions of this chapter deemed "regulatory only" are not enforceable by criminal proceedings. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
5.32.100 - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be, and the same is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance. The city attorney may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. The city attorney shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1792 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 5.36 - REGULATING THE USE AND OPERATION OF AMBULANCES UPON THE PUBLIC STREETS WITHIN THE CITY OF LODI 
Sections: 
 
5.36.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this division is to: 
A.  Enact formal policies and regulations for licensing and regulating the operation of ambulances; 
B.  Protect the public by assuring that ambulances operate safely; 
C.  Protect the public from unsafe and unsanitary operation of ambulances; 
D.  Allow for adequate emergency ambulance service and nonemergency ambulance services in all areas of the county; and 
E.  Allow for the orderly and lawful operation of a local emergency medical services system pursuant to the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 1797 et seq. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.020 - Exemptions. 
This division shall not apply: 
A.  To vehicles operated as ambulances and to persons engaged in the ambulance service where ambulance services are rendered at the request of any county communications center or at the request of any law enforcement or fire protection agency during a state of war emergency, state of emergency, or local emergency as defined in Government Code Section 8558 or during a period (not over thirty days, but renewable every thirty days) when the county officials have determined that adequate emergency ambulance service will not be available from existing permittee; 
B.  To vehicles operated as ambulance and to persons engaged in the ambulance service where ambulance services are rendered exclusively to patients who become in need of ambulance service while on or in the place of business of the person and where no charge is made for the ambulance services rendered, provided, however, that if the vehicle is going to travel Code 3 or its equivalent, the appropriate communications center shall be so notified of this fact; 
C.  This division shall not prevent any peace officer, fire fighter, or physician licensed to practice medicine in this state, from arranging for the transportation of an individual, in need of emergency medical care when no ambulance with an appropriate ambulance service permit is available and such transportation is required immediately for the preservation of life or to avoid substantial impairment of the person to be transported. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.030 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise specifically provided or required by the context, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
A.  "Ambulance" means a vehicle specially constructed, modified or equipped and used for the purpose of transporting sick, injured, convalescent, infirm, or otherwise incapacitated persons. Ambulance does not include the non-emergency transportation of persons confined to wheelchairs. 
B.  "Ambulance attendant" means a person who is minimally certified as an emergency medical technician I—ambulance (EMT-IA) whose primary duty is to care for the sick, injured or disabled persons while they are being transported in an ambulance. 
C.  "Ambulance driver" means a person properly licensed by the state of California as an ambulance driver and who is minimally certified as an emergency medical technician I—ambulance (EMT-IA). 
D.  "Ambulance operator's permit" means written authorization by the city to provide emergency and nonemergency ambulance service within the city. 
E.  "Ambulance provider" means a person, firm, partnership, corporation or other organization which furnishes or offers to furnish ambulance service within a zone. 
F.  "Ambulance service" means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance on or in any of the streets, roads, highways, alleys, or any public way or place in this county. 
G.  "City" means the city of Lodi. 
H.  "Code I, II, and III" calls mean as follows: 
1.  "Code I" means routine or scheduled transportation of patient between facilities or to a facility for normal (nonemergency) treatment. 
2.  "Code II" means an emergency where time is critical, requiring immediate response by the ambulance providers, without red light and siren. 
3.  "Code III" means an emergency where time is critical, requiring immediate response with red light and siren. 
I.  "Designated dispatch center" means a dispatch center designated by the county for dispatch within a zone(s) for emergency ambulance service. 
J.  "Dry run" means any ambulance response made as a result of any emergency call whereupon after responding to said call it is found that no ambulance is needed. 
K.  "Emergency call" means a request for an ambulance to transport or assist persons in apparent sudden need of medical attention; or, in medical emergency, as determined by a physician, to transport blood, or any therapeutic device, accessory to such device, or tissue or organ for transplant. 
L.  "Emergency medical technician I Ambulance (EMT-IA)" means an individual trained and certified in basic life support care in accordance with the provisions contained in Title 22, California Code of Regulations, Division 9, et seq. 
M.  "Emergency medical technician Paramedic (EMT-P)" means an individual trained and certified in advanced life support care in accordance with the provisions contained in Division 2.5 of the California Health and Safety Code and such additional requirements as the San Joaquin County EMS Agency may adopt. 
N.  "Emergency response zones" means the areas shown on the map entitled "Emergency Response Zones of San Joaquin County" on file in the office of the sheriff and the clerk of the board, and as it may be changed from time to time by the San Joaquin County board of supervisors. 
O.  "Emergency response zone list" means that list of permittees for each emergency response area who possess an emergency ambulance service permit. 
P.  "Emergency service" means the service performed in response to an emergency call. Emergency service also includes transportation of a patient, regardless of a presumption of death of the patient, or transportation of a body for the purpose of making an anatomical gift, as provided in Vehicle Code Section 12811, and the Uniform Anatomical Gift Act, Health and Safety Code. 
Q.  "Nonemergency call" means an ambulance call for a purpose other than emergency. 
R.  "Permit officer" means the county director of health care services or his/her designee. 
S.  "Person" means any natural person, firm, partnership, association, company, corporation, or organization of any kind. 
T.  "Private call" means any call that is received by the ambulance provider directly from a private party for services. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.040 - Permit required. 
No person (either as owner, agency or otherwise) shall furnish, operate, conduct, maintain or otherwise engage in or advertise, offer or profess to engage in the ambulance service unless the person holds (and is entitled to hold) a currently valid ambulance operator's permit. No permit is required for the delivery of persons picked up outside the city boundaries that transport into the city. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.050 - Application—Forms. 
Each application for an ambulance operator's permit shall be made upon forms prescribed by the permit officer. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.060 - Application—Required data. 
A.  Each applicant who desires an ambulance operator's permit shall submit the following data: 
1.  The names and addresses of the applicant, registered owner, partner, officer, director and controlling shareholder; 
2.  The applicant's training and experience in the transportation and care of patients; 
3.  The name under which the applicant has engaged, does, or proposes to engage in ambulance service; 
4.  A financial statement for the previous fiscal year, prepared by a certified public accountant; 
5.  A description of each ambulance, including: the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use; and the color scheme, insignia, name monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicle; 
6.  A statement that the applicant owns or has under his control, in good mechanical condition, required equipment to consistently provide quality ambulance service in the area for which he is applying, and that the applicant owns or has access to suitable facilities for maintaining his equipment in a clean and sanitary condition; 
7.  A description of the company's program for maintenance of the vehicles; 
8.  A description of the number and type, frequency and private line codes of the vehicles' radios; 
9.  A description of the locations from which ambulance services will be offered, noting the hours of operation; 
10.  A list, giving the name and description of the training for each ambulance attendant and driver and a copy of each certificate or license issued by the state or county establishing qualifications of such personnel, amended as required during the year by providing the permit officer an updated list for any personnel changes; 
11.  A description of the company's training and orientation programs for attendants, dispatchers, and drivers; 
12.  A statement of the legal history of the applicant, including criminal and civil convictions; 
13.  Evidence of insurance coverage under Section 5.36.380; 
14.  The ability of the applicant to provide emergency ambulance service within established response times for each emergency response area applied for, twenty-four hours per day, seven days per week, year round; 
15.  All service charges and rate structure of the company; 
16.  Whether the service will include advanced life support service, and if so: 
a.  The number of advanced life support units to be deployed on each shift; and 
b.  The emergency response zone to receive advanced life support service; and 
c.  The provisions for continuing education of the advanced life support personnel. 
17.  An affirmation that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application, and submit a copy of the license issued by the Commissioner of the California Highway Patrol to privately owned ambulance companies (in accordance with Section 2501, California Vehicle Code); 
18.  The applicant may be required to submit such other information as the permit officer deems necessary for determination of compliance with this division. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.070 - Application—Investigation. 
Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, the permit officer shall make or cause to be made such investigation to determine if: 
A.  The applicant meets the requirements of this division and of other applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations; and 
B.  That the radio in each vehicle is installed, is in good working order, and is integrated with the existing medical communications systems. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.080 - Application—Issuance. 
Within ninety days of receipt of an application, the permit officer shall make a determination of (1) whether the applicant meets all requirements of this division; (2) whether the public health, safety, and welfare require the granting of a permit. In making such determination, the permit officer shall consider, among other things, the demand and necessity for ambulance service, and the adequacy of existing service(s); (3) whether the applicant is able to provide the requested service; (4) whether the applicant has knowingly made a false statement of fact in such application; (5) whether the applicant has knowingly failed to disclose facts pertinent to the application; and (6) whether the applicant was previously a holder of a permit issued under this chapter which has been revoked or not renewed based on the provisions of this division. All determinations by the permit officer shall be subject to final approval by the city council. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.090 - Application—Denial. 
If it is determined that the applicant does not meet all requirements within this division, then the permit officer shall deny the application and notify the applicant in writing within ninety days of the receipt of the application. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.100 - Appeal from denial of issuance. 
Whenever the permit officer denies an application for a permit, the applicant may request a hearing on the denial at which the applicant will have the burden of proof. The appeal will be made to the board of supervisors and a hearing scheduled within thirty days of the applicant's written request for hearing. When the permit officer issues an ambulance operator's permit, the existing service within the response zone may file an appeal with the board of supervisors. A hearing on the request shall be scheduled within thirty days of the written request for an appeal. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.110 - Decisions—Finality. 
The decision of the permit officer rendered pursuant to this chapter shall be final, unless appealed to the board of supervisors within thirty days after such decision is rendered in writing, and notice of the same is given to the applicant by certified mail. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.120 - Term. 
Permits shall continue unless suspended, revoked or terminated for cause. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.130 - Application—Change of data. 
The applicant and permittee shall report to the permit officer any change in data required in Section 5.36.060 within ten days of the effective date of the change, except that any change in the data required in Section 5.36.060(A)(1) and (A)(17) shall be reported immediately. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.140 - Transfer of permits. 
No permit shall be transferred to another person except upon prior approval of the permit officer. Application for transfer of any ambulance operator's permit shall be subject to the same terms, conditions, and requirements as if the application were for an original permit. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.150 - Renewal of permit. 
Applicants for renewal of an ambulance operator's permit under this division shall annually file with the permit officer an application in writing on a form furnished by the permit officer, which shall include information required in Section 5.36.060. The application for renewal shall be accompanied by a renewal fee. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.160 - Fees. 
The board of supervisors shall set the fees by resolution. The fees shall not exceed the reasonable costs of administering and enforcing this ordinance as determined by the board of supervisors. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.170 - Driver and attendants. 
A.  Any ambulance attendant or driver utilized by a permittee shall be at least eighteen years of age; shall be trained and competent in the proper use of all emergency ambulance equipment; shall hold current certification as an emergency medical technician I-ambulance (EMT-IA); and shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable state laws and regulations. 
B.  Certificate Required. Every ambulance driver and attendant utilized by a permittee shall hold a certificate from the permit officer indicating compliance with the requirements of this section. A temporary certificate may be issued pending confirmation of all personnel requirements. 
C.  Application. Applications for such certificate shall be in the form required by the permit officer and shall be accompanied by the fee established by resolution of the board of supervisors. 
D.  Denial, Suspension or Revocation. Certificate may be denied, suspended or revoked by the permit officer if he finds, after an informal hearing, that the applicant does not comply with the requirements of this section. 
E.  Criminal Investigations. All applicants for ambulance driver/attendant certification must undergo a complete criminal history record check prior to issuance of a permanent certificate. 
F.  Term. The certificate shall remain in effect for no more than two years, with an expiration date to correspond to the applicant's EMT-IA or EMT-P certificate. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.180 - Uniform and appearance. 
Each person providing ambulance service subject to permit under this division shall staff each ambulance with appropriate personnel who shall wear clean uniforms, be neat and comply with the requirements of this division. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.190 - Dispatchers. 
Each person providing ambulance service subject to permit under this division shall assign at least one person or an agency to be responsible for receiving calls and dispatching ambulances and shall provide such dispatch services on a twenty-four hour day basis and shall train the dispatcher in accordance with a curriculum developed by the permit officer to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response zones. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.200 - Identification. 
Each person providing ambulance service subject to permit under this division shall wear while on duty an identification badge issued by the county permit officer that is clearly visible to the public. The badge shall identify the training and certification status of the attendant or driver. The badge shall be turned back to the permit officer in the event of changes of information on the badge. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.210 - Response. 
The on-duty ambulance driver and attendant responding to emergency calls shall be within the zone of response on a twenty-four hour basis. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.220 - Exemption. 
An ambulance driver or ambulance attendant who is a California licensed physician, mobile intensive care nurse, authorized registered nurse, or EMT-P with certification by the EMS medical director shall be exempt from the emergency medical training requirement set forth in Section 5.36.170. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.230 - Required. 
Every emergency ambulance shall carry a valid California Highway Patrol Inspection Permit authorizing the use of the vehicles as an ambulance. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.240 - Inspection. 
The ambulance provider shall allow the permit officer or designee to inspect, on a pre-announced or unannounced basis all ambulances used to provide ambulance service. The inspections should be held, whenever possible, during normal business hours. The purpose of such inspections may include, but shall not be limited to, determining if: 
A.  The ambulance is properly maintained and equipped for the provision of ambulance service; 
B.  The description of the ambulance, required by Section 5.36.060 is accurate; 
C.  The ambulance contains radios and that the radios are in good working order and that the radios are compatible with the emergency medical communications system. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1991)  
5.36.250 - Authority. 
The permit officer may suspend or revoke an ambulance operator's permit for failure to comply and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provisions, standard or requirements of state law or regulation, of this division, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Additionally, the permit officer may suspend or revoke a permit if (1) the permittee fails to make and retain records showing its dispatch operations, or fails to make such records available for inspection by the permit officer or his designee; or (2) the permittee accepts an emergency call when it is either unable or unwilling to provide the requested service or fails to inform the person requesting such service of any delay and fails to obtain consent of such person before causing an ambulance to respond from a location more distant than the one to which the request was directed. Suspension is not a condition precedent to revocation. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.260 - Notice issuance. 
Before suspension or revocation, the permit officer shall give written notice to the permittee specifying why such action is contemplated and giving the permittee a reasonable period of time (not less than seven (7) nor more than fifteen days) to comply with the provisions in question or to show cause against suspension or revocation and setting a date for hearing thereon. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.270 - Hearing. 
At the hearing, the permit officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the permittee. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.280 - Emergency action. 
The permit officer may reduce the period of time for compliance under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty- four hours and set the matter for hearing immediately upon expiration of said period when the permit officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceeding, a permit is suspended or revoked, the permittee may request an additional hearing at which the permittee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the permit. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the permittee's request. The request for, or the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.290 - Evidence. 
In hearings conducted pursuant to this Chapter, evidence must be relevant, noncumulative, and of such nature as responsible persons are accustomed to rely on in the conduct of serious affairs. So far as practicable, the hearing shall be conducted under Section 11513 of the Government Code and witnesses may be examined under Section 776 of the Evidence Code. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.300 - Hearing officer. 
Hearings conducted pursuant to this chapter shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the county administrator. The hearing officer may issue subpoenas for the production of documents or the attendance of witnesses. The hearing officer shall determine whether oral evidence at the hearing shall be recorded by a court reporter. At the conclusion of said hearings, the hearing officer shall promptly prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the permit officer. The parties all equally bear the expense of the hearing officer and the cost of the hearing. Each party shall bear its own expenses. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.310 - Decision. 
The permit officer shall issue a written decision within thirty days after conclusion of the hearing. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.320 - General requirements. 
When responding to an emergency call or operating "Code 3," the ambulance driver shall ensure by his action or his company's dispatcher that the radio is activated, that the appropriate designated dispatch center is notified, that the unit is responding to an emergency call or operating "Code 3." When the unit is responding to a county dispatched call, the unit shall comply with all orders and directions given by the designated dispatch center. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.330 - Level of response. 
An advanced life support unit shall be the primary unit dispatched to all emergency calls to treat and transport the sick, injured, and disabled person or persons and shall be staffed by a minimum of one (1) emergency medical technician/paramedic and one (1) emergency medical technician (IA). Should an advanced life support unit not be available, a basic life support unit shall be dispatched and shall be staffed with a minimum of two emergency medical technicians (IA). 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.340 - Preparation of zone lists. 
The permit officer shall prepare and keep up-to-date the emergency response zone lists. The permit officer shall include on the list for each emergency response zone the ambulance service provider who has possession of a valid emergency ambulance service permit with the county as well as the ambulance service providers who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that zone. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.350 - Renewal of permits. 
Renewal of an ambulance operator's permit and an emergency service permit shall require conformance with all requirements of this division as upon issuance of an initial permit. Nothing in this division shall be construed as requiring the granting of a permit upon expiration of a previous permit, and the burden of proof respecting compliance with all the requirements for a period, and of entitlement of a permit shall remain at all times with the applicant for renewal. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.360 - Advertising. 
No ambulance service permittee under this division shall announce, advertise, offer, or in any way claim that: 
A.  It provides emergency ambulance service unless it possesses a current, valid, emergency ambulance service permit for the emergency response zones where it is claiming to provide such service; or 
B.  It provides advance life support services unless it actually provides such service, in those zones for which it has a permit. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.370 - Adoption by local jurisdictions. 
Upon adoption of this chapter by a city, the county permit officer shall have enforcement powers within the city. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.380 - Liability insurance. 
The permittee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of said permit, a policy of insurance and in such form as the city's risk manager may deem proper, executed by an insurance company approved by the risk manager, whereby the owner and the driver of each of the vehicles described in said permit are insured against liability for damage to property and for injury to or death of any person as a result of the ownership, operation or other use thereof, the minimum liability limits upon each such vehicle being as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement naming the city as an additional insured, and under which it is stipulated that the city is indemnified and held harmless from and against all costs, expenses, and liability arising out of, or based upon any and all property damage, or damages for personal injuries, including death, which results or is claimed to have resulted from any act or omission on the part of ambulance operator or ambulance operator's agents or employees. 
In addition to the additional named insured endorsement on ambulance operator's policy of insurance, said insurance policy shall be endorsed to include the following language: 
"Such insurance as is afforded by the endorsement for the Additional Insured's shall apply as primary insurance. Any other insurance maintained by the city of Lodi or its officers and employees shall be excess only and not contributing with the coinsurance afforded by this endorsement." 
Such policy of insurance shall contain an endorsement providing that said policy will not be cancelled until notice in writing shall have been given to the city of Lodi, addressed in care of the city's risk manager, City Hall, Lodi, California at least ten days immediately prior to the time such cancellation shall become effective. A duplicate or certificate of said public liability and property damage insurance containing the above-stated required endorsements shall be delivered to the risk manager within ten days after the issuance and renewal of said policy. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.390 - Financial responsibility. 
A.  An ambulance provider shall annually submit to the permit officer, within ninety days of the close of each business year, a financial statement of its business activities, prepared by a certified public accountant. Renewal of a permit is contingent upon submission of a financial statement within the proper time frames. 
B.  An ambulance provider shall provide the permit officer with information in reference to any pending action or unpaid judgments or liens against the provider, and the notice of the transactions or acts giving rise to said judgments or liens. The ambulance provider shall notify the permit officer in writing of said actions within one week of the notification from the levying agency. The reported information will be reviewed by the permit officer who will make a determination regarding the effect this information will have on the agency's ability to provide continuous service in accordance with Section 5.36.060(A)(14). 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.400 - Unauthorized response. 
No ambulance service permittee under this division shall cause or allow its ambulance to respond to a location without first receiving a specific request for such service at that location. 
Ambulance service permittees shall cooperate with the permit officer, or designee, in any investigation of possible violations of this section and shall make all dispatch logs and similar dispatch records available for inspection and copying at reasonable times at the permittee's regular place of business. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.410 - Response. 
A.  When responding to a public dispatched emergency call or a private emergency call, the ambulance provider shall comply with the request of the patient, the on-scene paramedic or law enforcement officer regarding transportation of the injured or ill party(ies). 
B.  Ambulance response 
(Code I, II, III) to private calls must be consistent with the medical condition or injuries stated in the request for help. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.420 - Regulation. 
The permit officer shall make necessary and reasonable rules and regulations covering ambulance service operation, ambulance transport equipment, ambulance personnel, and standards of dispatch for the effective and reasonable administration of this division. Prior to adoption, said regulations shall be submitted to the emergency medical care committee for their comments prior to adoption. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
5.36.430 - Rates. 
The board of supervisors may set by resolution the rates that ambulance providers may charge for providing services under this ambulance ordinance. 
(Ord. 1542 § 1 (part), 1992)  
Chapter 5.40 - ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESSES* 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
5.40.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor the effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including adult-oriented materials and paraphernalia protected by the First Amendment, or deny access by the distributors, exhibitors and performers of adult-oriented entertainment to their intended market. In addition, the provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of condoning or legitimizing the distribution of obscene material. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.020 - Location of adult-oriented businesses. 
From and after adoption of this chapter, no person shall establish, conduct, or permit to be established or conducted any adult-oriented business within one thousand feet of any church, school, playground, child care center, residentially zoned property, or adult-oriented business. 
For the purposes of this section, the distance between uses shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures from the closest exterior wall of each business or use. 
Adult-oriented businesses in existence on the effective date of this chapter are deemed nonconforming uses, which may continue subject to the provisions of Section 17.69.030. 
(Ord. 1781 § 1, 2006: Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.030 - Licenses required. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to engage in, conduct, or carry on, or permit to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, in or upon any premises in the city, the operation of an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid temporary or regular adult-oriented business license issued by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person who operates an adult-oriented business to employ or permit a person to work for or at the adult-oriented business who does not possess a valid temporary or regular adult-oriented business employee license issued by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to obtain employment with or perform work for or at an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid temporary or regular adult-oriented business employee license issued by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter. These provisions shall not apply to persons exclusively on the premises of the adult-oriented business to render only repair or maintenance services or to deliver equipment or goods to the adult-oriented business as long as such persons are not nude, semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or in a semi-nude condition. 
D.  It is a violation of this chapter for any person to engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business unless the person first obtains and continues to maintain in full force and effect a valid temporary or regular adult-oriented business employee license issued by the chief of police pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  It is a violation of this chapter to locate an adult-oriented business other than as required by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
5.40.100 - Definitions. 
The definitions contained in this article shall govern the construction of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.105 - Adult arcade. 
"Adult arcade" means any commercial establishment to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated, slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.110 - Adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store. 
A.  "Adult bookstore," "adult novelty store" or "adult video store" means a commercial establishment which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
1.  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, any material in digital format including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD), slides, or other visual representations which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
2.  Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, except for clothing, which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
B.  The phrase "regular and substantial course of conduct" shall be construed with reference to all relevant factors, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The business devotes more than twenty-five percent of its retail inventory (not measured by the number of items but rather by the cost to the business owner of the inventory) to merchandise distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  The business devotes more than twenty-five percent of the retail floor area to merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas. 
3.  The retail value of merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas exceeds twenty-five percent of the total retail value of inventory offered in each of the following categories: (a) books; (b) magazines; (c) video tapes or any material in digital format including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD), for sale or rental; (d) novelties and devices; and (e) on-premises viewing of images, films and/or videos. 
4.  Gross revenue derived from merchandise in any category set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section exceeds twenty-five percent of the total gross revenue for the category. 
C.  There is a rebuttable presumption that a business constitutes an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult video store where the business (1) offers or advertises merchandise that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as set forth in subsection (B)(3) of this section and (2) fails to make revenue and inventory related business records available to the city upon reasonable advance notice. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.115 - Adult cabaret. 
A.  "Adult cabaret" means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment which, as a regular and substantial course of conduct, features: 
1.  Persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude condition; or 
2.  Live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities; or 
3.  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, any material in digital format including, but not limited to, compact disc (CD) or digital video disc (DVD), slides or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
B.  The phase "regular and substantial course of conduct" shall be construed with reference to all relevant factors, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The proportion of the businesses' performances or services that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
2.  The proportion of the businesses' revenue that is attributable to performances or services that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.120 - Adult motel. 
"Adult motel" means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other photographic reproductions which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has any of the following characteristics: 
1.  A sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of the above-described photographic reproductions; or 
2.  Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or 
3.  Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.125 - Adult motion picture theater. 
A.  "Adult motion picture theater" means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by five or more patrons at any one time. 
B.  The phrase "regularly shown" shall be construed with reference to all relevant factors, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The proportion of the theater's photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
2.  The number of photographic reproductions shown at the theater each month that are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
C.  The proportion of the theater's revenue that is attributable to the showing of photographic reproductions distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.130 - Adult-oriented businesses. 
"Adult-oriented businesses" means any of the following commercial establishments where patrons are permitted or invited: an adult arcade, adult bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture theater, adult theater, nude model studio, or sexual encounter center. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.135 - Adult theater. 
A.  "Adult theater" means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which as a regular and substantial course of conduct features persons who appear in a state of nudity or semi-nude condition and/or features live performances which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities. 
B.  The phase "regular and substantial course of conduct" shall be construed with reference to all relevant factors, including but not limited to the following: 
1.  The proportion of the businesses' performances or services that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; 
2.  The proportion of the businesses' revenue that is attributable to entertainment that is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the display or depiction of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.140 - Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon. 
"Distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon" means the dominant or essential theme of the object described by such phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "which are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas," the films so described are those whose dominant or predominant character and theme are the depiction or description of the enumerated sexual activities or anatomical areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.145 - Employee. 
"Employee" means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult-oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not such person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the business. "Employee" does not include a person exclusively on the premises of the adult-oriented business to render only repair or maintenance services or to deliver equipment or goods to the adult-oriented business as long as such persons are not nude, semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or in a semi-nude condition. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.150 - Establishment of an adult-oriented business. 
"Establishment of an adult-oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
A.  The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business; 
B.  The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any other adult-oriented business; 
C.  The addition of any adult-oriented business to any other existing adult-oriented business; or 
D.  The relocation of any adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.155 - Fabric. 
"Fabric" means cloth made by weaving or knitting natural or synthetic fibers and filaments. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.160 - Hotel. 
"Hotel" means a building where lodging and usually meals, entertainment and other various personal services are provided to the public for some form of consideration. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.165 - Licensee. 
"Licensee" means a person in whose name a license to operate an adult-oriented business has been issued, as well as the person listed as an applicant on the application for a license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued authorizing employment in an adult-oriented business. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.170 - Motel. 
"Motel" means a hotel in which the rooms are accessible from the business parking areas. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.175 - Nude model studio. 
"Nude model studio" means any place where a person who appears semi-nude, in a state of nudity, or who displays specified anatomical areas and is provided to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration. "Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the state of California or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or in a structure: 
A.  That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other advertising that indicates a nude or semi-nude person is available for viewing; 
B.  Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at least three days in advance of the class; and 
C.  Where no more than one nude or semi-nude model is on the premises at any one time. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.180 - Nudity or a state of nudity. 
"Nudity" or a "state of nudity" means the showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, anus, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque fabric covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque fabric covering of any part of the areola, or the showing of completely or opaquely covered (by fabric) male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.185 - Person. 
"Persons" means an individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.190 - Police chief or chief of police. 
"Police chief" or "chief of police" means the chief of police of the city of Lodi or the authorized representatives thereof. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.195 - Semi-nude or in a semi-nude condition. 
"Semi-nude" or "in a semi-nude condition" means a state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areola of the female breast. This definition shall include the entire lower portion of the human female breast, but shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit, or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.200 - Sexual encounter center. 
"Sexual encounter center" means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its principal purposes, offers for any form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude condition. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.205 - Specified anatomical areas. 
"Specified anatomical areas" means and includes the following: 
A.  Less than completely and opaquely covered by fabric: (1) human genitals or pubic region, (2) human buttocks, (3) human anus, or (e) the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; 
B.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered by fabric; and 
C.  Any device, costume, or covering that simulates any of the body parts included in subsection A or B of this section. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.210 - Specified criminal activity. 
A.  "Specified criminal activity" means any of the following offenses: 
1.  Prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale, distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance involving a child; possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure; indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries; 
2.  For which: 
a.  Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is for a misdemeanor offense, 
b.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; or 
c.  Less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any twenty-four month period. 
B.  The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification of the applicant. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.215 - Specified sexual activities. 
"Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following, whether performed directly or indirectly through clothing or other covering: 
A.  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus, or female breast; 
B.  Sex acts, actual or simulated, including but not limited to, intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy; 
C.  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
D.  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the other activities described in subsections A through C of this section. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.220 - Transfer of ownership or control of adult-oriented business. 
"Transfer of ownership or control of adult-oriented business" means and includes any of the following: 
A.  The sale, lease, or sublease of the adult-oriented business; 
B.  The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the adult-oriented business, whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or 
C.  The establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the adult-oriented business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article III. - Adult-Oriented Business Licenses 
 
5.40.300 - Adult-oriented business license required. 
Every person who proposes to maintain, operate, conduct, or establish an adult-oriented business in the city shall file an application with the chief of police on a form provided by the city and shall pay a non-refundable application, investigation, and licensing fee set forth by resolution from time to time by the city council. 
A.  All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this article. The application may request and the applicant shall provide such information as to enable the chief of police to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this article. 
B.  If a person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business is an individual, the person must sign the application. If a person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business is other than an individual, each individual who has a fifteen percent or greater interest in the adult-oriented business must sign the application. Each applicant must be qualified under this article and each applicant shall be considered a licensee if a license is granted. 
C.  The completed application for an adult-oriented business license shall contain the following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents: 
1.  If the applicant is: 
a.  An individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases and submit proof that he/she is at least eighteen years of age, 
b.  A partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, address and the names of all partners whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of the partnership agreement, if any, 
c.  A corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws of California, the names and capacity of all officers and directors, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the address of the registered office for service or process; 
2.  If the applicant intends to operate the adult-oriented business under a name other than that of the applicant, the applicant shall register the fictitious name of the adult-oriented business with the appropriate governmental entity and show written proof of registration of the fictitious name; 
3.  Whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal activity and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, the place, and jurisdiction of each; 
4.  Whether the applicant has ever had a license previously issued under this chapter or its predecessor, or other similar adult-oriented business ordinances from another city or county, denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended or revoked, as well as the date of the denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer, director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this chapter, or its predecessor, whose license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location of the adult-oriented business for which the license was denied, suspended, or revoked as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation; 
5.  Whether the applicant holds any other licenses under this chapter, or its predecessor, or other similar adult-oriented business ordinance from another city or county, and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed businesses; 
6.  The particular adult-oriented business for which the applicant is applying. An applicant must apply separately for each adult-oriented business to be operated, owned, managed, or controlled by the applicant; 
7.  The address to which notice of action on the application is to be mailed; 
8.  The location of the adult-oriented business, including a legal description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any; 
9.  The applicant's mailing address and residential address; 
10.  A recent photograph of the applicant; 
11.  The applicant's driver's license number, Social Security number, and the applicant's state or federally issued Tax Identification Number. The supplying of a Social Security number is optional at the choice of the applicant. A Social Security number does assist in differentiating between like-named persons; 
12.  The names of all employees, independent contractors, and other persons who will perform at the adult-oriented business, who are required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented business employee license. 
(Ord. 1737 § 1, 2003)  
5.40.305 - Investigation and action on application for adult-oriented business license. 
A.  The chief of police shall determine whether the application contains all of the information required by the provisions of this article. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within ten business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have thirty calendar days from the date of the notice to submit additional information to render the application complete. The applicant's failure to submit the additional information within this time period renders the application null and void. Within five business days following the receipt of a supplemental or amended application, the chief of police shall again determine whether the application is complete. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. Once the application is found to be complete, the applicant shall be notified within five business days of that fact. If an applicant submits two consecutive incomplete applications, the applicant shall be notified in writing that a new application must be filed with the chief of police as set forth herein. 
B.  Upon determining that a complete application and the required nonrefundable application fee have been submitted, the chief of police shall issue a temporary license to the applicant, which shall be valid for thirty business days after the date of issuance. 
C.  Within five business days after receipt of a completed application and the required filing fee, the chief of police shall transmit copies of the application and its attachments to appropriate city departments. 
D.  Within thirty business days after receipt of a completed application and the required filing fee, the chief of police shall complete the investigation, grant or deny the application in accordance with the provisions of this section, and shall notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  If the application is approved, the chief of police shall write or stamp "Granted" on the application and date and sign such notation. The chief of police shall attach to the application a regular adult-oriented business license. 
2.  If the application is denied, the chief of police shall write or stamp "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. The chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  The document specified in subsections (D)(1) and (D)(2) of this section shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address specified in the application. All notices given hereunder shall be deemed given upon the date they are deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service is provided. 
E.  The chief of police shall approve the issuance of a regular license to an applicant, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that any of the following findings is true: 
1.  An applicant is under eighteen years of age. 
2.  An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has knowingly answered a question or request for information falsely on the application form. 
3.  An applicant has been denied a license by the city to operate an adult-oriented business within the twelve months preceding the filing of the application or an applicant whose license to operate an adult-oriented business has been revoked within twelve months. 
F.  The regular license, if granted shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may only be renewed by the licensee filing with the chief of police a written request or renewal on a form provided by the city, accompanied by a nonrefundable application, investigation and licensing fee set forth by resolution from time to time by the city council, and a copy of the license to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the regular license. When a renewal request is made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration shall not be stayed. The chief of police shall act upon applications for license renewal as provided herein for applications for licenses. 
G.  The regular license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the adult-oriented business and the classification of adult-oriented business as set forth in Section 5.40.130, for which the license is issued. 
H.  All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so that all persons entering the adult-oriented business may easily read them at any time. 
I.  Within thirty calendar days of any change in the information originally submitted with the license application, all licensees shall provide the chief of police with a written statement supplementing or amending the information required by this article. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business license. 
J.  Within thirty calendar days of any change in employee hiring or status, all licensees shall provide the chief of police with a written statement supplementing or amending the information required by this article. Failure to submit such changes shall be grounds for suspension of the adult-oriented business license. 
K.  If the chief of police neither grants nor denies a completed application for which the filing fees have been paid, within thirty business days after the city's receipt of the application, the applicant may begin operating the adult-oriented business for the single classification of adult-oriented business as set forth in Section 5.40.130, for which the license was sought, subject to compliance with the development and performance standards and regulations of Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1737 § 2, 2003)  
5.40.310 - Transfer of adult-oriented business license. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter for a licensee to operate an adult-oriented business under the authority of an adult-oriented business license at any place other than the address of the adult-oriented business stated in the application upon which the license was issued. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter for a licensee to transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business license to another person unless and until the transferee first obtains a written amendment to the license from the chief of police in accordance with and subject to the application and fee requirements set forth in this article. 
C.  It is a violation of this chapter for a licensee to transfer an adult-oriented business license when the chief of police has notified the licensee that the license has been suspended or revoked or that such action is pending. 
D.  Any attempt to transfer a license either directly or indirectly in violation of this section is void, and the license shall be deemed revoked. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article IV. - Adult-Oriented Business Employee License 
 
5.40.400 - Adult-oriented business employee license required. 
A.  No person shall engage in or participate in any live performance depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities in an adult-oriented business, without a valid adult-oriented business employee license issued by the chief of police. 
B.  No person shall be employed at an adult-oriented business, except those persons excluded from the license requirements pursuant to Section 5.40.145, without a valid adult-oriented business employee License issued by the chief of police. 
C.  Before any applicant may be issued an adult-oriented business employee license, the applicant shall submit to the chief of police on a form to be provided by the city the following information: 
1.  The applicant's legal name and any other name including stage names or aliases used by the applicant; 
2.  Age, date, and place of birth; 
3.  Height, weight, hair and eye color; 
4.  Present residence address and telephone number; 
5.  Present business address and telephone number; 
6.  Date, issuing state and number of driver's license or other identification card information; 
7.  Social Security Number. The supplying of a Social Security number is optional at the choice of the applicant. A Social Security number does assist in differentiating between like-named persons; and 
8.  Satisfactory written proof that the individual is at least eighteen years of age. 
D.  Attached to the application form shall be the following: 
1.  A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant's face. Any fees for the photograph shall be paid by the applicant. 
2.  A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operated, or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state, or country, has ever had a license permit, or authorization to do business, denied, revoked, or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application; 
3.  A statement whether the applicant has been convicted within the past five years, as of the date of submitting the application, a specified criminal activity as defined in this chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the date, place and jurisdiction of each conviction; and 
4.  A statement whether the applicant is or has ever been licensed or registered as a prostitute, or otherwise authorized by the laws of any other jurisdiction to engage in prostitution, the place of such registration, licensing or legal authorization, and the inclusive dates during which the applicant was so licensed, registered, or authorized. 
E.  Every application for an adult-oriented business employee license, whether for a new license or for a renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application, investigation and license fee as set forth by resolution from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. 1781 § 2, 2006; Ord. 1737 § 3, 2003)  
5.40.405 - Investigation and action on application for adult-oriented business employee license. 
A.  Upon receipt of an application for an adult-oriented business employee license and the required non-refundable application, investigation and licensing fee, the chief of police shall issue a temporary license to the applicant. 
B.  The chief of police shall determine whether the application contains all of the information required by the provisions of this article. If it is determined that the application is not complete, the applicant shall be notified in writing within five business days of the date of receipt of the application that the application is not complete and the reasons therefor. The applicant shall have ten calendar days from the date of the notice to submit additional information to render the application complete. The applicant's failure to submit the additional information within this time period renders the application null and void. Within five business days following receipt of a supplemental or amended application, the chief of police shall again determine whether the application is complete. Evaluation and notification shall occur as provided above until such time as the application is found to be complete. Once the application is found to be complete, the applicant shall be notified within five business days of that fact. If an applicant submits two consecutive incomplete applications, the applicant shall be notified in writing that a new application must be filed with the chief of police as set forth herein. 
C.  Within fifteen business days after the issuance of the temporary license, the chief of police shall grant or deny the application and so notify the applicant as follows: 
1.  If the application is approved, the chief of police shall write or stamp "Granted" on the application and date and sign such notation. The chief of police shall attach to the application an adult-oriented business employee license. 
2.  If the application is denied, the chief of police shall write or stamp "Denied" on the application and date and sign such notation. The chief of police shall attach to the application a statement of the reasons for denial. 
3.  The documents specified in subsections (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section shall be placed in the United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address specified in the application. All notices given hereunder shall be deemed given upon the date they are deposited in the United States mail or the date upon which personal service is provided. 
D.  The chief of police shall grant the application unless it is determined by a preponderance of the evidence that any of the following findings is true: 
1.  The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance of the license or has knowingly answered a question or request for information falsely on the application form; 
2.  The applicant is under the age of eighteen years; and 
3.  The adult-oriented business employee license is to be used for employment in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited by a particular provision of this chapter. 
E.  The license, if granted shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by the licensee filing with the chief of police a written request for renewal on a form provided by the city, accompanied by the required fee and a copy of the license to be renewed. The request for renewal shall be made at least thirty days before the expiration date of the license. When a renewal request is made less than thirty days before the expiration date, the expiration shall not be stayed. The chief of police shall act upon applications for license renewal as provided herein for applications of initial licenses. 
F.  The license, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person to whom it is granted and the expiration date. The chief of police shall provide each person issued an adult-oriented business employee license with an identification card containing the name, address, photograph and license number of the licensee. 
G.  Both the license and the identification card shall be available for inspection at all times during which the licensee is on the premises of the adult-oriented business. 
H.  If the chief of police neither grants nor denies a completed application for which the filing fees have been paid, within fifteen business days after its receipt, the applicant may begin the employment for which the license is sought, subject to strict compliance with the development and performance standards and regulations of Article VI of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1737 § 4, 2003)  
5.40.410 - Transfer of adult-oriented business employee license. 
A licensee shall not transfer ownership or control of an adult-oriented business employee license. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article V. - Denial, Suspension, and Revocation of License 
 
5.40.500 - Denial and license renewal. 
When the chief of police denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license for one year from the date of the denial. If, subsequent to denial, the chief of police finds that the basis for denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the denial became final. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.505 - Suspension of license. 
The chief of police shall suspend a license for a period not to exceed thirty days if he or she determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has: 
A.  Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter; or 
B.  Refused to allow an inspection of the adult-oriented business premises as authorized by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.510 - Revocation of license. 
A.  The chief of police shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension in Section 5.40.505 occurs and the license has been suspended within the preceding twelve months. 
B.  The chief of police shall revoke a license for any of the following causes arising from the acts or omissions of the licensee, or an employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business: 
1.  A licensee knowingly gives false, misleading, or fraudulent information in the material submitted during the application process, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city; 
2.  A licensee, employee, agent, partner, director, stockholder, or manager of an adult-oriented business has knowingly allowed or permitted, and has failed to make reasonable effort to prevent the occurrence of, any of the following acts on the premises of the adult-oriented business, or in the case of an adult-oriented business performer, the performer has engaged in one of the activities described below while on the premises of an adult-oriented business: 
a.  Any act of unlawful sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, or masturbation, with the exception of adult motels unless the licensee or employee of the adult motel knowingly allowed the act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation or sexual contact to occur in a public place or within public view, 
b.  Use of the adult-oriented business as a place where unlawful solicitations for sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation or masturbation openly occur, 
c.  The occurrence of specified criminal activities, including acts of lewdness, assignation, or prostitution, or acts relating to obscene matter or distribution of harmful matter to minors; 
3.  A licensee knowingly operated, performed or was employed at the adult-oriented business during a period of time when the licensee's license was suspended. 
C.  When the chief of police revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one year, and the licensee shall not be issued an adult-oriented business license for one year from the date the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the chief of police finds that the basis for the revocation has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety days have elapsed since the date the revocation became effective. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.515 - Suspension or revocation hearing. 
On determining that grounds for license revocation or suspension exist, the chief of police shall furnish written notice of the proposed suspension or revocation to the licensee. Such notice shall set forth the time and place of a hearing to be conducted by a hearing officer appointed pursuant to Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 2.34, and the grounds upon which the hearing is based, the pertinent code sections at issue, and a brief summary of the facts in support of the suspension or revocation. The notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the last known address of the licensee, or shall be delivered to the licensee personally, at least ten working days prior to the hearing date. At the hearing, all parties shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary, and tangible evidence on the issues; may be represented by counsel; and shall have the right to confront and cross-examine witnesses. Any relevant evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious matters may be admitted. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or witnesses. 
Notice of the hearing officer's decision shall be mailed to the applicant or licensee no later than seven days after the hearing. If the hearing officer finds and determines that there are grounds for disciplinary action, the chief of police shall do either of the following: 
A.  Suspend the license for a specified period of time not to exceed three months for the first offense; 
B.  Revoke the license for the second offense. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.520 - Appeal. 
All decisions of the chief of police to issue, renew, deny, suspend or revoke a licensee are final within thirty calendar days. After any denial, or a suspension or revocation, the applicant or licensee may seek prompt judicial review of such decision pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8 in any court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law. Notwithstanding the applicant's or licensee's right to initiate judicial review, the city shall, upon the written request of an aggrieved applicant or licensee, within three business days of its receipt of the request, file an action with a court of competent jurisdiction seeking declaratory and injunctive relief, including temporary and preliminary relief, as to the propriety of the denial, revocation, or suspension. 
If the city denies an initial or renewal application and the aggrieved applicant commences a legal action to determine the validity of the denial or makes a written request in the manner set forth herein that the city commence such actions, then the city shall issue a temporary license. This temporary license shall remain in effect only until the court in which the action is pending renders a judicial decision on application for a temporary restraining order, a motion for preliminary injunction, etc., as to the propriety of the denial. 
If, upon request, the city files such action seeking judicial review or the aggrieved applicant or licensee files the action, the city's revocation or suspension of the license will be stayed pending a judicial decision on the propriety of the denial based upon an application for temporary restraining order, a motion for preliminary injunction or other form of judicial review, whichever is earliest. 
Any temporary license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not grant any vested rights on the holder of the temporary license. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.525 - Confidentiality. 
The city deems confidential license applications required by Articles III and IV above and all information contained therein. Absent an order from a court of competent jurisdiction, the city shall not disclose for public view the applications or the information contained therein. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article VI. - Development and Performance Standards and Regulations 
 
5.40.600 - Prohibition against minors in an adult-oriented business. 
It is unlawful for any licensee, operator, or other person in charge of any adult-oriented business to permit to enter, or remain within the adult-oriented business, any person who is not at least eighteen years of age or to provide service for which this chapter requires a license, to any person who is not at least eighteen years of age. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.605 - Concealing specified sexual activities and specified anatomical areas from public view. 
A.  No adult-oriented business shall be operated in any manner that permits observation of any material or activities depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any display, decoration, sign, show window, or other opening. No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped open or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times. 
B.  The exterior appearance of buildings housing adult-oriented businesses shall not be inconsistent with the external appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to cause blight, deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair property values in the neighborhood where such business is located. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.610 - Posting notices required to minors. 
No person under the age of eighteen years shall be permitted within the adult-oriented business at any time. The building entrance to an adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that persons under eighteen years of age are precluded from entering the premises. Such notice shall be constructed and posted to the satisfaction of the community development director or his or her designee. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.615 - Indoor areas open to view by management. 
All indoor areas of the adult-oriented business where patrons or members of the public are permitted, excluding rest rooms, shall be open to view by management at all times. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.620 - Security guards. 
Adult-oriented businesses shall employ security guards in order to maintain the public peace and safety, based on the following standards: 
A.  Adult-oriented businesses featuring live entertainment shall employ at least one security guard at all times while business is open. If the occupancy limit of the adult-oriented business is greater than thirty-five persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. 
B.  Security guards shall be charged with preventing violations of law and enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter. Security guards shall be uniformed in such manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable state law. No security guard required pursuant to this section shall act as a door person, ticket seller, ticket taker, admittance person, entertainer or performer, or sole occupant of the manager's station while acting as a security guard. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.625 - Register and license number of employees. 
Every licensee of an adult-oriented business that provides live entertainment depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities must maintain a register of all past and current persons so performing at the adult-oriented business and their license numbers. Such register shall be available for inspection during regular business hours by any police officer of the city. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.630 - Inspection. 
A.  An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the police department, health department, fire department, planning department, or other city departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time the adult-oriented business is occupied or open for business. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person who operates an adult-oriented business or that person's agent or employee to refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the adult-oriented business at any time it is open for business. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.635 - Restroom facilities. 
The adult-oriented business shall provide and maintain separate restroom facilities for male patrons and employees, and female patrons and employees. Male patrons and employees shall be prohibited from using the restroom(s) for females, except to carry out duties of repair, maintenance and cleaning of the restroom facilities. The restrooms shall be free from any adult material. Restroom shall not contain television monitors or other motion picture or video projection, recording, or reproduction equipment. The foregoing provisions of this section shall not apply to an adult-oriented business which deals exclusively with the sale or rental of adult material which is not used or consumed on the premises, such as an adult bookstore or adult video store, and which does not provide restroom facilities to its patrons or the general public. 
The foregoing requirements of this article shall be deemed conditions of adult-oriented business license approvals and failure to comply with every such requirement shall be grounds for revocation of the license. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.640 - Additional regulations for adult arcade. 
Any adult-oriented business, which is also an adult arcade, shall comply with the following provisions: 
A.  The interior of the adult-oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager station of every area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. If the adult-oriented business has two or more manager stations designated, then the interior of the adult-oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from at least one of the manager stations of each area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access. 
B.  It shall be the duty to the licensee to ensure that the view area required by subsection A of this section is at times unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or other materials while the adult-oriented business is open to patrons. 
C.  No viewing room or booth may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
D.  The walls or partitions between viewing rooms or booths shall be maintained in good repair at all times, with no holes between any two such rooms such as would allow viewing from one booth into another or such as to allow physical contact of any kind between the occupants of any two such booths or rooms. 
E.  Customers, patrons, or visitors shall not be allowed to stand idly by in the vicinity of any such video booths, or to remain in the common area of such adult-oriented businesses, other than the restrooms, unless actively engaged in shopping for or reviewing the products available or on display for purchaser viewing. Signs prohibiting loitering shall be posted in prominent places in and near the video booths. 
F.  The floors, seats, walls, and other interior portions of all video booths shall be maintained clean and free from waste and bodily secretions. Presence of human excrement, urine, semen, or saliva in any such booths shall be evidence of improper maintenance and inadequate sanitary controls. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.645 - Additional regulations relating to live entertainment not conducted in viewing booth. 
The following additional requirements shall pertain to adult-oriented businesses providing live entertainment not conducted in viewing booths depicting specified anatomical areas or involving specified sexual activities, except for business regulated by the California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. 
A.  No person shall perform live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business except upon a stage at least twenty-four inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest area occupied by patrons. Fixed rail(s) at least thirty inches in height shall be maintained establishing the separations between performers and patrons required by this section. 
"Performer" means any person who is an employee or independent contractor of the adult-oriented business, or any person who, with or without compensation or other form of consideration, performs live entertainment for patrons of an adult-oriented business. 
B.  The adult-oriented business shall provide separate dressing room facilities for performers, which are exclusively dedicated to the performers' use. 
C.  The adult-oriented business shall provide an entrance/exit for performers which is separate from the entrance/exit used by patrons. 
D.  The adult-oriented business shall provide access for performers between the stage and the dressing rooms which is completely separated from the patrons. If such access is not physically feasible, the adult-oriented business shall provide a minimum three-foot wide walk aisle for performers between the dressing room area and the stage, with a railing, fence or other barrier separating the patrons and the performers which is capable of preventing any physical contact between patrons and performers. 
E.  No performers, either before, during, or after performances, shall have physical contact with any patron and no patron shall have physical contact with any performer either before, during, or after performances by such performer. This subsection shall only apply to physical contact anywhere on or within the premises of the adult-oriented business, including off-street parking areas. 
F.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any performer and no performer shall solicit any pay or accept gratuity from any patron. 
G.  No owner or other person with managerial control over an adult-oriented business shall permit any person on the premises of the adult-oriented business to engage in a live showing of the human male or female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage, and/or the female breast with less than a fully opaque coverage over any part of the nipple or areola and/or covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state. This subsection may not be complied with by applying an opaque covering simulating the appearance of the specified anatomical part required to be covered. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.650 - Additional regulations for adult motels. 
A.  Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment has been rented and vacated two or more times in a period of time that is less than ten hours creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult motel. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter when, as a person in control of a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment that does not have an adult-oriented business license, the person rents or subrents a sleeping room to a person and, within ten hours from the time the room is rented, rents or subrents the same sleeping room again. 
C.  For purposes of A and B of this section, the terms "rent" or "subrent" mean the act of permitting a room to be occupied for any form of consideration. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.655 - Additional regulations relating to the exhibition of sexually explicit films, videos or live entertainment in viewing rooms. 
A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette, live entertainment or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan specifying the location of one or more manager's stations and the location of all overhead lighting fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed thirty-two square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the place at which the license will be conspicuously posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas of the interior of premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches. The chief of police may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises has not been altered since it was first prepared. 
B.  No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station may be made without the prior written approval of the chief of police. 
C.  It is the duty of the licensee of the adult-oriented business to ensure that at least one licensed employee is on duty and situated in each manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the adult-oriented business. 
D.  The interior of the adult-oriented business shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from the manager's station of every area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms may not contain video viewing equipment. If the adult-oriented business has two or more designated manager's stations, then the interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the adult-oriented business to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the manager's stations. The view required by this section must be by direct line of sight from the manager's station. 
E.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in this section remains unobstructed at all times by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials. 
F.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that no patron is permitted to access to any area of the adult-oriented business which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted pursuant to subsection A of this section. 
G.  No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any time. 
H.  The adult-oriented business shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than five footcandles as measured at the floor level. 
I.  It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination required by this section is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. 
J.  No openings of any kind shall exist between viewing rooms or booths. 
K.  No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between viewing booths or rooms. 
L.  The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls between the viewing booths to determine if any openings or holes exist. 
M.  The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting. 
N.  The licensee shall cause all wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used within forty-eight inches of the floor. 
O.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person having a duty under this section to knowingly fail to fulfill that duty. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.660 - Additional regulations for nude model studios. 
A.  A nude model studio shall not employ any person under the age of eighteen years. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person under the age of eighteen years to appear semi-nude or in a state of nudity in or on the premises of a nude model studio. It is a defense to prosecution under this section if the person under eighteen years was in a restroom not open to public view or visible to any other person. 
C.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person to appear in a state of nudity, or knowingly allow another to appear in a state of nudity in an area of a nude model studio premises which can be viewed from the public right-of-way. 
D.  A nude model studio shall not place or permit a bed, sofa, or mattress in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.665 - Additional regulations concerning public nudity. 
A.  It is a violation of this chapter for a person knowingly and intentionally, in an adult-oriented business, to appear in a semi-nude condition unless the person is an employee who, while semi-nude, is upon a stage at least twenty-four inches above the level of the floor which is separated by a distance of at least ten feet from the nearest areas occupied by patrons. 
B.  It is a violation of this chapter for an employee or performer while semi-nude in an adult-oriented business, to solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron or customer or for any patron or customer to pay or give any gratuity to any employee. 
C.  It is a violation of this chapter for an employee or performer, while semi-nude, to touch a patron or the clothing of a patron. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article VII. - Enforcement 
 
5.40.700 - Separate offense for each day. 
Any person that violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any such person commits, continues, permits, or causes a violation thereof and, shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.705 - Public nuisance. 
Any use or condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city pursuant to Chapter 15.30 of the city code. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.710 - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates, causes, or permits another person to violate any provision of this chapter commits an infraction. Any person convicted of an infraction shall be subject to a fine to the maximum amount permitted by state law. Any person twice convicted of an infraction for repeat violations of the same provision within a one year period, may be charged with a misdemeanor upon being issued a citation for the repeated violation of the same provision. Any person convicted of a misdemeanor shall be subject to punishment to the maximum permitted by state law. 
Pursuant to Government Code Section 36900(a), the city attorney may prosecute these violations in the name of the People of the state of California. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.715 - Civil injunction. 
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be and is declared to be contrary to the public interest and shall, at the discretion of city, create a cause of action for injunctive relief. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.720 - Administrative remedies. 
In addition to the civil remedies and criminal penalties set forth above, any person that violates the provisions of this chapter may be subject to administrative remedies, as set forth by city ordinance. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.725 - Revocation of license. 
In addition to the remedies set forth above, violation of the provisions of this chapter constitutes grounds for the revocation of an adult-oriented business license and/or adult-oriented business employee license. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Article VIII. - Miscellaneous Provisions 
 
5.40.800 - Regulations nonexclusive. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating adult-oriented businesses are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any other regulations pertaining to the operation of businesses as adopted by the Lodi city council. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.805 - Time limit for filing application for license. 
All persons who possess a valid business license heretofore issued for the operation of an adult-oriented business and all persons required by this chapter to obtain an adult-oriented employee license, must apply for and obtain such license within ninety days of the effective date of this chapter. Failure to do so and continued operation of an adult-oriented business, or the continued employment of persons by or at adult-oriented businesses after such time without a valid license shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.810 - Hours of operation. 
No adult business as defined herein with the exception of adult newsracks shall remain open between the hours of two a.m. and eight a.m., and all patrons, customers, and visitors shall be excluded therefrom during those hours. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
5.40.815 - Outcall adult-oriented businesses prohibited. 
All operation of adult-oriented businesses involving specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas as defined herein, or the presentation of any live nude, semi-nude or topless entertainment shall be conducted completely on licensed premises otherwise in compliance with this chapter. No out-call adult-related business, services or entertainment involving specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be permitted. 
(Ord. 1696 § 6 (part), 2000)  
Title 6 - ANIMALS  
Chapter 6.04 - IMPOUNDMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1895, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2014, repealed Ch. 6.04 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.04, §§ 6.04.010—6.04.080, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1608 § 1 (part), adopted in 1995. 
 
6.04.010 - Animal shelter. 
A public animal shelter shall be maintained at such place as is provided from time to time by the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.020 - Minimum time of impoundment. 
A.  Licensed Animals. Any animal wearing a valid city license tag issued pursuant to this title shall be provided with food and water and shall not be sold, given away or destroyed until the following: 
1.  The owner has been personally notified and has failed to redeem the animal within four business days, not including the day of impoundment, Sundays and holidays; or 
2.  The owner has given written authorization for release; or 
3.  The owner has failed to claim the animal within five business days, exclusive of Sundays and holidays, of the date a certified letter of notification, return receipt requested was deposited within the U.S. Postal Service by the animal control officer addressed to the owner's last known address, or by the Animal Control Officer posting a Notice of Impoundment at the owner's last known address. 
B.  Unlicensed Animals. All unlicensed animals impounded will be provided with food and water and held for a period of not less than four business days, not including the day of impoundment, Sundays and holidays. All unlicensed animals not redeemed by the owner or person having custody or control of the animal within the holding period may be euthanized or otherwise disposed of. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.030 - Redemption of impounded animals. 
A.  Licensed Animals. The owner or person having custody or control of an animal licensed pursuant to this title that is impounded may redeem said animal upon payment of a redemption fee and any other applicable fees or charges as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Unlicensed Animals. The owner or persons having custody or control of any unlicensed animal, not otherwise prohibited by this title, that is impounded may redeem said animal upon payment of the annual license fee, the redemption fee, any other applicable fees or charges and by obtaining any necessary anti-rabies vaccinations. The annual license fee, redemption fee and other fees or charges shall be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Out-of-Town Animals. The owner or persons having custody of an out-of-town animal taken up and impounded may redeem within four business days, not including the day of impoundment, Sundays or holidays upon payment of a redemption fee and any other applicable fees or charges in such amounts established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
D.  If the owner or person having custody or control of an animal impounded pursuant to this title contests any fee charged pursuant to this chapter, such person may redeem the animal only by paying the applicable fee or fees. After redemption of said animal, the person protesting the fees imposed may appeal the imposition of said fees by letter to the chief of police. The decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.040 - Register. 
The animal control officer shall keep a register, which shall be delivered to his or her successor in office, in which shall be entered, in numerical order, a full description of such animals impounded and disposed, with all natural and artificial marks and brands, with the time when, and the place where found prior to impoundment. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.050 - Advertisement for sale—Procedure—Sale. 
A.  Any animal, other than dogs or cats, whose value in the opinion of the animal control officer, will exceed the expense for which the animal may be liable, may be advertised for sale. The advertisement shall be published for not less than two days in the official newspaper, and shall contain a complete description of the animal to be sold. Advertisement shall give notice that the sale is to be at public auction to be conducted by the animal control officer; shall give the location, time and date of said sale; and shall set forth that the animal will be sold to pay the charges that have, or will have accrued against it, together with advertising costs. The date set for the conduct of the sale shall be not less than two nor more than ten days from the date of the first publication of the advertisement. 
B.  If the animal has not been redeemed prior to the sale, the animal control officer shall sell the animal for cash to the highest bidder, and upon the payment of the purchase money, he shall deliver the animal, together with a bill of sale thereof, to the purchaser. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.060 - Advertisement for sale—Costs if redeemed. 
Any owner redeeming an animal after advertisement for sale has begun shall be required to pay the advertising costs which have accrued in addition to any other applicable fees as fixed by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.070 - Sale or redemption record. 
Whenever any animal other than a dog or cat, has been sold or redeemed, the animal control officer shall enter in the register, under the same number as its description, the date it was sold or redeemed, the name and address of the party buying or redeeming the animal, the total cost and expense incurred, specifying each item, and the sale price or any applicable fees received. This register may be examined and copied, free of charge, during business hours of the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.04.080 - Disposal upon request. 
The animal control officer shall, upon request of any person within the city, receive, remove and/or dispose of any living or dead animal owned by or in the posses sion of such person subject to any fees which may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Chapter 6.08 - PROHIBITED ANIMALS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1903, § 1, adopted May 20, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 6.08, §§ 6.08.010—6.08.050, and enacted a new Chapter 6.08 as set out herein. The former Chapter 6.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1895, adopted August 6, 2014. 
 
6.08.010 - Definitions. 
A.  "Domesticated animals" means those nonferal animals commonly kept as household pets and includes: 
1.  Dogs (canis familiaris); 
2.  Cats (felis catus); 
3.  Reptiles such as lizards or nonpoisonous snakes under six feet in length; and 
4.  Rabbits. 
B.  "Livestock" means those animals commonly kept for commercial purposes, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Horses, mules, burros or jacks; 
2.  Chickens, turkeys, guinea hens, peacocks, ducks, roosters or similar fowl; 
3.  Bulls, cows, hogs, pigs, goats, sheep and llamas. 
C.  "Wild animals" means those feral animals, not commonly kept as household pets, including but not limited to: 
1.  The following members of the class mammalian: 
a.  Order Carnivora, except the domestic dog (canis familiaris) and the domestic cat (felis catus), but including, but not limited to, the family Felidea (such as ocelots, margays and cougars) and family Canidae (such as wolves, wolf hybrids, coyotes and jackals); and 
b.  Order Columbae (such as doves and pigeons) unless registered with a homing pigeon club—California Government Code Section 65852.6; and 
c.  Order Marsupialia (such as kangaroos and opossums); and 
d.  Order Chiroptera (bats); and 
e.  Order Primata (such as monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas); and 
2.  Reptiles that are poisonous or in excess of six feet in length or thirty pounds in weight; and 
3.  Any nondomestic species when kept, maintained or harbored in such numbers or in such a manner as to constitute the likelihood of danger to themselves, to human beings or to the property of human beings. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.08.020 - Livestock prohibited. 
It is unlawful to harbor, keep or have within the city any livestock as defined in Section 6.08.010(B), with the exception of chicken hens. It is unlawful to slaughter livestock within city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.08.025 - Chicken hens permitted. 
The total number of chicken hens allowed shall not exceed five in number on any one residential lot and may be kept purely for home consumption and not for commercial purposes, subject to the provisions of this code. 
A.  Feed for chicken hens shall be contained and enclosed so as not to attract rodents, insects, and other vermin. 
B.  Chicken hens shall be kept in the rear yard of residential units and not permitted in the front yard. 
C.  Chicken hens shall be kept in fenced areas, cages or coops that are sufficiently adequate to prevent the chickens from escaping from the property and to prevent wildlife predators from gaining entry. Chicken hens must be secured at night in a predator-proof enclosure, cage or coop, to protect from dogs, coyotes, raccoons or other predators. 
D.  It is unlawful to slaughter chicken hens within city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.08.030 - Wild animals prohibited. 
It is unlawful to harbor, keep or have within the city any wild animal. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.08.040 - Domesticated animals—Number permitted. 
A.  It is unlawful to harbor, keep or have within a single household within the city more than five domesticated animals in excess of four months of age in any combination thereof, except in a licensed business, where permitted in a particular district as provided by Title 17 of this code. 
B.  It is unlawful to harbor, keep or have within a single household within the city more than one litter of puppies or kittens during any twelve-month period, except in a licensed business, where permitted in a particular district as provided by Title 17 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.08.050 - Determination of age of animal. 
If there is any dispute as to the age of any domesticated animal, in the absence of any affidavit or sworn testimony from a person who has personal knowledge of the date of birth, a determination made by the animal control officer is conclusively presumed to be correct. 
(Ord. No. 1903, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
Chapter 6.12 - DOGS AND CATS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1895, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2014, repealed Ch. 6.12 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.12, §§ 6.12.010—6.12.140, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1608 § 1 (part), adopted in 1995. 
 
6.12.010 - License—Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to harbor, keep or have any dog or cat in excess of four months of age within the city unless the person owning or having custody or control of the dog or cat shall have secured a license to keep the dog or cat, obtained by licensing the dog or cat pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  For the purposes of this chapter, a dog or cat is not licensed until all applicable fees are paid, all required vaccinations are obtained and the license is issued to the owner or person having custody or control of such dog or cat. 
C.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no impounded dog or cat may be adopted until such dog or cat has been licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.020 - License—Fee information—Transferability. 
A.  The license required by Section 6.12.010 of this code shall be obtained in the following manner: 
1.  The owner or person having custody or control of a dog or cat as described in Section 6.12.010 shall pay to the animal shelter a license fee as may be fixed and set by resolution of the city council; 
2.  The owner or person having custody or control of a dog or cat as described in Section 6.12.010 shall furnish to the animal shelter a description of the dog or cat sufficient for identification, which description shall be entered in a record kept by the animal shelter for that purpose; 
3.  The owner or person having custody or control over the dog or cat shall have complied with Section 6.12.060 of this code. 
B.  Once the owner or person having custody of a dog or cat as described in Section 6.12.010 has complied with subsection A of this section, the animal shelter shall then issue to that person a license to keep a dog or cat and an identification tag having a number corresponding with the license number of the dog or cat. The owner or person having custody of the licensed dog or cat shall preserve said license and shall, upon demand of the animal control officer, an assistant animal control officer or a police officer, show such license. 
C.  The license to keep a dog or cat shall not be transferable from one dog or cat to another nor on change of ownership. 
D.  The owner or person having custody or control of a dog or cat shall notify the animal shelter within thirty days of a change in address for the license when a dog or cat has been moved to a different address. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.030 - License—Renewal—Delinquency. 
A.  All dogs and cats in excess of four months of age must be licensed within thirty days of the date such dog or cat came into the custody of a person residing in the city. Failure to so obtain a license shall be a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Dog license issuance is accomplished by paying the applicable license fee and by obtaining any vaccinations required by Section 6.12.060 of this code. Upon tendering said fee and a valid vaccination certificate as required by Section 6.12.060 of this code, the city shall issue the license. Said license shall expire one year following its date of issuance. Said license may be renewed in the same manner as it was issued. 
C.  Cat license issuance is accomplished by paying the applicable license fee. Cat licenses are issued on an annual basis and expire one year following the date of issuance. Said license may be renewed in the same manner as it was issued. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the expiration date of a license obtained pursuant to this chapter may be extended for up to three years, in increments of one year, from its date of issuance. The expiration date extension is accomplished by tendering the license fee for the desired additional years at the time of issuance of the standard license and a valid vaccination certificate as required by Section 6.12.060 of this code. 
E.  Dog and cat licenses must be renewed on or before the date of expiration. Failure to timely renew any dog or cat license shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
F.  The failure to timely renew any license required by this title shall cause any applicable license fees to become delinquent, and a charge in an amount to be fixed by resolution of the city council shall be added to the regular license fee. The regular license fee and all accrued charges must be paid before the license may be issued. This section is intended to supplement rather than supplant any other remedy available either under state law or this code. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.040 - Identification tag—Required—Replacement. 
A.  Every licensed dog and cat shall be maintained by the owner or person having custody or control with a suitable collar or other device to which shall be attached the identification tag issued by the animal shelter. Every dog and cat not licensed or not maintained with such collar or other device and identification tag found upon any streets, alleys, lanes, courts or other public places in the city, or upon private property, whether leashed or unleashed, whether or not it is in any manner under the control of any person may be taken into custody by the animal control officer or a police officer and lodged in the animal shelter and a citation for violation of this chapter may be issued to the owner or person having custody of said dog or cat. 
B.  Lost identification tags may be replaced by surrendering to the animal shelter the license to keep a dog or cat issued at the time the lost identification tag was procured, and by paying to the animal shelter a fee as may be fixed by resolution of the city council. After complying with the provisions of this section, the animal shelter will again license the dog or cat, issue a new license to keep a dog or cat, and new identification tag. The animal shelter shall attach the surrendered license to the city's copy of the new license, to substantiate the fee collected and verify the transaction. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person to use any identification tag on any dog or cat other than that for which it was specifically issued. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.050 - Guide or service dogs. 
Guide or service dogs are those dogs which have been specially trained to lead and aid persons with disabilities recognized within the State of California. Any disabled or impaired person having custody of such a dog may keep and harbor the dog within the city by obtaining a license to keep a dog, and may lawfully take the dog into any food establishment within the city. There will be no fee charged for such dogs upon proof of anti-rabies vaccination. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.060 - Vaccination—Required—Certificate—Exceptions. 
A.  The person owning or having custody or control of a dog or cat over the age of four months shall at such intervals of time as may be prescribed by the State Department of Public Health, procure its vaccination by a licensed veterinarian with the anti-rabies vaccine approved by and in a manner prescribed by the State Department of Public Health. 
B.  No license to keep a dog or cat shall be issued for any dog or cat, which has attained the age of four months or over, unless a valid, official certificate of vaccination with anti-rabies vaccine is presented with the specified license fee. Such certificate of vaccination, signed by a licensed veterinarian, shall indicate the date of vaccination and the type of vaccine used. The certificate shall be accepted as valid if the certificate does not expire within the first six-month period for which the license is to be issued. 
C.  The provisions of Section 6.12.060 (A) and (B) shall not apply when the person owning or having custody or control of the dog or cat presents to the animal shelter a certificate from a licensed veterinarian certifying that the dog or cat cannot be vaccinated as required by this code without causing physical injury or the death of the dog or cat. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.070 - Business of breeding or raising. 
A.  Any person who is engaged in the business of breeding or raising dogs or cats that produce offspring for sale or transfer ("breeder") shall obtain a business tax certificate and pay a tax as set by resolution of the city council, subject to the requirements and exemptions set forth in Title 3 Revenue and Tax of the Lodi Municipal Code. 
B.  Any breeder shall be allowed the whelping of up to two litters for each breeding animal (dog or cat) within any twelve-month period. A litter is the offspring produced at one birth of a dog or cat from the same mother. 
C.  At no time shall the breeder be allowed to maintain more than four breeding animals of any variety (dogs or cats) within any business or household. 
D.  No puppies or kittens may be sold, adopted, bartered, gifted or otherwise transferred, until it has reached the age of at least eight weeks, unless the transfer of a puppy or kitten less than eight weeks old is authorized in writing by a licensed California veterinarian in accordance with State law. 
E.  The breeder selling or otherwise transferring a dog or cat, shall maintain written records for each dog or cat for a period of three years including a bill of sale with the name, address and telephone number of the animal's new owner. 
F.  Breeders are subject to reasonable inspections of the premises to ensure that state health or safety laws and city ordinances relating to the keeping and care of animals are met. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.080 - Removal of collar or tag. 
It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to remove from any dog or cat any collar, harness or other device to which is attached an identification tag for the current year or to remove such tag therefrom. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.090 - Dogs and cats in food establishments. 
No person shall allow, permit or take any dog or cat, whether loose, on leash or in arms, into any restaurant, grocery store, meat market, convenience store, fruit store or food establishment of any kind in the city, except guide or service dogs, as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.100 - Police dog mistreatment. 
No person shall willfully or maliciously torture, torment, beat, kick, strike, mutilate, injure, disable or kill any dog used by the police department or parks and recreation department of the city in the performance of the functions of such departments, or interfere or meddle with any such dog while being used by such departments or any member thereof in the performance of any of the functions or duties of such departments or of such officers or members. A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.110 - Animal noise. 
No person shall keep or permit to remain in any premises within the city any animal which continuously and incessantly produces noise at any time during the day or night to the disturbance of any other person. "Continuous and incessant noise" means producing noise for an aggregate period of ten minutes or more duration during any one-hour period which disturbs the peace of another person, including barking, howling, crying, baying, squealing or making any other noise, provided that at the time of the complaint, no person or persons were trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the private property of the owner or person in custody or control of the animal, or the animal was not being teased or provoked in any manner. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.120 - Animals at large. 
A.  No person owning any dog or other domesticated animal as defined herein or having the care, custody, control or possession of any such animal shall, except as provided in Section 12.12.020(B) of this code, suffer, allow or permit such animal to run, be or remain at large on any public street, road, alley, park, square or other public place, or upon any private property other than the property of the owner or custodian of such animal without the consent of the owner of such property within the corporate limits of the city. Except as provided in subsection C of this section, all animals are "running at large" within the meaning of this section unless tied, restrained by chain, strap or cord not exceeding six feet in length attached to their collars and actually held by some person or tied or restrained in an automobile or other vehicle, or unless staked or fastened or kept securely in an enclosure upon the property of the owner or person in control of said dog. A dog is not "kept securely in an enclosure" within the meaning of this section when said dog has exhibited the ability to escape from that enclosure. 
B.  No person shall permit a female dog or cat during the period when the dog or cat is in heat or breeding condition, to be outside a house, garage, building, closed structure or secure enclosure except for purpose of exercising and while under strict control of the owner. 
C.  No person owning or having the care, custody, control or possession of any cat shall suffer, allow or permit such cat to run at large beyond the boundaries of the property upon or within which such cat is kept. 
D.  When not in an enclosed area, any dog, cat or other domesticated animal must be in the immediate presence, control or supervision of the person owning, or having the care, custody or possession of said animal or be restrained. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.130 - Rabies danger. 
Whenever any cases of rabies exist in the city or in the vicinity of the city, the chief of police is authorized to publish an order requiring every person owning or having possession of any dog or cat to keep it confined upon private premises or else keep it effectively muzzled to prevent biting. When the period of danger from rabies has terminated, in the opinion of the chief of police, he or she shall publish a notice terminating the order. During the period between the published notice and the termination of such order, it is unlawful for any person owning or having possession of any dog or cat to allow it to be so unconfined or unmuzzled, and every unmuzzled dog or cat not so confined during such period shall be taken by the animal control officer and impounded in the animal shelter. The notices referred to in this section shall be published by posting in at least three public places in the city and by one or more publications in a newspaper published and circulated within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.12.140 - Bites. 
In the event that any dog or cat is impounded upon complaint of any person asserting that such dog or cat has bitten some person, the animal control officer may impound and keep such dog or cat safely segregated during a period of at least ten days for observation for rabies, and following such period of observation, if it is found that the dog or cat does not have rabies, and if it is licensed and otherwise eligible to be returned, it shall be returned to the owner upon payment of impound fees and feeding charges. If the dog or cat is found to have rabies, it shall be forthwith destroyed by the animal control officer. In the event of any statute taking precedence over the provisions of this title with respect to the im pounding or regulating of dogs or cats suspected of having rabies or otherwise regulating dogs or animals, then to the extent that such statutes conflict with the provisions of this title, the provisions of this title shall be suspended during such period of conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Chapter 6.14 - KEEPING AND SANITATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1895, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2014, repealed Ch. 6.14 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.14, §§ 6.14.010—6.14.060, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1608 § 1 (part), adopted in 1995. For current provisions pertaining to vicious behavior and abatement, see Ch. 6.15. 
 
6.14.010 - Property damage—Personal injury. 
A.  Every animal which has injured any person, other than a trespasser or the person owning or having the possession thereof, and every animal which has damaged the property of any person other than the person owning or having the possession of such animal, may be taken by the animal control officer and impounded provided the violation took place in the presence of said animal control officer or any regular member of the city police department. 
B.  Before any animal may be picked up and impounded by the animal control officer for a violation of this section which has been committed outside of the presence of the animal control officer or of a regular member of the city police department, the person complaining against such violation shall be required to file a written complaint, setting forth the details with respect to the injury or damage asserted to have been committed and identifying the animal which has committed the injury or damage. In the event that the facts and circumstances of any case warrant, in the opinion of the chief of police, an arrest of the person owning or having possession of the animal, then the person complaining may also be required to sign a complaint to cause the arrest. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.14.020 - Sanitation of premises. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, at any time, to maintain any lot or other premises, or any portion thereof in the city, upon which an animal is kept, in an unsanitary condition. No person shall maintain any such lot or premises, or portion thereof upon which an animal is kept, in such condition as to be infested with flies or insects or to create any noxious or offensive odors. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person owning or having charge, care, control or custody of any animal to allow animal waste or fecal matter produced by said animal to accumulate or remain on the ground or about the premises or property for more than three calendar days without said animal waste or fecal matter being placed in an airtight bag or other container and removed from the property within seven calendar days. 
C.  Notwithstanding the above, any person owning or having charge, care, control or custody of any animal shall at all times prevent urine and/or feces odors of said animal's waste from hindering, hampering, impeding, interfering with, infringing upon, or detracting from another person's enjoyment of their real or personal property. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.14.030 - Removal of animal waste. 
A.  It is unlawful for the owner or any person having custody of any dog, cat or other domesticated animal, referred to as "animal" in this section, to fail to immediately remove and dispose of any feces deposited by the animal on either public property or on private property not under the control of such person. Disposal shall be by placing the feces in a closed or sealed container and depositing the container in a trash receptacle. 
B.  Persons having custody or control of such animals in a public place or private property not under such person's control shall have in their possession a suitable wrapper, bag or container for the purpose of complying with this section's requirements. Failure to have the wrapper, bag or container while with the animal in such designated places shall constitute a violation of this section. 
C.  This section shall not apply to a physically disabled person who has custody or control of a guide or service dog. 
D.  A violation of this section is an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.14.040 - Dead animals. 
The animal control officer shall remove and dispose of all dead dogs, cats and other animals found on any street or other public place. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Chapter 6.15 - VICIOUS/POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOGS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1904, § 1, adopted May 20, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 6.15, §§ 6.15.010—6.15.120, and enacted a new Chapter 6.15 as set out herein. The former Chapter 6.15 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1895, adopted August 6, 2014. 
 
6.15.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used in this chapter are defined as follows: 
A.  "Animal section" means that section of the Lodi Police Department designated by the chief of police as being responsible for animal control and/or services within the city. 
B.  "Enclosure" means a fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children, and which is suitable to confine a potentially dangerous dog or vicious dog. The enclosure shall be securely locked, shall have secure sides and bottom sufficient to prevent the dog from escaping, and shall be of sufficient size to provide the dog with an adequate exercise area. A top may be required for the enclosure if necessary to assure the dog's containment. 
C.  "Impoundment" means the taking into custody of an animal by a police officer or an animal services officer. 
D.  "Muzzle" means a device that is placed over the snout of an animal to keep it from biting. A muzzle is primarily solid with air holes to allow the animal to breathe and drink usually made in leather, wire, plastic, nylon or similar materials. 
E.  "Potentially dangerous dog" means: 
1.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, on two separate occasions within the prior thirty-six-month period, engages in any behavior that requires a defensive action by any person to prevent bodily injury when the person and the dog are off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog; or 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, bites a person causing a less severe injury than that defined in subsection 6.15.010(F) of this section; or 
3.  Any dog when unprovoked on two separate occasions within the prior thirty six-month period, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury while attacking a domestic animal or chicken hen off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
F.  "Severe injury" means any physical injury to a human being that results in muscle tears or disfiguring lacerations or requires multiple sutures or corrective or cosmetic surgery. 
G.  "Unprovoked" means without being intentionally incited to aggressive action. 
H.  "Vicious dog" means: 
1.  Any dog which has been trained to fight or which is owned or maintained for this purpose; or 
2.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, in an aggressive manner, inflicts severe injury on or kills a human being; or 
3.  Any dog previously determined to be and currently listed as a potentially dangerous dog which, after its owner or keeper has been notified of this determination, continues the behavior described in the definition of potentially dangerous dog or is maintained in violation of the requirements of a potentially dangerous dog; or 
4.  Any dog which, when unprovoked, has killed, seriously bitten, inflicted injury, or otherwise caused injury, while attacking a domestic animal or chicken hen off the property of the owner or keeper of the dog. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.020 - Behavior prohibited. 
A.  Vicious Dog. It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing, controlling, harboring or keeping any dog or puppy to cause or permit said animal to exhibit or engage in any prohibited behavior as defined in Section 6.15.010(H). 
B.  Potentially dangerous dog. It is unlawful for any person owning, possessing, controlling, harboring or keeping any dog or puppy to cause or permit said animal to exhibit or engage in any prohibited behavior as defined in Section 6.15.010(E). 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to any dog assisting a peace officer or park ranger engaged in law enforcement duties. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.030 - Abatement hearing procedure for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. 
Purpose and Intent. Within the city there are vicious and potentially dangerous dogs which constitute a public nuisance which should be abated. The provisions of this section provide an administrative procedure by which dogs found to be a nuisance may be abated following a hearing at which oral and documentary evidence is considered. This section is intended to supplement rather than supplant any other remedy available either under state law or this code. 
A.  Vicious Dog Defined. Any dog, except one assisting a peace officer or park ranger engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the behavior as described in Section 6.15.010 or 6.15.020 as set forth herein, is presumed vicious or potentially dangerous. 
B.  Potentially Dangerous Dog Defined. Any dog, except one assisting a peace officer or park ranger engaged in law enforcement duties, which demonstrates any of the behavior as described in Section 6.15.010(E), is presumed to be potentially dangerous. 
C.  Investigation. Any incident reported to the Lodi Police Department concerning a vicious dog or potentially dangerous dog may be investigated by the police chief, or designee. The investigation may consist of the observations and/or reports of officers made at the time of the incident, or follow-up reports. If, based on the investigation, the police chief or designee, concludes that there is probable cause to believe that the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous, he shall so certify in writing within ten days following completion of the investigation to the person owning or controlling the dog. Thereafter a hearing may be held pursuant to subsections D, E and F of this section. 
D.  Confinement of Dog. If the police chief or designee, certifies that there is probable cause to believe that a dog is vicious or potentially dangerous and a risk to public safety, the police chief or designee may direct any animal control officer, police officer or other authorized employee of the city to enter the yard of any private residence or business in order to seize any such dog, whether running at large or not, and confine the dog at an appropriate animal shelter pending the decision of the city manager or designee, following the hearing provided for in subsections D, E and F of this section. The cost of said confinement shall be paid by the person owning or controlling such dog. The dog shall not be released until such costs have been paid in full. 
E.  Hearing—Schedule. A hearing date shall be set not later than fifteen business days from the date of certification. The city manager, or the appointed hearing officer, shall mail or otherwise deliver to the owner or person controlling the dog and other interested persons, which may include but is not necessarily limited to, properties within three hundred feet of the address of the owner or person controlling the dog, at least five business days prior to the date set for hearing, a notice in substantially the following form: 
NOTICE OF HEARING REGARDING VICIOUS DOG [OR POTENTIALLY DANGEROUS DOG] 
TO:     (name)    ; 
   (address)   . 
NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that pursuant to the provisions of Section 6.15.030 of the Lodi Municipal Code, the Police Chief has certified that there is probable cause to believe a dog owned or controlled by you, a   (breed)   , is vicious [or potentially dangerous]. 
FURTHER NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that on _______ the _______ day of _______, 20___, at the hour of _______ o'clock, in the offices of the City Manager, City Hall, 221 West Pine Street, Lodi, California, the report of the Police Chief or designee, will be considered by the City Manager or an appointed hearing officer with such other oral and documentary evidence bearing upon the question of whether your dog is vicious [or potentially dangerous]. You may appear and may present evidence at the hearing. You may also be represented by an attorney. If you fail to appear without giving notice to the City Manager, the matter may proceed in your absence and such absence may be further considered a waiver of your right to present evidence and object to any decision made. 
In the event your dog is found to be vicious [or potentially dangerous], it will be ordered to be controlled, confined, destroyed, restricted, or otherwise abated as a public nuisance and any impoundment cost incurred shall be assessed against you. 
A copy of this notice has been sent to property owners within three hundred feet of your address. 
Dated: ___________ 
   City Manager 
F.  Hearing—Procedure. At the hearing, which may be continued from time to time, both oral and documentary evidence may be taken from any interested person and considered in determining whether the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous. Any owner who fails to appear after notice as provided herein was given, without obtaining a continuance from the city manager or an appointed hearing officer, may be deemed to have waived any right to introduce evidence or object to an order made by the city manager. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing officer other than the city manager, the hearing officer shall submit a report to the city manager summarizing the evidence and making a recommendation as to disposition. 
G.  Hearing—Findings—Public Nuisance. If, based upon the hearing, and the report of the hearing officer, if any, the city manager upholds the findings of the police chief or designee, that the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous, the city manager shall so specify in writing together with the reasons therefore. Any dog found to be vicious or potentially dangerous is deemed a public nuisance and shall be, pursuant to the order of the city manager, humanely destroyed, be removed from the city, or the nuisance otherwise abated by appropriate order of the city manager. The decision of the city manager shall be made within ten business days after the conclusion of the hearing and shall be final. A copy of the decision shall be sent by certified mail or personally served upon the person owning or controlling the dog. 
H.  Cost of Impoundment. If the city manager finds the dog is vicious or potentially dangerous, the costs of impoundment incurred by the city, including any abatement period, shall be paid by the owner or the person controlling the dog and may become a lien against the real property upon which the dog was kept and maintained until said lien is paid. If the order includes the release of a dog found to be vicious or potentially dangerous to the owner or person controlling it, the dog shall not be released until such costs have been paid in full. If such costs have not been paid within thirty calendar days after the date of mailing or delivery of the order, the city manager may dispose of the dog in any manner provided by law, or return the dog and pursue alternative collection procedures. The total amount of the impoundment charges may be entered on the next fiscal year tax roll as a lien against the property upon which the dog was maintained and shall be subject to the same penalties as are provided for other delinquent taxes, liens or assessments of the city, or an action may be brought in the name of the city to recover the costs of impoundment. 
I.  Criminal Sanctions. Any violation of this Chapter 6.15 is a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.040 - Time limit to meet requirements. 
All requirements for owners of a dog determined vicious or potentially dangerous must be satisfied within thirty calendar days of notice of determination. Proof of compliance must be provided to animal services. If all the requirements are not satisfied within thirty calendar days, or the animal owner is unable or unwilling to comply, the dog shall be humanely euthanized either by an animal services officer or by a licensed veterinarian. Proof of euthanasia shall be provided to animal services within two business days. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.050 - Insurance requirements for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. 
The owner or keeper of any dog determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous under this chapter or a court of competent jurisdiction shall present to animal services proof that the owner or keeper has procured liability insurance in the amount of at least one hundred thousand dollars. The liability insurance shall cover any damage or injury which may be caused by the vicious or potentially dangerous dog. The liability insurance coverage shall be evidenced by a certificate issued by the insurer. Liability insurance shall not be cancelled unless the owner or keeper ceases to keep the dog prior to expiration of that license. City to receive notice of the annual renewal and all cancellations of the required liability insurance. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.060 - Unlawful to own, harbor or keep a dog found by another jurisdiction to be vicious or potentially dangerous. 
No dog, which has been determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous following an administrative hearing or court proceeding by another jurisdiction, will be allowed to be kept, owned or harbored in the city. A notice by animal services to remove any dog owned, harbored or maintained in violation of this section may be appealed to the city manager or designee by filing a written statement for the appeal within five business days of the receipt of said notice. Decision of the city manager or designee is final and not subject to an administrative appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.070 - Muzzling of a vicious or potentially dangerous dog. 
In any case where a dog determined to be vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to this chapter is outside an enclosure, except in cases where it is inside the dwelling of its owner or keeper, which dwelling is sufficient to contain the dog, or in custody of a veterinarian, the dog shall be securely and humanely muzzled and restrained with a harness and nylon leash sufficient to restrain the dog, having a minimum tensile strength of three hundred pounds and not exceeding two feet in length, and shall be under the direct charge and control of its owner or keeper. For the purposes of this section, a dog which is humanely muzzled shall be able to drink, breathe and pant freely. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.080 - Civil penalties for violations of provisions regulating vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. 
Any violation of this chapter involving a vicious or potentially dangerous dog shall be punishable as a misdemeanor per Chapter 1.08 of the Lodi Municipal Code. Such fine may be assessed by city manager or designee after hearing conducted or by a court of competent jurisdiction and shall be paid to the city to defray the cost of implementation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.090 - Notice of escape or disposal of vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. 
A.  The owner or keeper of any dog found to be vicious or potentially dangerous shall notify animal services immediately if the dog has attacked another animal, has bitten a human being, has escaped the custody and control of the owner or keeper, or has died. 
If the dog is sold, transferred, or permanently removed from the city where the owner or keeper resides, the owner shall notify the animal control of the changed condition and new location within two business days. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.100 - Sterilization requirement and microchip for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs. 
The owner or keeper of any dog found to be vicious or potentially dangerous pursuant to this chapter shall, at their expense, have a microchip, assigned by animal services, inserted into the dog for identification purposes. The identifying information listed on the microchip shall be noted in the city licensing files for that dog. A dog that has been found to be potentially dangerous or vicious pursuant to this chapter shall be sterilized at the owner's expense. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.110 - Penalties for willful violation of provisions regulating vicious and potentially dangerous dogs. 
It is a misdemeanor for any owner or keeper of a determined vicious or potentially dangerous dog to intentionally fail to comply with Sections 6.15.090 (Notice of escape or disposal of vicious or potentially dangerous dogs), 6.15.050 (Insurance requirements for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs), 6.15.100 (Sterilization requirement and microchip for vicious or potentially dangerous dogs), and 6.15.070 (Muzzling of a vicious or potentially dangerous dog). Conviction for a violation of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars, or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Upon conviction of a misdemeanor under this chapter, the court shall order the vicious or potentially dangerous dog to be seized and humanely destroyed. Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be prohibited from owning or keeping any dog within the city for a minimum of three years. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
6.15.120 - Exemption for police dogs. 
This chapter does not apply to any dog owned by a government agency, when the dog is used in the performance of law enforcement duties. 
(Ord. No. 1904, § 1, 5-20-2015)  
Chapter 6.16 - PET SHOPS[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1895, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2014, repealed Ch. 6.16 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.16, §§ 6.16.010—6.16.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1608 § 1 (part), adopted in 1995. 
 
6.16.010 - Permit required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect, establish or maintain any pet shop without first obtaining a permit from the city's community development director. 
B.  For purposes of this chapter a "pet shop" means a commercial establishment where live animals are sold or kept for sale or hire. 
C.  The permit required by this title is a separate requirement exclusive of any other licenses or permits required by any other provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.16.020 - Exemptions—Animal shelters. 
The provisions of this chapter requiring the payment of an annual license fee shall not apply to an animal shelter maintained and operated by a society for the prevention of cruelty to animals duly incorporated under Title 1, Division 2, part 4 of the California Corporations Code or to the animal shelter. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.16.030 - Permit—Issuance conditions. 
The granting of the permit required by Section 6.16.010 shall be in the discretion of the community development director, who shall take into consideration the type of construction to be employed as it relates to sanitation and the manner in which animals are to be housed, and such zoning regulations as may be in effect or adopted from time to time, provided that: 
A.  No permit shall be granted for a pet shop that is not in compliance with the zoning ordinance or other federal, state or local law; and 
B.  The application for a permit shall show that odor, noise, dust and drainage from the pet shop shall not constitute a nuisance or hazard to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.16.040 - Annual permit fee—Renewal—Delinquency. 
A.  Upon approval of the community development director and subject to the payment of the annual permit fee as set by resolution of the city council, the community development director shall issue to the applicant a permit in such form as he or she may prescribe, and deliver a copy thereof to the applicant. 
B.  All permits issued pursuant to this chapter are issued on a year to year basis and expires on January 31st of the year following the year of issuance. All such permits must be renewed on or before the date of expiration. Permit renewal is accomplished by paying the applicable annual permit fee. Failure to timely renew any permit required under this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
C.  The failure to timely renew any permit required by this chapter shall cause any applicable permit fees to become delinquent, and a charge in an amount fixed by resolution of the city council shall be added to the regular annual permit fee. The regular annual permit fee and all accrued charges must be paid before the permit may be issued. This section is intended to supplement rather than supplant any other remedy available under state law or this code. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Chapter 6.18 - ENFORCEMENT[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1895, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 2014, repealed Ch. 6.18 and enacted a new chapter as set out herein. The former Ch. 6.18, §§ 6.18.010—6.18.030, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1608 § 1 (part), adopted in 1995. 
 
6.18.010 - Powers of animal control officer. 
The animal control officer shall have the powers of enforcement of the provisions of this title and such state laws and local ordinances as relate to the care and treatment of animals and for the prevention of cruelty thereto. For the purpose of discharging these duties, the animal control officer is authorized and directed, when it is lawful to do so, to enter upon any premises for the inspection or examination thereof or for the performance of any other of his or her official duties thereon; to take up and impound any animal or fowl which may be in the city contrary to any provision of this title; to destroy any animal lawfully impounded, which is by reason of age, disease or other cause, unfit for further use, or is dangerous to keep impounded. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.18.020 - Resisting or obstructing animal control officer. 
It is unlawful for any person to resist or obstruct the animal control officer in any way in the performance of his duties under this title. A violation of this section constitutes a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
6.18.030 - Violation—Infraction. 
Except where specifically stated, any violation of this title is an infraction unless the defendant has been convicted of three or more violations of a particular section within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense, and then the violations of this title constitute a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Chapter 6.20 - FEES 
 
6.20.010 - Fees. 
The city council shall establish by resolution, and from time to time may amend, the fees charged by the Lodi Animal Shelter for the administration of Lodi Municipal Code Title 6, Animals. 
(Ord. No. 1895, § 1, 8-6-2014)  
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters:  
Chapter 8.04 - OUTDOOR AND TENT ASSEMBLIES 
Sections: 
 
8.04.010 - Permit—Outdoor or tent assembly. 
It is unlawful for any person to maintain or conduct a place of public assembly under a tent or in an uncovered space in the city, without first having obtained a written permit in the manner prescribed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 25-1)  
8.04.020 - Permit—Outdoor or tent sleeping accommodations. 
It is also unlawful for any person to maintain or conduct premises wherein living or sleeping accommodations in a tent or in an uncovered space are offered for rent or provided as part of the remuneration for services performed, without obtaining a written permit as prescribed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 25-2)  
8.04.030 - Application—Deadline. 
Permits for either of the uses specified in Sections 8.04.010 and 8.04.020 must be obtained from the city manager, or his authorized representative, on written application submitted at least ten days before the meeting is to be held or the premises opened for business. 
(Prior code § 25-3)  
8.04.040 - Application—Contents. 
The application for a permit required by this chapter shall state: 
A.  The name and address of the applicant; 
B.  The purposes for which the premises are to be used; 
C.  The time during which it is proposed to operate, both as to hours and to opening and closing dates; 
D.  The number of persons to be accommodated; 
E.  The accessibility of sanitary facilities and fire hydrants; 
F.  Whether the premises are to be occupied under tent or in the open air; and 
G.  If under tent, accompanied by a certificate of inspection signed by the chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 25-4)  
8.04.050 - Application—Sketch or map. 
Each application for a tent permit shall be accompanied by a sketch or map or drawing delineating the boundaries of the subject premises and showing the relation of the space to be occupied in its relation to existing buildings or structures within fifty feet thereof. 
(Prior code § 25-5)  
8.04.060 - Application—Insurance certificate. 
The application for a tent permit, if for a place of public assembly, shall be accompanied by a certificate that the applicant is adequately protected by public liability insurance within the following minimum limits: 
A.  Injury or death of one person in any one accident, twenty-five thousand dollars; and 
B.  More than one person in any one accident, fifty thousand dollars; and 
C.  Injury or destruction of property, five thousand dollars. 
(Prior code § 25-6)  
8.04.070 - Health district approval. 
If the tent is to be occupied for living or sleeping accommodations, no permit will be issued unless approved for this purpose by the local representative of the San Joaquin Local Health District. 
(Prior code § 25-7)  
8.04.080 - Revocation of permits. 
Any tent permit issued under the provisions of this chapter may be revoked summarily for violation of city ordinances or regulations or of state laws applicable thereto or for loud or raucous noises emanating from the subject premises. Revocation for any other reason shall be on three days' notice delivered by the city manager to the permittee or to the person in charge of the occupied premises. 
(Prior code § 25-8)  
Chapter 8.08 - WATER WELLS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
8.08.010 - Purpose. 
The city council of the city declares that the people of the city have an inalienable right to demand the protection of the groundwaters, and that the city council has the responsibility to protect these waters for the enjoyment, health, safety and welfare of the people. The city council further declares that the people of the city have a primary interest in the location, construction, maintenance and destruction of water wells, cathodic protection wells, test wells and geophysical wells that directly affect the quality and potability of underground waters. 
(Prior code § 26A-1)  
8.08.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
1.  "Abandoned well" means any well whose original purpose and use has been permanently discontinued or which is in such a state of disrepair that it cannot be used for its original purpose. 
2.  "Agricultural well" means any water well used to supply water for irrigation, livestock operation or other agricultural purposes not including any uses of domestic water. 
3.  "Air-conditioning wells" means wells constructed to return to the ground, in a closed system, well water which has been used as a coolant in air-conditioning processes. 
4.  "Board of trustees" means the board of trustees of the San Joaquin local health district. 
5.  "Cathodic protection well" means any artificial excavation in excess of fifty feet deep constructed by any means for the purpose of installing equipment or facilities for the protection electrically of metallic equipment in contact with the ground (commonly referred to as cathodic protection). 
6.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the waters by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. "Contamination" includes any equivalent effect resulting from the disposal of waste, whether or not waters of the city are affected. 
7.  "Destruction of wells" means to restore as nearly as practicable those conditions which existed prior to the construction of the well. 
8.  "Disposal well" means a hole dug, bored or drilled into any known aquifers in which are deposited matters or substances, which, by reason of temperature or content, may be deleterious to groundwater. 
9.  "District health officer" means the health officer of the San Joaquin local health district or his authorized representative. 
10.  "Geophysical well" means a well used for testing or logging strata or to obtain data from the underground. 
11.  "Health district" means the San Joaquin local health district. 
12.  "Individual domestic water well" means any water well used to supply water for domestic needs of an individual residence or duplex. 
13.  "Industrial well" means any water well used to supply industry on an individual basis. 
14.  "Injection or recharge well" means any well constructed to introduce water into the underground as a means of replenishing groundwater basins. 
15.  "Person" means any natural person, individual, firm, partnership, company, corporation, association, joint venture, joint stock company, organization, club, company, business trust, lessee, agent, servant, officer, employee, unincorporated association or representative of same. 
16.  "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects (a) the value of such water for beneficial uses; or (b) facilities which serve such beneficial uses. "Pollution" may include contamination. 
17.  "Public domestic water supply well" means any water well used to supply domestic water to more than one individual parcel of property or any water supply which services any premises which contains a temporary or permanent resort, hotel, apartment house, triplex, motel, institution, labor camp, trailer park, gas station, cafe, school, subdivision or any commercial establishment. 
18.  "Pump contractor" means any person or company licensed by the state contractors license law, as provided in Division 3, Chapter 9 of the State Business and Professions Code, to install, service or repair a pump. 
19.  "Recharge well": see "injection well." 
20.  "Sanitary hazards" means inadequacies, actual or potential, which may permit the entrance of pollutants, contaminants or pathogenic organisms into the water, thereby impairing the water quality or rendering it injurious to public health. 
21.  "Seal, annular" means the cement grout between the conductor casing or bore and the casing. 
22.  "Seal, sanitary" means a grout, mastic or mechanical device used to make a watertight joint between the pump and casing or the concrete base. 
23.  "Seal, surface" means a monolithically poured concrete platform constructed around the top of the well casing on thoroughly compacted earth. 
24.  "Test well": see "geophysical well." 
25.  "Waters of the city" means any water, surface or underground, including saline waters, within the boundaries of the city. 
26.  "Water quality" is a term used to describe the chemical, physical and biological characteristics of water in respect to its suitability for a particular purpose. The same water may be of good quality for one purpose or use and bad or poor for another, depending upon its characteristics and requirements for the particular use. 
27.  "Well contractor" means any person or company licensed by the state contractors license law, as provided in Division 3, Chapter 9, of the State Business and Professions Code. 
28.  "Well pit" means an excavation in which the well head or top of well casing is installed below the ground surface. 
29.  "Well" or "water well" means any artificial excavation constructed by any method for the purpose of extracting or recharging groundwater or testing or logging of stratum to obtain data from the underground. This definition does not include: 
a.  Oil and gas wells or geothermal wells constructed under jurisdiction of the department of conservation of the state except those wells converted to use as water wells; 
b.  Wells used for the purpose of (i) dewatering excavation during construction or (ii) stabilizing hillsides or earth embankments. 
(Prior code § 26A-2)  
8.08.030 - Applicability. 
This chapter shall apply to all territory lying within the existing limits of the city as the same exist as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may be extended in the future. 
(Prior code § 26A-3)  
8.08.040 - Special areas. 
In all areas of the city where poor quality water could infiltrate good quality groundwater due to well construction, special requirements will be set to protect the good quality water. 
(Prior code § 26A-4)  
Article II. - Permits 
 
8.08.050 - Required—Term. 
No person, as principal, servant, agent or employee, shall dig, drill, bore, drive, repair or destroy any well or shall repair, replace, install or seal a pump for use on any well, whether the well is to be used for domestic, irrigation, testing, geophysical or cathodic protection or other purposes, without having a valid unrevoked and unsuspended permit to do so from the district health officer. The permit shall be valid for one year from date of issue. No property owner shall be denied the right to install a well or pump on his property, if work is accomplished in accordance with this chapter. No permit is necessary to replace or repair equipment if the sanitary seal is not broken. A fee may be charged for issuing a permit as determined by the city council after a public hearing. 
(Prior code § 26A-5)  
8.08.060 - Application. 
Every person proposing to dig, drill, bore, drive, repair, deepen or destroy any well shall, before commencing the work, apply to the district health officer for approval of the well site and method of installation or destruction and for a permit to do the work. Such application shall be on forms furnished by the district health officer and contain such information as the district health officer may require. Such application is to be submitted at least forty-eight hours prior to the proposed commencement of work on such permit application as prescribed in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26A-6)  
8.08.070 - Compliance with chapter. 
The applicant applying for a permit for the construction, repair or destruction of the well shall assume the responsibility of complying with all requirements of such permit and this chapter, including such rules and regulations as may be adopted pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 26A-7)  
8.08.080 - Qualified persons. 
Permits shall be granted to any owner or his authorized representative and to those persons having a valid city business license and a license from the State Contractor's License Board as a well or pump contractor. 
(Prior code § 26A-8)  
8.08.090 - Emergency repairs. 
In the event of an emergency, as evidenced by lack of water, repairs may proceed without a permit. Emergency repairs include the construction of a new well or the repair, deepening or replacement of a well or pump. All work done under emergency conditions shall comply with the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter. In all such cases, the owner or contractor must file a statement that this was an emergency repair and the reason for the repair. Application for emergency repairs must be made within forty-eight hours after such repairs are begun, excluding weekends and holidays. 
(Prior code § 26A-9)  
8.08.100 - Special permits. 
The district health officer may grant special permits for limited periods of time when, in his opinion, the application of this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter would be impracticable or unnecessary. In issuing such special permits, the district health officer may prescribe such conditions as in his judgment will be necessary to protect the public health. 
(Prior code § 26A-10)  
Article III. - Requirements 
 
8.08.110 - Driller's report. 
Upon completion of a well, the applicant or the licensed contractor shall file a copy of a well driller's report with the health district. These report forms will be furnished by the district health officer. 
(Prior code § 26A-11)  
8.08.120 - Pits. 
The construction, use or installation of well pits shall not be permitted, except under unusual circumstances as determined by the district health officer. 
(Prior code § 26A-12)  
8.08.130 - Sanitary seal. 
All wells shall have a sanitary seal. 
(Prior code § 26A-13)  
8.08.140 - Concrete platform or slab. 
All wells, except cathodic protection wells, shall have a concrete platform or slab constructed to prevent the entrance of surface water from any source into the well or the underground water source. 
(Prior code § 26A-14)  
8.08.150 - Disinfection. 
After the construction or repair of individual domestic or public domestic water wells and prior to the use of such wells, the wells and all appurtenances thereto shall be adequately disinfected. 
(Prior code § 26A-15)  
8.08.160 - Annular seal. 
Public domestic water supply and individual domestic wells shall have a grout seal in the annular space. 
(Prior code § 26A-16)  
8.08.170 - Orders of health officer. 
The district health officer may order changes in the location of water wells and in the methods, means and manner of constructing water wells in order that they will not constitute a menace to the health of human beings or animals or a detriment to groundwater sources. The orders of the district health officer shall designate the period within which such changes are to be made. 
(Prior code § 26A-17)  
8.08.180 - Inspection. 
The well site, location, material and methods used may be inspected by the district health officer at any time prior to or during construction or destruction of any well. The district health officer shall be informed when the work is completed and thereafter shall make a final inspection. 
(Prior code § 26A-18)  
8.08.190 - Abandonment. 
Upon determination that any well is abandoned as provided in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter, that well must be destroyed in the manner prescribed so that entrance of degraded or contaminated water into usable aquifers or creation of a safety hazard are minimized. 
(Prior code § 26A-19)  
8.08.200 - Destruction. 
The district health officer is authorized, after reasonable efforts to eliminate pollution, contamination or a safety hazard, to enforce the permanent abandonment by destruction of any well that is polluted, contaminated or is so located as to become polluted or contaminated or is a safety hazard. The district health officer is authorized to destroy any such well and to recover the cost of the destruction from the owner of the property on which the well is located. 
(Prior code § 26A-20)  
8.08.210 - Out-of-service wells. 
If the owner intends to cease use of a well for a period of six months or more, he shall inform the district health officer. Such a well shall be protected from any source of contamination while the well is temporarily out of service. The owner shall maintain such a well as required in the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter pertaining to out-of-service wells. 
(Prior code § 26A-21)  
8.08.220 - Health rules and regulations. 
The board of trustees shall adopt and may from time to time amend rules and regulations including, but not limited to, standards for implementation of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall not be in conflict with this chapter or with the laws of the state. The rules and regulations shall be adopted or amended only after the board of trustees has considered the matter at a public hearing at which all interested persons have been afforded the opportunity to urge or oppose adoption of the proposed rules and regulations. 
(Prior code § 26A-22)  
Article IV. - Appeals and Enforcement 
 
8.08.230 - Appeal to board of trustees. 
Any person whose application for a permit or for approval of a proposed action under this chapter has been denied by the district health officer may within thirty days after the date of such denial appeal therefrom in writing to the board of trustees. Such appeal shall be heard by the board of trustees at its next regular meeting thereafter unless the appeal was filed within five days of such meeting, in which event, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting subsequent thereto. The board of trustees shall uphold or reverse the denial of the application of the approval sought and shall make such orders in connection with the matter as may be necessary to protect and preserve the public health. 
(Prior code § 26A-23)  
8.08.240 - Appeal to city council. 
If the appellant is dissatisfied with the decision of the board of trustees acting pursuant to Section 8.08.230, he may, within ten days after that decision, appeal to the city council. The appeal shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk. Thereafter, the council shall set the appeal for hearing. Notice of the hearing shall be given to the applicant not less than five days prior to the hearing. At the hearing, any interested party may present oral or written evidence. Following the hearing, the council shall render a decision on the appeal and may sustain, modify or reverse any action of the board of trustees. 
(Prior code § 26A-24)  
8.08.250 - Enforcement by health officer. 
The district health officer shall enforce all needful orders, rules and regulations necessary or proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter and may perform all other acts necessary or proper to accomplish the purposes of this chapter, except insofar as the same pertains to wells owned and operated for the city. 
(Prior code § 26A-25)  
8.08.260 - State enforcement. 
The State Department of Public Health Bureau of Sanitary Engineering shall enforce all needful orders, rules and regulations insofar as the same pertain to the wells owned and operated by the city. 
(Prior code § 26A-26)  
Chapter 8.12 - SMOKING IN CITY-OWNED FACILITIES 
Sections: 
 
8.12.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "City-owned building or facility" means any and all structures owned or under the control of the city, customarily used for municipal purposes, including places of public assembly. 
B.  "Enclosed space" means any space contained within a roof and walls on all sides, normally used for human habitation or occupation. 
C.  "Sign" means a device utilizing letters at least one inch high, posted in a conspicuous place, advising that smoking is allowed within a room or space in which such sign is posted. 
D.  "Smoke" or "smoking" means the inhaling, exhaling, lighting, burning or carrying of any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, tobacco product or other vegetable material customarily burned for the ingestion of the smoke produced thereby. 
(Ord. 1457 § 1 (part), 1989)  
8.12.020 - Prohibition of smoking in public buildings or facilities. 
It is unlawful for any person to smoke any cigar, cigarette, pipe, tobacco product or similar substance within any enclosed space located in any city-owned building or facility, whether or not such space is open to the public, unless appropriate signs are posted designating such space to be a "smoking permitted" area. 
(Ord. 1457 § 1 (part), 1989)  
8.12.030 - Exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to: 
A.  Any city-owned outdoor facility, intended and utilized primarily for recreational purposes, including parks and stadiums or similar places where members of the public assemble to engage in or witness athletic competitions or entertainment events. However, smoking in such locations or facilities as designated by the city manager may be prohibited by posting of appropriate signs indicating that smoking is not permitted; 
B.  Jail or detention facilities in which arrestees, sentenced or unsentenced prisoners are confined; 
C.  Enclosed spaces in city-owned facilities designated by the city manager, and appropriately signed, allowing smoking. 
(Ord. 1457 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 8.16 - SMOKING POLLUTION CONTROL 
Sections: 
 
8.16.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the smoking pollution control ordinance. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.020 - Findings and purpose. 
A.  The city council finds that: 
1.  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution; and 
2.  Reliable studies have shown that breathing secondhand smoke is a significant health hazard for certain population groups, including elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease; and 
3.  Health hazards induced by breathing secondhand smoke include lung cancer, respiratory infection, decreased exercise tolerance, decreased respiratory function, bronchoconstriction and bronchospasm; and 
4.  Nonsmokers with allergies, respiratory diseases and those who suffer other ill effects of breathing secondhand smoke may experience a loss of job productivity or may be forced to take periodic sick leave because of adverse reactions to same; and 
5.  Numerous studies have shown that a majority of both nonsmokers and smokers desire to have restrictions on smoking in public places and places of employment; 
6.  Smoking is a documented cause of fires; and cigarette and cigar burns and ash stains on merchandise and fixtures cause economic losses to businesses. 
B.  Accordingly, the city council finds and declares that the purposes of this chapter are: 1) to protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in specified public places by regulating smoking in places of employment; and 2) to strike a reasonable balance between the needs of smokers and the need of nonsmokers to breathe smokefree air and to recognize that, where these needs conflict, the need to breathe smokefree air shall have priority. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.030 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
A.  "Bar" means an area which is devoted to the serving of alcoholic beverages and in which the service of food is only incidental to the consumption of such beverages. 
B.  "Business" means any sole proprietorship, partnership, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profitmaking purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered. 
C.  "Dining area" means any enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which meals are served. 
D.  "Employee" means any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity. 
E.  "Employer" means any person, partnership, corporation, or nonprofit entity, including a municipal corporation, who employs the services of one or more persons. 
F.  "Enclosed" means closed in by roof and four walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress. 
G.  "Nonprofit entity" means any corporation, unincorporated association, or other entity created for charitable, educational, political, social, or other similar purposes, the net proceeds from the operations of which are committed to the promotion of the objects or purposes of the organization and not to private financial gain. A public agency is not a "nonprofit entity" within the meaning of this section. 
H.  "Place of employment" means any enclosed area under the control of a public or private employer which employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, and restrooms, conference and class rooms, cafeterias and hallways. Except: 
1.  A private residence is not a place of employment, unless it is used as a child care or a health care facility. 
I.  "Public place" means any enclosed area to which the public is invited or in which the public is permitted, including, but not limited to: banks, educational facilities, health facilities, public transportation facilities, reception areas, restaurants, retail food production and marketing establishments, retail service establishments, retail stores, theaters, and waiting rooms. 
J.  "Restaurant" means any coffee shop, cafeteria, tavern, sandwich stand, soda fountain, private or public school cafeteria, and any other eating establishment, organization, club, boardinghouse, or guesthouse, which gives or offers food for sale to the public, guests, patrons, or employees, except that the term "restaurant" shall not include a cocktail lounge or tavern if said cocktail lounge or tavern is a "bar" as defined in this section. 
K.  "Retail tobacco store" means a retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories. 
L.  "Service line" means any indoor line at which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not such service includes the exchange of money. 
M.  "Smoking" means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind. 
N.  "Sports arena" means sports pavilions, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the public assemble to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition, or witness sports events. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.040 - Prohibition of smoking in public places. 
A.  Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public places within the city, including, but not limited to the following places: 
1.  Elevators and restrooms; 
2.  Buses, taxicabs and other means of public transit under the authority of the city, and in ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of public transit depots; 
3.  Service lines; 
4.  Retail stores, except areas in said stores not open to the public and all areas within retail tobacco stores; 
5.  Retail food marketing establishments, including grocery stores and supermarkets, except those areas not open to the public, which may be otherwise regulated by this chapter; 
6.  All areas available to and customarily used by the general public in all businesses and nonprofit entities patronized by the public, including, but not limited to, business offices, banks, hotels and motels; 
7.  Restaurants; 
8.  Any building not open to the sky which is used primarily as a museum or for exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance, except when smoking is part of any such production; 
9.  Enclosed sports arenas and convention halls; 
10.  Every room, chamber, and place of meeting or public assembly, including school buildings under the control of any board, council, commission, committee, or agencies of the city or any political subdivision of the state during such time as a public meeting is in progress, to the extent such place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city; 
11.  Doctors' offices, dentists' offices, waiting rooms, hallways, wards, and semiprivate rooms of health facilities, including, but not limited to, hospitals, clinics, and physical therapy facilities. In bed space areas of health facilities used for two or more patients, smoking shall be prohibited unless all patients within the room are smokers and request in writing upon the health care facility's admission forms to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted; 
12.  Polling places. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment as a nonsmoking establishment. Further, provided that notwithstanding this chapter, the owner or person who controls such establishment may, but is not required to set aside in any facility described in this section, a separate room with walls and doors reasonably impermeable to tobacco smoke for use as an employee lounge or break room. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.050 - Regulation of smoking in places of employment. 
A.  It shall be the responsibility of employers to provide smokefree areas for nonsmoking employees within existing facilities to the maximum extent possible, but employers are not required to incur any expense to make structural or other physical modifications in providing these areas. 
B.  Within sixty days of the effective date of this chapter, each employer and each place of employment located within the city shall adopt, implement, make known and maintain a written smoking policy, which shall contain at a minimum the following requirements: 
1.  Any employee in a place of employment shall have the right to designate his or her work area as a nonsmoking area and to post the same with an appropriate sign or signs, to be provided by the employer; 
2.  Prohibition of smoking in auditoriums, classrooms, conference and meeting rooms, elevators, hallways, medical facilities, and restrooms; 
3.  Provision and maintenance of separate and contiguous nonsmoking areas of not less than fifty percent of the seating capacity and floor space in cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges or provision and maintenance of separate and equal-sized cafeterias, lunchrooms and employee lounges for smokers and nonsmokers; 
4.  In any dispute arising under this smoking policy, the health concerns of the nonsmoker shall be given precedence. 
C.  The smoking policy shall be communicated to all employees within three weeks of its adoption. 
D.  All employers shall supply a written copy of the smoking policy to any prospective employee. 
E.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, every employer shall have the right to designate any place of employment, or any portion thereof, as a nonsmoking area. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.060 - Where smoking not regulated. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the following areas shall not be subject to the smoking restrictions of this chapter: 
1.  Bars; 
2.  Private residences, except when used as a child care or a health care facility; 
3.  Hotel and motel rooms rented to guests; 
4.  Retail tobacco stores; 
5.  Restaurant, hotel and motel conference or meeting rooms, and public and private assembly rooms while these places are being used for private functions; 
6.  A private enclosed place occupied exclusively by smokers, even though such a place may be visited by nonsmokers. 
B.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, any owner, operator, manager, or other person who controls any establishment described in this section may declare that entire establishment, or any portion thereof, as a nonsmoking establishment. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.070 - Posting of signs. 
A.  "Smoking" or "no smoking" signs, whichever are appropriate, with letters of not less than one inch in height or the international "no smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly, sufficiently and conspicuously posted in every building or other place where smoking is controlled by this chapter, by the owner, operator, manager or other person having control of such building or other place. 
B.  Every theater owner, manager or operator shall conspicuously post signs in the lobby stating that smoking is prohibited within the theater or auditorium, and in the case of motion picture theaters, such information shall be shown upon the screen for at least five seconds prior to the showing of each feature motion picture. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.080 - Enforcement. 
A.  Enforcement shall be implemented by the fire marshal. 
B.  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint hereunder may initiate enforcement with the fire marshal. 
C.  Any owner, manager, operator or employer of any establishment controlled by this chapter shall have the right to inform persons violating this chapter of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, a private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this chapter. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.090 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person who owns, manages, operates or otherwise controls the use of any premises subject to the regulation under this chapter to fail to comply with its provisions. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person to smoke in any area restricted by the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by: 
1.  A fine, not exceeding one hundred dollars, for first violation; 
2.  A fine, not exceeding two hundred dollars, for a second violation of this chapter within one year; 
3.  A fine, not exceeding five hundred dollars, for each additional violation of this chapter within one year. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.100 - Nonretaliation. 
No person or employer shall discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner, retaliate against any employee or applicant for employment because such employee or applicant exercises any rights afforded by this chapter. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.110 - Governmental agency cooperation. 
The city manager shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this chapter. The city manager shall urge federal, state, county and special school district agencies to enforce their existing smoking control regulations and to comply voluntarily with this chapter. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
8.16.120 - Other applicable laws. 
This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. 1488 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 8.18 - NOTICE OF AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS AFFECTING OTHER PROPERTY 
Sections: 
 
8.18.010 - Policy statement. 
It is the policy of the city to protect, preserve and encourage the use of viable agricultural lands for the production of food and other agricultural products. When nonagricultural land uses extend into or encroach upon agricultural areas, it is likely that conflicts will arise between such land uses and the agricultural operations. These conflicts often result in an involuntary curtailment or cessation of agricultural operations, are detrimental to the local economy, and discourage investment in such agricultural operations. The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the occurrence of conflict between agricultural and non-agricultural land uses within the city. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, words and phrases are defined as follows: 
A.  "Agricultural activity" means the cultivation and tillage of the soil, dairying, the production, cultivation, growing and harvesting of any agricultural commodity including timber, viticulture, apiculture, or horticulture, the raising of livestock, fur bearing animals, fish or poultry, and any practices performed by a farmer or on a farm as incident to or in conjunction with such farming operations, including preparation for market, delivery to storage or to market or to carriers for transportation to market. 
B.  "Buyer" means any transferee of real property; 
C.  "Property" means any real property located anywhere within the city limits. 
D.  "Seller" means the owner and/or transferor of title to real property or seller's authorized selling agent as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 10130 et seq., or Health and Safety Code Section 18006. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.030 - Delivery of disclosure statement by transferor. 
A.  The transferor of any real property subject to this chapter shall deliver the disclosure statement required by this chapter to the transferee as follows: 
1.  In the case of sale, as soon as practicable before transfer of a title; 
2.  In the case of a transfer by a real property sales contract, as defined in Section 2985 of the Civil Code, as soon as practicable before execution of the contract. For the purpose of this subdivision, "execution" means the making or acceptance of an offer. 
B.  With respect to any transfer subject to subdivisions A.1 or A.2, the transferor shall indicate compliance with this chapter either on the receipt for deposit, the real property sales contract, or any addendum attached thereto, or on a separate account. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.040 - Disclosure statement. 
The disclosure required by this chapter shall be in essentially the same form as set forth in this section, which shall state: 
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT 
THIS DISCLOSURE STATEMENT CONCERNS THE REAL PROPERTY SITUATED IN THE CITY OF LODI, COUNTY OF SAN JOAQUIN, STATE OF CALIFORNIA, DESCRIBED AS _______. THIS STATEMENT IS A DISCLOSURE OF THE CONDITION OF THE ABOVE DESCRIBED PROPERTY IN COMPLIANCE WITH ORDINANCE NO. 1519 OF THE LODI MUNICIPAL CODE AS OF SEPTEMBER 4, 1991. IT IS NOT A WARRANTY OF ANY KIND BY THE SELLER(S) OR ANY AGENT(S) REPRESENTING ANY PRINCIPAL(S) IN THIS TRANSACTION, AND IS NOT A SUBSTITUTE FOR ANY INSPECTIONS OR WARRANTIES THE PRINCIPAL(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN. 
I 
SELLER'S INFORMATION 
The seller discloses the following information with the knowledge that even though this is not a warranty, prospective buyers may rely on this information in deciding whether and on what terms to purchase the subject property. Seller hereby authorizes any agent(s) representing any principal(s) in this transaction to provide a copy of this statement to any person or entity in connection with any actual or anticipated sale of the property. THE FOLLOWING ARE REPRESENTATIONS MADE BY THE SELLER(S) AS REQUIRED BY THE CITY OF LODI, AND ARE NOT THE REPRESENTATIONS OF THE AGENT(S), IF ANY. THIS INFORMATION IS A DISCLOSURE AND IS NOT INTENDED TO BE PART OF ANY CONTRACT BETWEEN THE BUYER AND SELLER. 
1.  The City of Lodi permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the city limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT THE PROPERTY YOU ARE PURCHASING MAY BE LOCATED CLOSE TO AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND OPERATIONS. YOU MAY BE SUBJECT TO INCONVENIENCE OR DISCOMFORT ARISING FROM THE LAWFUL AND PROPER USE OF CHEMICALS AND AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS AND PESTICIDES AND FROM OTHER AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, CULTIVATION, PLOWING, SPRAYING, IRRIGATION, PRUNING, HARVESTING, BURNING OF AGRICULTURAL WASTE PRODUCTS, PROTECTION OF CROPS AND ANIMALS FROM DEPREDATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES WHICH OCCASIONALLY GENERATE DUST, SMOKE, NOISE, AND ODOR. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in an agriculturally active region. 
2.  _____
_____
_____
_____
_____
Seller certifies that the information herein is true and correct to the best of the seller's knowledge as of the date signed by the seller. 
Seller _____ Date _____ 
Seller _____ Date _____ 
II 
BUYER(S) AND SELLER(S) MAY WISH TO OBTAIN PROFESSIONAL ADVICE AND/OR INSPECTIONS OF THE PROPERTY AND TO PROVIDE FOR APPROPRIATE PROVISIONS IN A CONTRACT BETWEEN BUYER AND SELLER(S) WITH RESPECT TO ANY ADVICE / INSPECTIONS/DEFECTS. 
I/WE ACKNOWLEDGE RECEIPT OF A COPY OF THIS STATEMENT. 
Seller _____ Date _____ 
Buyer _____ Date _____ 
Seller _____ Date _____ 
Buyer _____ Date _____ 
Agent (Broker Obtaining the offer) 
_____ By _____ Date _____ 
(Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature) 
Agent (Broker Obtaining the Offer) 
_____ By _____ Date _____ 
(Associate Licensee or Broker-Signature) 
A REAL ESTATE BROKER IS QUALIFIED TO ADVISE ON REAL ESTATE. IF YOU DESIRE LEGAL ADVICE, CONSULT YOUR ATTORNEY. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.050 - Disclosure statement—Building permits. 
Prior to issuance of a city building permit for construction of a residential building, the owner of the property upon which the building is to be constructed shall sign, date and file with the city building department the disclosure statement set forth below: 
DISCLOSURE STATEMENT— 
BUILDING PERMIT 
The City of Lodi permits operation of properly conducted agricultural operations within the city limits, including those that utilize chemical fertilizers and pesticides. YOU ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED THAT THE PROPERTY FOR WHICH A BUILDING PERMIT IS BEING SOUGHT MAY BE LOCATED CLOSE TO AGRICULTURAL LANDS AND OPERATIONS. YOU MAY BE SUBJECT TO INCONVENIENCE OR DISCOMFORT ARISING FROM THE LAWFUL AND PROPER USE OF AGRICULTURAL CHEMICALS AND PESTICIDES AND FROM OTHER AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES, INCLUDING WITHOUT LIMITATION, CULTIVATION, PLOWING, SPRAYING, IRRIGATION, PRUNING, HARVESTING, BURNING OF AGRICULTURAL WASTE PRODUCTS, PROTECTION OF CROPS AND ANIMALS FROM DEPREDATION, AND OTHER ACTIVITIES WHICH OCCASIONALLY GENERATE DUST, SMOKE, NOISE, AND ODOR. Consequently, depending on the location of your property, it may be necessary that you be prepared to accept such inconveniences or discomfort as a normal and necessary aspect of living in an agriculturally active region. 
I declare that I have read and understand the foregoing disclosure. 
Dated: ___________ 
(sign)___________ 
Print Name: ___________ 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.060 - Refusal to sign disclosure statement. 
If a buyer refuses to sign the disclosure statement set forth in Sections 8.18.040 and/or 8.18.050 of this chapter, the transferor may comply with the requirements of this chapter by delivering the statement to the buyer as provided in Section 8.18.080 and affixing and signing the following declaration to the statement: 
I (insert name) have delivered a copy of the foregoing disclosure statement as required by law to (insert buyer's name) who has refused to sign. 
I declare the foregoing to be true under penalty of perjury. 
Dated: ___________ 
(sign)___________ 
Print Name: ___________ 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.070 - No limitation on other disclosure obligations. 
The specification of items of disclosure in this chapter shall not limit or abridge any obligation for disclosure created by any other provision of law which may exist in order to avoid fraud, misrepresentation, or deceit in the sale. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.080 - Delivery of disclosure statement. 
Delivery of the disclosure statement required by Sections 8.18.040 and/or 8.18.050 of this chapter shall be by personal delivery or certified mail return receipt requested to the buyer. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.090 - Presumption. 
Compliance with the provisions of this part shall create a presumption that specified agricultural activities are not a nuisance, as provided in Civil Code Section 3482.5. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
8.18.100 - Penalty for violation. 
Noncompliance with any provision of this chapter shall not affect title to real property, nor prevent the recording of any document. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1519 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 8.20 - HAZARDOUS MATERIAL AND SUBSTANCES—RECOVERY OF COSTS 
Sections: 
 
8.20.010 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as follows: 
"Costs" means those necessary and reasonable costs incurred by the city in connection with investigation, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating discharges of hazardous material and substances, including, but not limited to, the following: actual labor costs of city personnel or its authorized agents, cost of equipment operation and rental, cost of expendable items including, but not limited to, firefighting foam, chemical extinguishing agents, absorbent material, sand, recovery drums, goggles and protective clothing (both structural and chemical—protective, disposable or standard use). 
"Discharge" means any intentional or unintentional action or omission resulting in the releasing, spilling, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying or dumping of a hazardous substance upon public or private property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
"Hazardous substances" means any substances or materials in a quantity or form, which, in the determination of the fire chief or his authorized designee, poses an unreasonable and imminent risk to the life, health, safety or welfare of persons or property within the city and shall include, but not be limited to those hazardous substances listed in Health and Safety Code Section 25316, State of California; Labor Code 6382, State of California; N.F.P.A. Guide on Hazardous Materials; EPA and DOTSC list of extremely hazardous substances. 
"Persons" means one or more individuals, partnerships, corporations, trusts, joint ventures, associations or any other entities or any combination thereof. 
"Responsible persons" or "responsible parties" means those persons described in 42 USC Section 9607(A). 
(Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 1995)  
8.20.020 - Clean-up and abatement. 
A.  The fire department is authorized to take such steps as are necessary to clean up, remove or abate the effects of any hazardous substances discharged upon or into public or private property (including streets and appurtenances) or facilities located within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  Any person or persons responsible for allowing an unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances that requires emergency action by the fire department or its authorized agents in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare shall be jointly and severally liable to the city for the costs incurred by the city in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge. 
C.  When responding to the emergency caused by the unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances, the fire department shall keep a detailed record of the cost attributable thereto. 
D.  The intrusion into a river, lake, canal, pond or other waterway by a surface or rail transportation vehicle shall constitute a discharge of materials so described in subsection B of this section due to the release of hydrocarbon materials such as fuel and oils and the potential for hazardous cargo. To reduce environmental damage, the fire department may authorize underwater diving operations to assist in said vehicle removal. 
E.  The fire department may activate the county joint hazardous materials response team to assist in scene mitigation on their behalf for emergencies that require their response. 
(Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 1995)  
8.20.030 - Cost recovery—Penalties—Other remedies. 
A.  Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances shall reimburse the city for the full amount of all costs, as defined herein, associated with the investigation, mitigation, minimizing, removing and abating any such discharge within a period of thirty days after receipt of an itemized bill for such costs from the city. Reasonable administrative fees are inclusive. 
B.  Any person or persons responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized discharge of hazardous substances and who fails to reimburse the city within the time set forth in subsection A of this section, shall be subject to additional penalties or lien for costs and damages upon the real property owned by the responsible party which is subject to, or affected by the removal and remedial action. This lien shall attach regardless of whether a responsible party is solvent. The city shall not be considered a responsible party for a hazardous substance release site because a claim and lien is imposed pursuant to this section. 
C.  The remedy provided for in this section shall be supplemental to and in addition to all other available remedies at law and equity. 
D.  Funds recovered under this cost recovery ordinance will be charged back to the city department that provided services or materials on the problem. It is the intent of this chapter that pre-stock levels of response equipment inventories be replenished in a prompt manner and specific operational funds be replenished for the expenditures that occur. 
(Ord. 1606 § 1 (part), 1995)  
Chapter 8.22 - NUISANCES—SPECIFIC HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS 
Sections: 
 
8.22.010 - Declaration of a nuisance. 
Significant quantities of hazardous substances have come to be located and further threaten to become located in the soil and groundwater in and emanating from the city; 
The city has commenced, in cooperation with other governmental agencies having concurrent jurisdiction and authority, an investigation into the nature and extent of the impacts on human health, welfare and the local environment resulting from hazardous substance contamination of the soil and groundwater in and emanating from the city; 
The hazardous substance contamination of the soil and groundwater in and emanating from the city causes or threatens to cause significant and unacceptable impacts on the human health, welfare, public resources and environment for present and future generations of the local community; and 
The City Council, the duly elected legislative body of the City of Lodi, has met and duly enacted the following Declaration of Nuisance, pursuant to its authority under the California Constitution, the California Government Code, specifically including but not limited to California Government Code § 38771. 
(Ord. 1647 (part), 1997)  
8.22.020 - Definitions. 
Whenever used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
A.  "Discharge" means the accidental or intentional spilling, leaking, pumping, pouring, emitting, emptying, dumping, depositing, disposing, or placing of hazardous substances, or any constituent thereof, into or on the environment. 
B.  "Domestic source" means emanating or originating from a household or residence, and shall specifically not include hotels, motels, or facilities the principal residential use of which is for industrial or commercial, for-profit purposes. 
C.  "Environment" means any surface water, ground water, soil water, drinking water supply, soil, land surface, or subsurface strata, or ambient air within, under the jurisdiction of, or affected by conditions emanating from the city. 
D.  "Hazardous substances" means the following: 
1.  Tetrachloroethane (PCE), Trichloroe-thene (TCE), 1,1,1-Trichloroethane (1,1,1-TCA), 1,1-Dichloroethene (1,1 DCE), cis 1,2-Dichloroethene (c-1,2 DCE), 1,2-Di-chloroethane (1,2 DCA), 1,1-Dichloroethane (1,1, DCA), Benzene, Toluene, Ethylbenzene, Xylene, Chromic Acid, Hexavalent Chromium, Bromodichloromethane, Carbon Tetrachloride, Chloroethane (Ethyl Chloride), Chloromethane (Methyl Chloride), Dibromochloromethane, 1,4-Dichlorobenzene, Dichlorodifluoromethane, Dichloro-methane, trans-1,2-Dichloroethene, 1,2,3,-Trichloropropane, and Chloroethene (Vinyl Chloride); 
2.  Such other materials as are included within the definitions set forth in: 
a.  42 U.S.C. Section 9601(14) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, as amended by the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986, Pub. L. 99-499, 100 Stat. 1613, and as further amended by the Asset Conservation, Lender Liability, and Deposit Insurance Protection Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601—9675, 
b.  42 U.S.C. Section 6904(5) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as further amended by the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments of 1984, and as further amended by the Asset Conservation, Lender Liability, and Deposit Insurance Protection Act of 1996, Pub. L. 104-208, 110 Stat. 3009, 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901—6992k (hereinafter collectively "RCRA"), 
c.  RCRA Section 9001 (8), 42 U.S.C. Section 6991(8), 
d.  Section 307(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended by the Federal Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1317(a), and its implementing regulations, 
e.  Section 2701(23) of the Federal Oil Pollution Act of 1990, 33 U.S.C. Section 2701(23), 
f.  Section 112(6) of the Federal Clean Air Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 7412(6), 
g.  Section 25299.22 of the California Health and Safety Code; 
3.  Any radioactive material; and 
4.  Any other substance, as determined by the city council, which poses or may pose a threat to the human health, welfare, public resources or the environment within, or under the jurisdiction of, the city. 
E.  "Unpermitted" means other than as expressly authorized by valid permit or similar express authorization issued by a federal, state, county, city or other governmental unit or agency acting within its jurisdiction, which permit or other similar express authorization allows the presence of hazardous substances in the environment where they are located or threaten to become located. 
F.  "Unregulated" means other than as expressly authorized by federal, state, county, city or other duly promulgated and valid statute, ordinance, regulation, rule or other legislative enactment or duly authorized and validly promulgated administrative requirement of a governmental agency acting within its jurisdiction which enactment or administrative requirement expressly allows the presence of hazardous substances in the environment where they are located or threaten to become located. 
(Ord. 1647 (part), 1997)  
8.22.030 - Nuisance. 
A.  The unpermitted or unregulated presence, resulting from other than a domestic source, of a hazardous substance in the environment or in a location where it may threaten to enter into the environment is a public nuisance. 
B.  Any permit, regulation, rule or other governmental authorization to discharge a hazardous substance into or otherwise place a hazardous substance in a pipe, lateral, sewer, manhole, or other conveyance shall neither be nor constitute either a permitted presence or regulated presence within the meaning of Section 8.22.020(E) or (F) of this chapter, unless that regulation, permit, rule or other governmental authorization expressly authorizes, in the valid exercise of jurisdiction by the governmental authority that promulgated or issued the authorization, the discharge of that hazardous substance into the environment where it has become located or threatens to become located, and unless all such discharges or placements of hazardous substances were in strict compliance with all of the terms, conditions and requirements of the regulation, permit, rule or other authority authorizing the discharge or placement of the hazardous substances into the environment. 
(Ord. 1647 (part), 1997)  
Chapter 8.30 - REGULATION OF MEDICINAL AND ADULT-USE CANNABIS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 19147, § 2, adopted Nov. 1, 2017, repealed Ch. 8.30 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 8.30 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 8.30, §§ 8.30.010—8.30.060, pertained to marijuana cultivation and derived from Ord. No. 1898, § 1, adopted Oct. 15, 2014. 
 
8.30.010 - Purpose and intent. 
It is the purpose and intent of this Chapter to prohibit medicinal and adult-use commercial cannabis activities, medicinal and adult-use cannabis deliveries, the outdoor cultivation of either medicinal or adult-use cannabis, and to reasonably regulate the indoor cultivation of medicinal and adult-use of cannabis within the City of Lodi in a manner that protects the health, safety, and welfare of the community. 
The City Council finds that sanctioning activities related to commercial cannabis (marijuana) is inconsistent with federal law under the Controlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. §801 et seq.) which lists marijuana as a Schedule 1 drug and prohibits the possession, sale, and distribution of marijuana . 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.020 - Definitions. 
[The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
"AMUA" refers to the "Control, Regulate and Tax Adult-Use of Marijuana Act" approved by the voters as Proposition 64 on November 8, 2016, and codified in various sections of the Health and Safety Code and the Business and Professions Code. 
"Cannabis" or "marijuana" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(f), as may be amended from time to time, and means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the cannabis plant, its seeds or resin. It does not include industrial hemp, as defined by Health and Safety Code section 11018.5 or the weight of any other ingredient combined with cannabis to prepare topical or oral administrations, food, drink, or other product. 
"Commercial cannabis activity" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(k), as may be amended from time to time, and includes the medicinal or adult-use cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis or cannabis products. Commercial cannabis activity also includes the activities of any business, person or nonprofit licensed by the State of California or other governmental entity under Chapter 3.5 of Division 8 or Division 10 of the Business and Professions Code. 
"Cultivation" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(l), as may be amended from time to time, and includes the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of any cannabis plant(s) or any part(s) thereof for either medicinal or adult use. 
"Delivery" shall have the meaning set forth in Business and Professions Code section 26001(p), as may be amended from time to time, and means the commercial delivery, transfer or transport, or arranging for the delivery, transfer or transport, or the use of any technology platform to arrange for or facilitate the commercial delivery, transfer or transport of medical marijuana, adult-use cannabis, all cannabis edibles, and/or any and all cannabis products to or from any location within the jurisdictional limits of the city of Lodi, and any and all associated business and/or operational activities. 
"Indoors" means within a fully enclosed and secure structure. 
"MAUCRSA" refers to the "Medicinal and Adult-Use Regulation and Safety Act" signed into law on June 27, 2017, and codified in Business and Professions Code section 26000 et seq. 
"Medical marijuana" and "medicinal cannabis" means marijuana authorized in strict compliance with Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.5 et seq. 
"Outdoor" means any location within the city limits that is not a residential structure (as defined below). 
"Person with an identification card" shall have the meaning as set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, and as may be amended from time to time. 
"Primary caregiver" has the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Qualified patient" has the meaning set forth in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, as may be amended from time to time. 
"Residential structure" means a single or multi-family house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling located within a residential zoning district. Residential structure includes a greenhouse on the property of the residential structure but not physically part of the residence, as long as it is fully enclosed, secure, and not visible from any street, sidewalk, or other place freely accessible by the public. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.030 - Establishment and operation of medical marijuana dispensaries and adult-use commercial cannabis sales prohibited. 
Medical marijuana dispensaries and adult-use commercial cannabis retail or wholesale establishments are prohibited in all zoning districts within the city's jurisdictional limits and shall not be established, operated, or permitted in or upon any premises in the city of Lodi. The city shall not issue, approve or grant any permit, license or other entitlement for the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana dispensary or the operation of an adult-use cannabis commercial, wholesale or retail establishment. No person may be the lessor for property where a medical marijuana dispensary or adult-use cannabis commercial, wholesale or retail establishment is located. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.040 - Delivery of medicinal and adult-use cannabis prohibited. 
Delivery of cannabis by any person or entity, including, but not limited to, clinics, collectives, cooperatives and dispensaries, is prohibited in all zoning districts within the city's jurisdictional limits. No permit, license, use permit or variance, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Any delivery that takes place in violation of any provision of this chapter is unlawful, and is hereby declared a public nuisance. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any delivery activity that is otherwise prohibited under California law. As an exception to this provision, a person may deliver or transport medicinal cannabis to a qualified patient or person with an identification card for whom the delivering party is the primary caregiver. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.050 - Commercial cannabis activity prohibited. 
Commercial cannabis activity by any person or entity, including, but not limited to, clinics, collectives, cooperatives, dispensaries, commercial or retail establishments, is prohibited in all zones within the city's jurisdictional limits. No permit, license, use permit or variance, whether conditional or otherwise, shall be issued for the establishment of such activity. Any commercial cannabis activity that takes place in violation of any provision of this chapter is unlawful, and is hereby declared a public nuisance. Nothing in this chapter is intended to, nor shall it be construed to, make legal any commercial cannabis activity that is otherwise prohibited under California law. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.060 - Outdoor cultivation prohibited. 
Outdoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited in all zoning districts in the city of Lodi. No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge, possession, or control of any property within the city limits shall cause or allow such property to be used for the outdoor cultivation of cannabis for any purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.070 - Indoor cultivation. 
A.  Indoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited in all zoning districts of the city, except for residential zones. Cultivation of cannabis is permitted in a residential structure to the extent authorized under the AMUA and MAUCRSA. Indoor cannabis cultivation, including any lighting, plumbing, or electrical components used for cultivation, shall comply with all state and local building and fire codes. The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legally permitted and functioning cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities, and with appropriate ingress and egress as required by this code. Cultivation shall not prevent the primary use of these rooms for the cooking of meals, sleeping, and bathing. 
B.  No person owning, renting, leasing, occupying or having charge, possession, or control of any residential structure within the city shall cause or allow indoor cultivation of cannabis to be visible from any street, sidewalk, or other place freely accessible by the public or to allow the odor of marijuana to permeate beyond the boundaries of the parcel or property where the indoor cultivation is occurring. The indoor cultivation of cannabis is prohibited as a home occupation. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.080 - Public nuisance. 
Any violations of this chapter shall be considered and declared to be a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the city of Lodi pursuant to Civil Code Section 731. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
8.30.090 - Enforcement and civil penalties. 
A.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from instituting any appropriate legal procedures to abate, correct, enjoin or restrain any violation of this section, including civil or criminal proceedings. 
B.  In any civil action for injunctive relief brought pursuant to Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorney's fees and costs to the prevailing party. 
C.  Any person violating this ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to the penalties set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.08. 
D.  Each day a person is in violation of this chapter shall be considered a separate violation. 
E.  The remedies and relief provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city under this code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1947, § 2, 11-1-2017)  
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapters:  
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY 
 
9.04.010 - Alcoholic beverage—Open container in public. 
No person shall drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage in the public right-of-way. Further, no person shall drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage within fifty feet of any public right-of-way while on private property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, his agent or the person in lawful possession thereof. 
A.  Exceptions: 
1.  In the downtown, as delineated by the "downtown development standards and guidelines" as approved by the city council, the sale and consumption of alcohol within the public right-of-way may be allowed in conjunction with an event sponsored or conducted by the downtown Lodi partnership. Said event shall have an alcoholic beverage license issued by the state of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control and written approval of the city manager or his designee. 
2.  Sidewalk seating areas as defined in Chapter 12.04, Encroachments; 
B.  Within fifty feet of any public way while on private property open to public view without the express permission of the owner, his agent or the person in lawful possession thereof. 
C.  Nothing in this section shall prohibit the sale, possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages on a public right-of-way; provided, that all the following conditions are met: 
1.  A valid right-of-way encroachment permit for such premises has been obtained from the public works department, 
2.  The location upon which such alcoholic beverages are to be sold, consumed or possessed is adjacent to and operated as part of a bona fide eating establishment, 
3.  The premises are appropriately licensed by the state of California for such sale of alcoholic beverages, 
4.  The area of the public right-of-way upon which such alcoholic beverages are to be sold, possessed or consumed is completely surrounded by a fence or enclosure at least three feet high and not directly accessible (with the exception of emergency exits or gates from the surrounding public sidewalk or right-of-way). 
(Ord. 1666 § 1, 1998; Ord. 1618 § 1, 1995; prior code § 15-5A)  
9.04.020 - Poolrooms and minors. 
A.  Except as provided in this section, it is unlawful for any person, either as owner, principal clerk, agent, servant or employee of any public billiard room or poolroom or combination billiard room and poolroom conducted, maintained or operated in the city, where one or more billiard, pool or combination billiard and pool tables are kept for hire or public use, to permit, allow or suffer any minor under the age of eighteen years to visit, enter, remain on or frequent any such public billiard room or poolroom or combination billiard room and poolroom. 
B.  Any person desiring to conduct or carry on a public billiard room or poolroom where minors under the age of eighteen years may use such facilities shall first make an application in writing to the chief of police. After investigation should the chief of police find that applicant's billiard room or poolroom is suitable for use and patronage of minors under the age of eighteen years, that the applicant is a proper and suitable person, and that the location and arrangement of the proposed place where such business is to be conducted are satisfactory, a permit may be issued by the chief of police permitting a billiard room or poolroom to be visited, occupied and used by minors under the age of eighteen years, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  No minor under the age of eighteen years may be permitted to frequent any billiard room or poolroom after the hour of ten p.m. on any day following which any public school shall be in session in the city, or after twelve midnight on any other day. School is "in session" from the beginning of the first class in any school to the end of the last class in any school in the city. 
2.  The light at the playing level of the tables in any billiard room or poolroom frequented by minors under the age of eighteen years shall be at least fifty footcandles and the area of play set aside for minors shall be completely open to full public view. 
3.  The billiard room or poolroom frequented by minors under the age of eighteen years, as provided in this section, shall be supervised by an adult person over the age of twenty-one years at all times during which any such minors are present, and such supervisor shall be responsible for the prevention of the violation of any law, state or local, by any occupants of such billiard room or poolroom. 
C.  Should a permit be denied or, if granted, subsequently revoked or suspended by the chief of police, the aggrieved party may appeal to the city council. 
(Prior code 15-12)  
9.04.030 - Public urination or defecation. 
No person shall urinate or defecate in or upon any street, alley, plaza, park, public building, publicly maintained facility, public land, or in any place open to the public or exposed to public view. This does not apply to using a public bathroom. 
(Ord. 1726 § 1, 2002)  
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY  
Article I. - Generally 
 
9.08.010 - Advertising matter distribution—Private property. 
It is unlawful for any person to distribute or throw, or procure anyone to distribute or throw, upon any private yard, lawn, driveway, sidewalk, porch or steps of any residence, or upon or in any part of any structure, or upon any vacant property, or in or upon any motor vehicle or other vehicle in the city, any advertising sample, handbill, dodger, circular, booklet or other notice of commercial advertising; provided, that nothing in this section prohibits the distribution and delivery of any newspaper which is capable of being entered or is entered as second-class matter under the provisions of the United States Post Office regulations of March 3, 1879, and other United States statutes. 
(Prior code § 15-1)  
9.08.015 - Advertising matter distribution—Delivery methods—Declaration of public nuisance. 
A.  The council declares that the throwing, depositing or procuring of another to throw or deposit circulars, handbills, pamphlets, advertisements or other written materials by attaching to such materials a bag or bags of stones or other heavy object or objects is a public nuisance because said stones or other similar objects may cause serious injury to persons and/or property when struck, picked-up or propelled by power lawnmowers, edgers, leaf blowers, string trimmers or other lawn and/or garden care equipment or when thrown from moving vehicles and shall therefore be abated pursuant to procedures set forth herein. These procedures for abatement are not exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances regulation or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
B.  Nuisances Prohibited. It is unlawful and an infraction for any person to throw, deposit or to procure another to throw or deposit a circular, handbill, pamphlet, advertisement or any other written material onto any public or private property when said circular, handbill, pamphlet, advertisement or other written material has attached to it a bag containing stones or other heavy object or objects or otherwise has been rolled, wrapped or packaged with a heavy object or objects enclosed with or affixed onto said circular, handbill, pamphlet, advertisement or other written material. 
(Ord. 1596 § 1, 1994)  
9.08.020 - Advertising matter distribution—Public property. 
Any person who throws or deposits, or causes or procures to be thrown or deposited, any scraps or pieces of paper, dodgers, handbills, advertising or business cards in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or public place in the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. Nothing provided in this section prohibits sticking or placing bills or the attaching of handbills, dodgers or cards to posts or buildings by or with the consent of the owners or persons in charge of the same, or the sweeping or removing of the same into any street, alley, sidewalk or place by any person who did not place or procure the placing of such bills and similar matter in such places. 
(Prior code § 15-2)  
9.08.030 - Vandalism—Buildings and improvements. 
Every person who wilfully or maliciously breaks or destroys any window, window sash, door, blinds or pane of glass of any house or outhouse in the city, or commits any nuisance therein or breaks or destroys or injures any thing therein, or any part of such house, outhouse or any fence or improvement, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 15-4)  
9.08.040 - Vandalism—Public property. 
Any person who cuts, breaks, defaces or injures any grassplot, shrubs, flowers, bench, chair, outhouse, building or fence, or who cuts or mutilates any trees otherwise than as provided by an ordinance of the city, or by written permit and under the supervision of the city engineer, or any fixtures upon any street, public walk or other public place of the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 15-15)  
9.08.050 - Vandalism—Public notices or monuments. 
Any person who destroys, injures or removes any flare, sign, notice or monument erected or placed by any employee of the city is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 15-9)  
9.08.055 - Protection of city trees, shrubs and plants. 
A.  The term "city tree, shrub or other plant" refers to those trees, shrubs and other plants which are located upon city property or within the public right-of-way. 
B.  No person shall damage, cut, carve, transplant, remove or otherwise injure or deface any city tree, shrub or other plant. 
C.  No person shall attach any rope, wire, chain, screw, nail, bicycle lock, advertising poster, or other contrivance to any city tree, shrub or other plant. 
D.  No person shall allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance which is harmful to any city tree, shrub or other plant to come in contact with such city tree, shrub or other plant or the soil adjacent thereto. 
(Ord. 1652 § 1, 1997)  
9.08.060 - Electrical interference—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person knowingly or wantonly to operate or cause to be operated any machine, device, apparatus or instrument of any kind whatever, within the city, the operation of which causes reasonably preventable electrical interference with radio or television reception within the city limits. 
(Prior code § 9-42)  
9.08.070 - Electrical interference—Exceptions. 
Section 9.08.060 shall not be held or construed to embrace or cover the regulation of any transmitting, broadcasting or receiving instrument, apparatus or device used or useful in interstate commerce, or the operation of which instrument, apparatus or device is licensed by any act of Congress of the United States. 
(Prior code § 9-43)  
Article II. - Trespassing and Loitering 
 
9.08.080 - Definitions. 
"Community center" means any building or structure, or portion thereof, operated by or under the jurisdiction of the city of Lodi or city of Lodi parks and recreation department and used for a planned recreation program. 
"Posted property" means any property specified in Section 9.08.090, which is posted in the manner provided in Section 9.08.100. 
"Recreation facility" means any building or structure, or portion thereof, operated by or under the jurisdiction of the city of Lodi or the city of Lodi parks and recreation department and used for recreation purposes. 
"School property" means any building, structure, or property, or portion thereof, operated by or under the jurisdiction of the Lodi Unified School District and used for education or recreation purposes. 
"Sign" means a board, placard, or card not less than seventeen inches by twenty-two inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, which appear the words, "Stopping, Standing, or Parking Vehicles Prohibited by Law. Vehicles Will be Removed at Owner's Expense. LPD Phone (209) 333-6727," as to stopping, standing, or parking, or upon which appear the words, "Trespassing-Loitering Forbidden by Law," and any time limit that may be specified thereon as to trespassing-loitering. 
(Ord. 1790 § 1, 2007)  
9.08.090 - Posting—Where permitted. 
Any property within the city may be posted against stopping, standing or parking vehicles on posted property and/or may be posted against trespassing and loitering in the manner provided in Section 9.08.100, and thereby become posted property subject to the provisions of this article. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following property: 
A.  An established and existing right-of-way for public road purposes; 
B.  Any property which comes within the provisions of Section 554 of the Penal Code. 
(Prior code § 15-21)  
9.08.100 - Posting—Method. 
Property may be posted against trespassing and loitering and/or stopping, standing or parking vehicles on posted property in the following manner: 
A.  If the property does not contain any lineal dimension exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding one hundred feet and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
B.  If the property has lineal dimensions exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding two hundred feet and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
(Prior code § 15-22)  
9.08.110 - Prohibited where posted. 
It is unlawful for any person to enter or remain on any posted property without the written permission of the owners, tenant or the occupant in legal possession or control thereof. 
(Prior code § 15-23)  
9.08.115 - Loitering in certain public places prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to willfully enter, remain, or loiter in or about any community center, recreation facility, or school property operated by or under the jurisdiction of the city of Lodi, the Lodi parks and recreation department, or the Lodi Unified School District that has been posted in accordance with this article, when the property or any section or part thereof has been declared closed, whether temporary or at stated intervals, and whether entirely or merely as to certain uses by an authorized employee or representative of such city, department, or school district, as applicable, except when the person is given permission to do so by an authorized employee or representative of such city, department, or school district, while the person is using the facilities of, or is participating in, a planned program at any such community center, recreation facility, or school property. 
(Ord. 1790 § 2, 2007)  
9.08.120 - Peace officers and public employees exempted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the entry upon posted property in the course of duty of any peace officer or other duly authorized public employee. 
(Prior code § 15-24)  
9.08.130 - Union activities exempted. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to any lawful activity by which the public is informed of the existence of an alleged labor dispute. 
(Prior code § 15-25)  
9.08.140 - Destruction of signs. 
It is unlawful for any person without authority to tear down, deface or destroy any sign posted pursuant to this article. 
(Prior code § 15-26)  
9.08.150 - Vehicles. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing such vehicle at any time within or upon any posted property without written permission of the owner, tenant or the occupant in legal possession or control thereof. Vehicles parked in violation of this requirement may be removed at the vehicle owner's expense. Violations of this requirement are deemed to be an infraction. 
(Ord. 1744 § 1, 2003)  
Chapter 9.10 - LOITERING BY MINORS PROHIBITED DURING CERTAIN HOURS 
 
9.10.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds and declares that the problems associated with minors loitering on city streets and in other public places between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. is an increasing problem, creating a danger to both the public and to the minors by allowing such minors to be in contact with or have the opportunity for participation in street gangs, illegal drugs, and other unlawful activity while not under direct parental supervision. The city council further finds and declares that the problems associated with such juvenile loitering impair the use and enjoyment of public and private property by law abiding citizens, create enforcement problems for police, and generally make the city a less desirable place to live. It is therefore necessary for the city council to protect both the members of the public and the minors who are at risk by regulating certain conduct by minors while in designated public places. It is not the intention of the city council to place restrictions upon minors while in such public places which involve legal and constitutionally protected activities. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.10.020 - Loitering by minors prohibited during certain hours. 
It is unlawful for a minor, as defined herein, to loiter in any public place within the city between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day, subject to the definitions and exceptions contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.10.030 - Responsibility of parents or guardians. 
It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any parent or guardian having the legal care or custody of a minor to knowingly allow or permit such minor to violate the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.10.040 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
"Emergency" means an unforeseen situation involving the health, safety, or welfare of the minor, of the minor's employer, or a member of the minor's immediate family, and which requires the minor to be present in a public place between the hours of eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day. 
"Loiter" means the lingering for the specific purpose of committing a crime or crimes as the opportunity may be discovered. 
"Minor" means a person under the age of eighteen years. 
"Public place" means any street, sidewalk, alley, park, outdoor recreation facility, or other similar publicly-owned property generally open to the public, and shall also include privately-owned property customarily open to the public, including but not limited to restaurants, malls, and parking lots, but shall not include theaters, arcades or similar places of supervised amusement. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.10.050 - Exemptions/exceptions. 
This chapter shall not apply under the following circumstances to minors: 
A.  Emancipated pursuant to the provisions of California Civil Code Section 64 et seq. or similar statutes of another state; 
B.  Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult having legal care or custody of said minor; 
C.  Upon a specific, legitimate errand at the direction of a parent or guardian having the care or custody of a minor, while such minor is actually and directly carrying out such errand; 
D.  Going directly to or coming directly from a place of public amusement, school function, or place of employment, with the knowledge and consent of the minor's parent or guardian; 
E.  Present in a public place because of an emergency, as defined herein, while actually dealing with or responding to such emergency. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
9.10.060 - Circumstances manifesting intent to loiter. 
Circumstances or factors which may create a presumption of violation of this chapter as it applies to determining intent to loiter, include but are not limited to the following: 
A.  The minor's presence in a public place known by police as a location in which illegal drug-related activity occurs or has occurred; 
B.  The minor's presence in a public place known by police as a location in which street gang members customarily congregate; 
C.  The minor's presence in a public place, without a legitimate reason, after such minor has been found in such public place, admonished or advised of the ordinance codified in this chapter by a police officer and given the opportunity to leave such public place(s). The presumption created by this paragraph shall be valid only if the advisement or admonishment occurs during the same eleven p.m. to five a.m. period specified above, as any alleged violation; 
D.  The minor's presence in a public place with or in a group wherein two or more persons are wearing or displaying street gang paraphernalia. For purposes of this chapter, "gang paraphernalia" shall include distinctively-colored, styled or marked clothing, hats, bandannas, emblems, or symbols intended by the wearer to identify that person as a member of or associated with a known street gang; 
E.  The minor's presence in a vehicle which has been observed by police to drive past one specific location in the city more than twice during any single period of time between eleven p.m. and five a.m. of the following day. The presumption created by this paragraph shall be valid only if the observation by police occurs during the same eleven p.m. to five a.m. period specified above as an alleged violation. 
(Ord. 1588 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 9.12 - FIRES, FIREARMS AND FIREWORKS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1874, § 1, adopted April 3, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 9.12, §§ 9.12.010, 9.12.020, and enacted a new Ch. 9.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.12 pertained to fires, firearms and fireworks and derived from Ord. No. 1844, adopted April 20, 2011 
 
9.12.010 - Discharge of weapons and fireworks—Fires. 
A.  Any person who does any of the following without first obtaining a special permit therefore, in writing, from the chief of police, which permit shall designate the time and place of such firing or discharging, is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
1.  Fires or discharges any pistol, gun, rifle, firearm, cannon anvil loaded with powder, bow, airgun or sling, or projects any other dangerous missile within the city. 
B.  Except as provided in Chapter 9.13 of this Code, any person who does any of the following without first obtaining a special permit therefore, in writing, from the fire chief, which permit shall designate the time and place of such firing or discharging, is guilty of a misdemeanor: 
1.  Discharges, or explodes any firecrackers, firerockets, roman candles, chasers, or other fireworks of any nature or kind; or 
2.  Makes any bonfire of any nature or kind, or who makes any bonfire or burns any hay, straw, rubbish, shavings, or other combustible materials within the city limits. 
C.  The provisions of this section do not prohibit any person from shooting destructive animals within or upon his own enclosure, nor prohibit the establishment and maintenance of shooting galleries, in accordance with the ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 4-3-2013; Ord. No. 1943, § 1, 5-23-2017)  
9.12.020 - Firearms at Lodi Lake Park. 
Any person, excepting public officers, possessing, carrying or discharging firearms within the boundaries of the lands of the city commonly known and designated as "Lodi Lake Park" is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1874, § 1, 4-3-2013)  
Chapter 9.13 - SALE OF FIREWORKS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1943, § 2, adopted May 23, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 9.13, §§ 9.13.010—9.13.230, and enacted a new Ch. 9.13 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.13 pertained to similar subject matter. and derived from Ord. No. 1874, § 2, adopted April 3, 2013. 
 
9.13.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, as used in this chapter, are defined as follows: 
A.  "Citee" means any person or responsible person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for violation of this chapter. 
B.  "Citation" means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy a violation. 
C.  "City manager" means the city manager of the city of Lodi and/or designee or designees. 
D.  "Code" means the Lodi Municipal Code. 
E.  "Code enforcement officer" (CEO) means any Lodi firefighter or Lodi Police Officer and those Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services employees designated to have citation powers by the parks, recreation and cultural services director. 
F.  "Dangerous fireworks" mean dangerous fireworks as set forth in California State Fireworks Law (Sections 12505 and 12561 of the California Health and Safety Code and the relevant Sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6), as hereinafter may be amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
G.  "Director" means the city manager and/or designee or designees. 
H.  "Fire chief" means the fire chief of the city of Lodi or other city manager designee or designees. 
I.  "Fireworks task force costs" means those employee salary, overtime and benefit costs, disposal costs, clean-up costs, and operations costs incurred by the Lodi police, fire, and parks and recreation departments to operate a task force to enforce the provisions of this chapter between June 28 and July 7 of each calendar year. Fireworks task force costs shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars in the first year after the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived, adjusted by the Consumer Price Index, San Francisco, All Consumers, annually thereafter. 
J.  "Fireworks wholesaler" means any person who sells fireworks to other wholesalers or retailers for resale; or any person, other than an importer, exporter, or manufacturer, who purchases fireworks from a manufacturer, importer or exporter for resale to a retailer or any other person for resale. 
K.  "Hearing officer" means the person appointed by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings under this chapter. 
L.  "Issuance" or "issued" means any of the following: 
1.  The preparation and service of an administrative fine citation to a citee in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article III (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedures; or 
2.  Mailing of administrative fine citation to the citee by certified mail with return receipt to the address shown on the county's latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls; or 
3.  By personally serving the responsible person by personal delivery of the administrative fine citation or by substituted service. Substituted service may be accomplished as follows: 
a.  By leaving a copy at the recipient's dwelling or usual place of abode, in the presence of a competent member of the household, and thereafter mailing by first class mail, postage pre-paid, a copy to the recipient at the address where the copy was left; or 
b.  In the event the responsible person cannot be served by first class mail, postage pre-paid, or cannot be personally served and has a property manager or rental agency overseeing the premises, substituted service may be made upon the property manager or rental agency or may be affected by posting the property with the administrative fine citation and mailing a copy by first class mail, postage pre-paid, to the responsible person in violation at the address of the property where the violation exists. 
M.  "Lodi City Clerk" or "city clerk" means the Lodi City Clerk and/or designee or designees. 
N.  "Nonprofit organization" means: (1) any nonprofit association, charity, church, corporation, club, or society organized primarily for veteran, patriotic, welfare, civic, benevolent, betterment, youth activities, or charitable purposes and has obtained a nonprofit status with either the California Franchise Tax Board or the Internal Revenue Service; or (2) a group which is an integral part of a recognized nonprofit national organization having such tax exempt status; or (3) an organization affiliated with and officially recognized by an elementary, junior high school, high school, school district, and/or college that serves, in whole or in part, the residents of Lodi. To qualify as a "nonprofit" under in this definition, the entity must have a principal and permanent meeting place within the city limits of the City of Lodi. 
O.  "Person" means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee, and/or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this chapter occurred. 
P.  "Principal and permanent meeting place" means and includes, but is not limited to, a permanent structure, playing field, geographic area, or service population which resides in or is located within the city limits of the city of Lodi. 
Q.  "Residents of the city" or "city residents" means and includes owners of businesses and/or property in the city limits as well as occupants of residential dwellings within the city limits of the city of Lodi. 
R.  "Responsible person" means a person who causes a code violation to occur or allows a violation to exist or continue, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of real property, as shown on the county's latest equalized property taxes assessment rolls, and a lessee of real property has a notice of any violation existing on said property. For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. Any person, irrespective of age, found in violation of any provision of this chapter may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Every parent, guardian, or other person having the legal care, custody, or control of any person under the age of eighteen years, who knows or reasonably should know that a minor is in violation of this chapter, may be issued a citation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, in addition to any citation that may be issued to the offending minor. 
S.  "Safe and Sane Fireworks" (a.k.a. "State-Approved Fireworks") mean Safe and Sane Fireworks as defined in California State Fireworks Law (Sections 12529 and 12562 of the Health and Safety Code and the relevant Sections of Title 19, Code of Regulations, Subchapter 6), as hereinafter may be amended from time to time, which are hereby incorporated by reference. 
T.  "Violation" or "violates" refers to any violation of any provision of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.020 - Sale and discharge—Time limit. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the State Fireworks Law, Sections 12500 through 12728 of the California Health and Safety Code, and any regulations promulgated thereunder, safe and sane fireworks, as defined herein, may be sold within the city limits of the city of Lodi only during the period beginning at 12:00 noon on June 28 and shall not continue after 9:00 p.m. on July 4 of the same year. The sale of fireworks shall be permitted only from 12:00 noon to 9:00 p.m. on June 28; from 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m. daily from June 29 through July 4. No fireworks classified as "Dangerous Fireworks" by Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code may be sold within the city limits of the city of Lodi. 
B.  Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the State Fireworks Law, Sections 12500 through 12728 of the California Health and Safety Code, and any regulations promulgated thereunder, safe and sane fireworks may be discharged within the city limits of the city of Lodi only on July 4, from 9:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m. 
C.  No fireworks classified as "Dangerous Fireworks" by Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code may be discharged within the city limits of the city of Lodi. 
D.  The use or discharge of fireworks within fifty feet of any fireworks sales stand is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.030 - Permit required—Issuance—Limitations. 
A.  Except as provided in this chapter, it is unlawful to offer for sale or sell at retail "Safe and Sane Fireworks" without having first applied for and been issued a permit therefor, in the manner set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Permits for the sale of safe and sane fireworks shall be issued only to nonprofit organizations, and such fireworks shall be sold only at the outdoor sales stands, as more specifically set forth hereinafter. 
C.  Permits shall be issued by lottery. The lottery shall take place at a time, place, and manner determined by the fire chief in accordance with administrative rules and procedures adopted by the fire chief. Each applicant shall receive one lot. 
D.  No more than six such permits shall be issued and be outstanding at any time. 
E.  No nonprofit organization may receive more than one permit for the sale of fireworks during any one calendar year. Only one application per school will be allowed. If an organization is affiliated with a recognized educational institution as defined in Section 9.13.010 of this chapter, but maintains a separate tax-exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service or the California Franchise Tax Board, said nonprofit organization shall be allowed a separate application. 
F.  No nonprofit organization may be awarded a permit for more than two consecutive calendar years. 
G.  Any applicant that has had a fireworks sales permit suspended or revoked within the prior three calendar years shall be eligible for a fireworks sales permit only upon demonstrating to the fire chief's reasonable satisfaction that suitable arrangements have been made to preclude future violations. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.040 - Permit application—Regulations—Limitations. 
A.  All applications for a permit to sell fireworks may be filed with the Lodi Fire Department between the first business day in March and the last business day in March of each year. All applications shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  All permit applications must be properly completed and submitted to the Lodi Fire Department before the close of business on the last business day in March. Permit applications that are incomplete or filed late shall not be processed. 
C.  All permit applications shall be made in writing on a form supplied by the Lodi Fire Department. A completed permit application shall be accompanied by an assurance that, if the applicant is issued a permit, the applicant shall, before receipt of such permit, deliver to the city the following items and/or information: 
1.  Proper identification and signature of the permit applicant; 
2.  The proposed location of the fireworks sales stand; 
3.  A detailed description of the fireworks proposed to be sold; 
4.  The written consent of the owner of record and/or lessor in control of the property upon which the proposed sales stand will be located; 
5.  The fireworks distributor's business name, address, telephone number, and person that is the point of contact; 
6.  A site plan, with dimensions indicating the location of all existing buildings, structures, driveways, flammable materials, and rights of way where the proposed sales stand will be located; 
7.  Proof of a temporary sales tax permit from the State Board of Equalization or proof of application; 
8.  A certificate of insurance evidencing current and valid commercial general liability, property damage, and product liability insurance of not less than two million dollars combined single limit, from a company authorized to transact the business of insurance in the state of California. The insurance company must have an AM Best Rating of not less than A-; 
9.  The certificate of insurance must provide an appropriate additional insured endorsement to the insurance policy or policies, which names the city of Lodi and its officers, employees, agents, and volunteers as additional insured's under the policy or policies; 
10.  Proof of a state fire marshal retail fireworks license; 
11.  Such other information and documentation that the fire chief in his or her reasonable discretion may require; 
12.  Temporary Event Permit. Each applicant shall also file a temporary event permit application as required by Lodi Municipal Code Section 17.78.050 with the community development department; 
13.  Reimbursement Agreement. An agreement in a form to be obtained from the city attorney's office between the city of Lodi and the permittee's fireworks distributor, requiring the distributor to indemnify the city for that distributor's pro rata share of all fireworks task force costs incurred during the period that fireworks may be sold under this chapter. 
D.  Each applicant shall file with the city, at the time of filing the permit application, a nonrefundable application fee as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. If selected in the lottery as a permittee, a letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or a surety bond made payable to the city in the amount as set by resolution of the city council to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be filed with the city. Such deposit certificate or bond shall be refundable upon compliance with the provisions and requirements of this chapter, including but not limited to, the removal of the sales stand, cleaning of the site, and full passage of the city's final site inspection. 
E.  The fire chief is authorized to promulgate administrative regulations and procedures necessary for the successful and effective implementation of this chapter including rules and procedures governing the submission of applications for permits to sell safe and sane fireworks, inspections of fireworks stands, operation of fireworks stands, and such regulations relating to the sale of safe and sane fireworks as may be necessary for the protection of life and property. Said administrative regulations and procedures shall be set forth in writing and are subject to prior approval by the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.050 - Prerequisites to issuance of permit. 
Permits to sell fireworks shall only be issued to applicants that meet all of the following qualifications: 
A.  The applicant must be a nonprofit organization that conducts its activities primarily for the benefit of the city and its residents. 
B.  The applicant must have been organized and established in the city limits of the city of Lodi for a minimum of one year continuously preceding the filing of application for the permit, and must have a bona fide membership of at least ten members who are residents of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.060 - Permit applications—Notice of acceptance or rejection—Selection procedure—Fee. 
A.  The fire chief shall notify all applicants by the third Monday in April regarding the results of the lottery and the applicants that have been granted permits, and said successful lottery/prospective permittees will have until the close of business on the third Monday in May to submit their final paperwork required in subsection C of Section 9.13.040. If any successful lottery/prospective permittee fails to submit its paperwork by the deadline, in any given year, the fire chief shall give notice on the third Wednesday in May to the requisite number of substitute lottery applicants that they have until the second Monday in June to submit paperwork as required by subsection C of Section 9.13.040. 
B.  All applicants that have been granted permits shall, prior to issuance of the permit, pay a permit fee in an amount established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The permit fee is intended to cover the cost of the first inspection of the fireworks stand. Any necessary subsequent inspections shall be subject to a re-inspection fee in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The letter of credit, certificate of deposit, or a surety bond made payable to the city and provided by the applicant pursuant to subsection D of Section 9.13.040 shall be held by the city to be available to cover the cost of removal of the fireworks sales stand and site clean-up in accordance with subsection P of Section 9.13.090. 
C.  Each applicant that has been granted a permit shall have no less than two members of its sales staff attend an operator safety seminar approved and supervised by the Lodi Fire Department and provided by a licensed firework's wholesaler or the City of Lodi Fire Department. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.070 - Suspension of permit—Appeal procedure. 
A.  The fire chief may suspend immediately and without notice or hearing the permit of any permittee that violates any California statute, rule, regulation, or this Code while operating or preparing to operate a fireworks sales stand during or immediately preceding any period of sale. If the fire chief reasonably believes that a violation has occurred during, immediately preceding, or immediately following the authorized period of sale, he or she shall have power to prohibit the permittee from acquiring a fireworks sales permit in the future. 
B.  Any decision of the fire chief made pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to review by the city manager. When the decision being appealed affects the current sale period, such review shall be held at the earliest possible time that the permittee, city manager and the fire chief can schedule a hearing for such review. For decisions that do not affect the current sales period, the hearing shall be held within ten city business days after the request for hearing, which request must be made in writing within ten calendar days after notice of the decision being appealed. The city manager may set aside the decision, modify it, or revoke in his or her reasonable discretion. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.080 - Fireworks sales stand—Operation. 
A.  It is unlawful for the permittee to allow any person other than individuals who are members and/or volunteers of the permitted nonprofit organization, or the spouses or adult children of such members, to sell or otherwise participate in the sale of fireworks. 
B.  It is unlawful for the permittee to pay any consideration to any person for selling or otherwise participating in the sale of fireworks. 
C.  Each sales stand must have a minimum of one adult (twenty-one years of age or older) in attendance and in charge thereof while fireworks are stored therein. 
D.  No person may sleep in or remain in the stand after close of business. 
E.  All unsold fireworks must be removed from the stand during non-sale hours and stored in a centrally located locked metal container or other secure and fire safe structure during non-sale periods. Each fireworks distributor shall provide a single storage location and container for storage of its stands' fireworks. The container shall be approved by the fire chief and located in an M1 or M2 zoned location approved by the community development director and the fire chief. 
F.  Each sales stand must have on duty at all times during the sales period, at least one salesperson (twenty-one years of age or older) who attended the city of Lodi Fire Department operator safety seminar, required pursuant to subsection C of Section 9.13.060. 
G.  The sale of fireworks shall conform to restrictions of Section 9.13.020. 
H.  All unsold fireworks and accompanying litter shall be removed from the sales location by 10:00 p.m. on July 4 and the sales stand shall be removed by 12:00 noon on July 9 of each year. 
I.  Permittees shall require all persons who appear to be under the age of thirty years to provide proof of age and shall make no sales of fireworks to persons younger than eighteen years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.090 - Fireworks sales stands—Requirements. 
All retail sales of "Safe and Sane Fireworks" shall be made only from within a temporary fireworks sales stand, and sales from any other building or structure is hereby prohibited. Fireworks sales stands are subject to the following requirements: 
A.  Fireworks sales stands shall be put in place by the permittee no earlier than 8:00 a.m. on June 24 of each year. 
B.  No fireworks sales stand shall be located within twenty-five feet of any other building or structure, within five feet of any curb line, or within one hundred feet of any gasoline pump. 
C.  The stand must be located on a developed lot with paved parking areas and driveway approaches and the stand itself must be located on a paved surface. 
D.  The stand may not occupy parking spaces required for the primary use of the site, or interfere with required access, circulation, fire lanes or fire hydrants. 
E.  No fireworks stand shall be located within one hundred feet of any building used as a school, day care, hospital, place of detention, public garage, or place of assembly that can accommodate three hundred or more occupants, or within one hundred feet of a residential zone. Fireworks stands shall only be permitted in a district zoned CS, C2, CM, M1, or M2 or the PD designation equivalents. 
F.  A minimum of twenty feet of separation shall be provided between the fireworks sales stand and any vehicle(s), with the exception of loading or unloading the permittee's supply vehicle. 
G.  No weeds or other combustible materials are permitted within twenty-five feet of the fireworks sales stand. 
H.  All fireworks sales stands shall be preapproved by the fire chief prior to opening for business. 
I.  All general use fifteen amp and twenty amp receptacles shall have listed ground-fault circuit-interrupter protection and electrical installations shall be approved by the city building inspector and/or the fire department prior to the stand opening for business. 
J.  All fireworks sales stands shall be built and maintained in accordance with the safety requirements of the city prior to opening for business. 
K.  No generators shall be allowed within twenty-five feet of any fireworks sales stand. 
L.  Smoking and the consumption of alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed within fifty feet of any fireworks sales stand and "no smoking" signs shall be displayed on and in the fireworks sales stand. 
M.  Permittees shall place no signs in the public right-of-way. 
N.  Each fireworks sales stand shall be provided with two, two-and-one-half gallon pressurized water type fire extinguishers, or two 2A10BC dry chemical/powder type fire extinguishers, in good working order, and easily accessible for use in case of fire. 
O.  The fireworks sales stand shall be removed from the temporary location by 12:00 p.m. on July 9 of each year, all unsold fireworks by 10:00 p.m. July 4, and any accompanying litter shall be cleared from the location by 5:00 p.m. on July 5. If the permittee does not remove the stand and/or clean the sales site as required by this chapter, the city may do so, or cause the same to be done, and the reasonable cost thereof shall be charged against the permittee, and his or her deposit, certificate, or surety. In addition, any permittee found to be in violation of this section shall be subject to an administrative penalty imposed in accordance with Section 9.13.160. 
P.  The permit to sell fireworks shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks sales stand and shall at all times be visible to members of the public. 
Q.  Each permittee under this chapter shall display a poster measuring eighteen inches by thirty-two inches that shall be posted at the point of sale of the fireworks and hand out a flyer with each sale to notify purchasers of all applicable restrictions established by this chapter. All information shall be provided in English and Spanish. The permittee shall provide the posters and fliers, which shall be approved by the fire chief prior to the permittee opening for business. 
R.  Fireworks stands shall be either twenty-four or thirty-two feet long by eight feet wide. Twenty-four-foot stands shall have two exits and a maximum occupancy of six people. Thirty-two-foot stands shall have two exits and a maximum occupancy of eight people. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.100 - Fee imposed upon permittees. 
A.  The city of Lodi will require each applicant receiving a permit to pay a fee, as described in Section 1(e)(3) of Article XIII C of the California Constitution, and the city of Lodi will require each permittee to pay their pro rata portion of the costs that the city of Lodi has incurred related to the following: 
1.  Processing and issuing permits; 
2.  Inspection of fireworks stands; 
3.  Public education and awareness campaign regarding the safe and responsible use of safe and sane fireworks and the dangers and risks posed by the use of illegal fireworks; and 
4.  With respect to the sale and use of safe and sane fireworks, including extra personnel time, and cleanup of fireworks trash and debris. "Extra personnel time" shall be defined as employee or contracted employee time that the city of Lodi would not otherwise incur but for the sale and use of safe and sane fireworks in the city of Lodi and is the amount to be paid by the fireworks wholesaler pursuant to subsection 9.13.040(C)(13). 
B.  No permittee may offer for sale or sell safe and sane fireworks, unless and until the permittee has paid to the city the fee imposed by this section. 
C.  The fees established pursuant to this section are not intended to generate excess revenue for the city, but rather to attempt to offset costs. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.110 - Temporary sales tax permit—Requirements. 
A.  Each permittee must obtain a temporary sales tax permit from the state board of equalization. 
B.  The temporary sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks sales stand and at all times be visible to members of the public. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.120 - Possession of dangerous fireworks. 
California Health and Safety Code Section 12677 provides that it is unlawful for any person to possess dangerous fireworks without holding a valid permit and the criminal penalty for such violations is set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 12700. In addition, or in the alternative, any person who possesses a gross weight, including packaging, of less than twenty-five pounds of unaltered dangerous fireworks, as defined in Section 12505 of the California Health and Safety Code, may be subject to an administrative fine as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.130 - Permissible locations for discharge. 
The discharge of fireworks in the city shall be limited to private property except as otherwise provided in this chapter. No fireworks shall be discharged on public, or semipublic properties, or in a public street or right-of-way except in those areas approved in writing by the fire chief. For purposes of this chapter, "semipublic" is defined as private property generally open for use by the public but not owned or maintained by a governmental body. Such property includes without limitation church property, shopping center property, and other property generally used by patrons of a commercial or private business establishment, but not including private streets in residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.140 - Prohibitions on discharge. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person or responsible person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use any fireworks, or permit the ignition, explosion, or projection thereof, upon, over, or onto the property of another without his or her consent, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of, any fireworks within ten feet of any residential dwelling or other structure used as a place of habitation by human beings. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, it is unlawful for individuals under eighteen years of age to sell, purchase, possess, use, or discharge "Safe and Sane Fireworks." 
C.  It is unlawful for any person having the care, custody, or control of a minor under the age of eighteen years to permit such minor to discharge, explode, fire, or set off any dangerous, illegal fireworks, at any time, or to permit such minor to discharge or set off any "Safe and Sane Fireworks" unless such minor does so under the direct supervision of a person over eighteen years of age and during the hours and on the days permitted by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.150 - Seizure of fireworks. 
A.  Pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq., the Fire Chief, his or her authorized representatives, and law enforcement officers may seize any fireworks described in California Health and Safety Code Section 12722, including, but not limited to: 
1.  Dangerous fireworks, including fireworks kits, used, possessed, stored, manufactured, or transported by a person who does not possess a valid permit; 
2.  Safe and sane fireworks stored in violation of the conditions required by a permit; 
3.  Safe and sane fireworks sold or offered for sale at retail that do not bear the state fire marshal label of registration and firing instructions; 
4.  Safe and sane fireworks sold or offered for sale at retail that are in unsealed packages or containers that do not bear the state fire marshal label of registration and firing instructions; and 
5.  Fireworks still possessed by a person who has just thrown any ignited fireworks at a person or group of persons. 
B.  The city may charge any person, firm, or corporation, whose fireworks are seized pursuant to this section or the state fireworks law, an amount which is sufficient to cover the cost of transporting, storing, and handling the seized fireworks. If the city or a court determines that a person's, firm's, or corporation's fireworks are illegally or erroneously seized, or if legal proceedings do not result in a conviction for violation of any provision of the Lodi Municipal Code or State Fireworks Law, any funds collected pursuant to this section or the state fireworks law shall be refunded, or if charged but unpaid, canceled. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.160 - Administrative penalties—Appeals. 
A.  This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person or responsible person who violates any provision of this chapter in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the benefit and protection of the citizens of the city of Lodi. This Chapter governs the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of all administrative fines, related to: the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of those fireworks classified as "Dangerous Fireworks" in California Health and Safety Code Section 12500, et seq., with the exception of a pyrotechnic licensee when operating pursuant to that license; and the use of "Safe and Sane Fireworks" as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 12500 et seq. on or at dates, times and/or locations other than those permitted by this chapter. Said administrative fines are imposed under authority of Government Code Section 53069.4, Health and Safety Code Section 12557, and the police power of the city of Lodi. 
B.  The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city of Lodi; and the issuance of a citation to any person or responsible person constitutes but one remedy of the city to redress violations of this chapter by any person or responsible person. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to redress any violation of this chapter by any person or responsible person, which this city may otherwise pursue. 
C.  The imposition of fines related to "Dangerous Fireworks" under this chapter shall be limited to persons or responsible person(s) who possess, sell, use and/or display, or the seizure of, twenty-five pounds or less (gross weight) of such dangerous fireworks. 
D.  Fines collected pursuant to this chapter related to "Dangerous Fireworks" shall not be subject to Health and Safety Code Section 12706, which Section provides that certain fines collected by a court of the state be deposited with, and disbursed by, the county treasurer. However, the city shall provide cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal pursuant to regulations to be adopted by the state fire marshal addressing the state fire marshal's cost for the transportation and disposal of "Dangerous Fireworks" seized by the city, which costs will be part of any administrative fine imposed. Unless and until said regulations have been adopted by the state of California, the city shall hold in trust two hundred fifty dollars or twenty-five percent of any fine collected, whichever is greater, to cover the cost reimbursement to the state fire marshal for said cost of transportation and disposal of the "Dangerous Fireworks." 
E.  Because of the serious threat of fire or injury posed by the use of "Dangerous Fireworks" that can result from persistent or repeated failures to comply with the provisions of this chapter and the effect of such conditions or activities on the safety and the use and enjoyment of surrounding properties and to the public health, safety, and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of real property for all violations of this chapter existing on their real property. Each individual use, display, and/or possession shall constitute a separate violation and each shall be subject to a separate administrative fine. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.170 - Issuance of administrative citation—Contents. 
A.  Whenever a code enforcement officer (CEO) determines that a violation of the Code has occurred, the CEO may issue an administrative citation on a city-approved form listing the Code violation(s) and the amount of the administrative fine required to be paid by the responsible person(s) in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Each administrative citation shall contain the following information: 
1.  The name, mailing address, date of birth, CDL number (if available), and home or business telephone number of the responsible person charged with any violation of this chapter; 
2.  The address or description of the location of the violation; 
3.  The date or dates on which the person violated this chapter; 
4.  The section or sections of this chapter that were violated; 
5.  A description of the violation(s); 
6.  The amount of the administrative fine for each violation, the procedure in place to pay the fines, and any late fee and interest charge(s), if not timely paid, and notice that if the city is required to take action to collect such fines, the responsible person may be charged costs and attorney's fees; 
7.  Notice of the procedure to request an administrative hearing to contest the citation (including the form to be used, how to obtain the form, and the period within which the request must be made in order for it to be considered timely); 
8.  The names, addresses, and telephone numbers of any witnesses to the violation(s); 
9.  The name and signature of the CEO who issued the citation and the name and signature of the citee, if he or she is physically present and will sign the citation at the time of its issuance. The failure or refusal of a citee to sign a citation or provide the information required on the citation, shall not affect its validity or any related subsequent proceedings, nor shall signing a citation constitute an admission that a person is responsible for a violation of this chapter; 
10.  Any other information deemed necessary by the director for enforcement or collection purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.175 - Third-party administrative citations. 
A.  Whenever one or more private persons observe a violation of this chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code, they may request that an administrative citation be issued to a responsible person by a CEO. The private persons will be required to sign an affidavit under penalty of perjury verifying that they personally observed a violation of this Code, and may be required to testify at an administrative hearing as provided in this chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code if the administrative citation is appealed. Failure of the private persons to testify at an administrative hearing if required by the department prosecuting the violation on behalf of the private persons may result in a dismissal of the administrative citation. The CEO shall have the discretionary authority to issue an administrative citation to a responsible person where, on the basis of an affidavit and any other available evidence, a violation of this chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code has occurred. 
B.  Each third-party administrative citation shall contain: 
1.  The date of the violation; 
2.  The address or a definite description of the location where the violation occurred; 
3.  The section of this Code violated and a description of the violation; 
4.  The amount of the fine for the Code violation; 
5.  A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine must be paid; 
6.  An order prohibiting the continuation or repeated occurrence of the Code violation described in the administrative citation; 
7.  A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which a request for hearing form to contest the administrative citation may be obtained; 
8.  The name, signature and department issuing the citation on behalf of the private persons. 
C.  Each third-party administrative citation shall be accompanied by an affidavit from the private persons setting forth a description of the violation as observed by the private persons signed under penalty of perjury. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.180 - Administrative fines. 
A.  Each person or responsible person who violates any provision of this chapter as it relates to the possession, use, storage, sale and/or display of "Dangerous Fireworks" shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of offense in 1 year period 	Amount of Administrative Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty plus Late Charge 
First 	$1,000.00 	$250.00 	$1,250.00 
Second 	$2,000.00 	$500.00 	$2,500.00 
Third 	$3,000.00 	$1,000.00 	$4,000.00 
 
B.  Each person or responsible person who uses "Safe and Sane Fireworks" on or at dates, times, and/or locations other than those permitted by the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided below: 
Number of offense in 1 year period 	Amount of Administrative Penalty 	Late Charge 	Total Amount of Penalty plus Late Charge 
First 	$250.00 	$75.00 	$325.00 
Second 	$500.00 	$150.00 	$650.00 
Third 	$750.00 	$300.00 	$1,050.00 
 
C.  In the case of a violation of any of the provisions listed above, the administrative fine(s) shall be due and payable within thirty calendar days from the issuance of the administrative fine citation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, and surrender all dangerous fireworks to the CEO, immediately. For penalties not paid in full within that time, a late charge in the amount set forth above is hereby imposed and must be paid to the city by the citee. Fines not paid within the time established by this section shall accrue interest at the prevailing established rate. On the second and each subsequent time that a person is issued a citation for the same violation in any twelve-month period, the fine is increased as indicated above and the citee shall be liable for the amount of the new fine until it is paid, in addition to being responsible for payment of previous fines. 
D.  All administrative fines and any late charges and interest due shall be paid to the city at such a location or address as stated on the citation, or as may otherwise be designated by the city manager. Payment of any fine or fines shall not excuse the citee from complying with the provision of this chapter so violated. The issuance of the citation and/or payment of any fine shall not bar the city from employing any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the Code so violated including the issuance of additional citations and/or criminal prosecution. 
E.  Upon confirmation of the citation or when the citation is deemed confirmed, all unpaid administrative fines, late fees, and/or interest shall constitute a judgment which may be collected in any manner allowed by law for collection of judgments including but not limited to recordation to create a lien on any real property owned by the responsible person. The city shall be entitled to recover its attorney's fees and costs incurred in collecting any administrative fines, late charges, and/or interest. 
F.  Payment of the administrative fine shall not excuse or discharge a citee from the duty to immediately abate and correct a violation of this chapter, nor from any other responsibility or legal consequences for a continuation or a repeated occurrence(s) of a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.190 - Right to an administrative hearing. 
A.  Any citee may contest the violation(s), or that he or she is a responsible person, by filing a request for an administrative hearing on a city-approved form with the Lodi Fire Chief's office within thirty calendar days from the issuance date of a citation. If the fire chief does not receive the request in the required time period, the citee shall have waived a right to a hearing and the citation shall be deemed confirmed and final. 
B.  No fees shall be charged for the filing of a request for a hearing. 
C.  Citees must deposit the full amount of the penalty listed on the citation on or before the request for a hearing is filed. Failure to deposit the full amount of all penalties within the required time period, or the tender of a non-negotiable check, shall render a request for an administrative hearing incomplete and untimely. Penalties that are deposited with the city shall not accrue interest. Penalties deposited shall be returned to the person who deposited them if the citation is overturned. 
D.  A request for a hearing shall contain the following: 
1.  The citation number; 
2.  The name, address, telephone number, and any facsimile numbers and e-mail addresses of each person or responsible person contesting the citation; 
3.  A statement of the reason(s) why a citation is being contested; 
4.  The date and signature of the citee(s). 
E.  The city will notify all persons or responsible person(s) who file a request for a hearing in writing by first class mail of the date, time, and place set for the hearing at least ten calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Service of this notice is deemed complete at time of mailing. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed notice shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  The hearing will be conducted within sixty calendar days of the date a timely and complete request is received by the fire chief's office. 
G.  If the CEO submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the city for consideration at the hearing, the CEO shall also serve a copy of such report by first class mail on the person requesting an administrative hearing no less than seven calendar days prior to the date of the hearing. Failure to receive said report shall not invalidate the citation or any hearing, city action, or proceeding pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.200 - Administrative hearing—Procedures. 
A.  The hearing officer designated or appointed by the city manager shall hear all requests for administrative hearings of administrative fines in accordance with the procedures established herein. 
B.  Administrative hearings are informal, and formal rules of evidence and discovery do not apply. Photographs of seized fireworks shall be admissible evidence of the violation. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation and responsibility therefore by a preponderance of evidence. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation, however, the CEO who issued the citation is required to attend or participate at the hearing. The citee(s) and CEO, if present, shall have an opportunity to present evidence and witnesses and to cross-examine witnesses. 
C.  A citee may appear at the hearing in person or by written declaration executed under penalty of perjury. Said declaration and any documents in support thereof shall be tendered to and received by the city at least seven business days prior to the hearing. If the citee fails to attend or does not submit a written declaration in a timely manner, he or she shall be deemed to have waived the right to a hearing. In such an instance, the hearing officer shall cancel the hearing and not render a decision. In such instances, the citation shall be deemed confirmed. 
D.  Hearings may be continued once at the request of a citee or the officer who issued the citation. The hearing officer may also continue the hearing for cause. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.210 - Hearing decision—Right of appeal. 
A.  After considering all the testimony and evidence submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written decision to uphold or overturn the citation and shall state the reasons therefore. 
B.  The hearing officer shall serve citee(s) by first class mail with a copy of the written decision. The date the decision is deposited with U.S. Postal Service shall constitute the date of its service. The failure of a citee to receive a properly addressed decision shall not invalidate any hearing, city action, or proceeding conducted pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  The decisions of the hearing officer may be appealed by the citee to the city council within thirty calendar days after the date of service of the decision. Each decision shall contain a statement advising the citee of this appeal right and the procedure for its exercise. 
D.  If a hearing officer's decision is not appealed in a timely manner, the decision shall be deemed confirmed. 
E.  If a responsible person prevails on appeal, the city shall reimburse his or her fine deposit within thirty calendar days of the city council's decision on the appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.220 - Financial reporting. 
On or before September 1 of any year authorized pursuant to a permit, the permittee shall submit to the city clerk a financial statement by the treasurer or financial officer of the permittee setting forth the total gross receipts from the fireworks stand operated by the permittee; all expenses incurred and paid in connection with the purchase of fireworks and the sale thereof; and the most recent report filed by the permittee to the state board of equalization. The filing of such statement shall be a condition precedent to the granting of any subsequent permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
9.13.230 - Provisions supplementary. 
The provisions of this chapter are supplementary to the provisions of the Fire Code of the City of Lodi. In case of a direct conflict between the provisions of the Fire Code of the city, and the provisions of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Except with respect to such direct conflict, the provisions of the Fire Code of City of Lodi shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1943, § 2, 5-23-2017)  
Chapter 9.14 - INTERFERENCE WITH SPECIAL EVENTS 
 
9.14.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall have the meaning given herein: 
A.  "City" means the city of Lodi. 
B.  "Special event" means any event, parade, exposition, fair or procession staged in or upon public streets including sidewalk area for which an encroachment permit has been issued and for which city services are required because of interference with normal vehicular traffic, pedestrian traffic or which will reasonably be expected to generate an extraordinary need for sanitation or other city services. 
C.  "Public street" shall have the meaning set forth in Section 12.040.010(D) of the Lodi Municipal Code. 
(Ord. 1678 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.14.020 - Interference with special event prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, disrupt or impede a permitted special event as specified herein. The following acts are prohibited by this section when done for the purpose of or with knowledge that an effect thereof is to interfere with or disrupt the ability of the permittee to carry on the special event. 
A.  To block, obstruct or impede the passage of participants, vehicles or animals in the special event along the special event route; 
B.  When not participating in the special event with the permission of the permit holder, to walk, run, operate a skateboard, ride any wheeled vehicle or rollerskate through, between, with or among the participants, vehicles or animals in the special event, except in cases of bona fide emergency; 
C.  To drop, roll, throw, toss, squirt or propel any gaseous, liquid semi-solid or solid substance or object toward or among the participants, vehicles or animals in the special event; 
D.  To grab, take hold of, strike, hit, pull or push any participant, vehicle or animal in the special event, or to mount any vehicle in the special event, except with the permission of the permittee or in cases of bona fide emergency; 
E.  To generate, amplify or broadcast any noises or sounds using any loudspeaker, amplifier, instrument or device other than sounds generated solely by the human voice or body unaided by any such amplifier, device or instrument upon any sidewalk or public place. This restriction shall apply only along the special event route while the special event is in progress at that location, and shall not apply to any participant in the special event acting with the permission of the permittee; 
F.  When not participating in the special event with the permission of the permittee, to vend or sell any product along the special event route or during the time of the special event, as designated on the permit issued to permit holder. 
(Ord. 1678 § 1 (part), 1999)  
9.14.030 - Violation—Infraction. 
Any person who is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. 1678 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 9.15 - PROHIBITION AGAINST CERTAIN FORMS OF AGGRESSIVE SOLICITATION 
 
9.15.010 - Definitions. 
For purposes of this chapter: 
"Public place" means a place to which the public or a substantial group of persons has access, and includes, but is not limited to, any street, highway, sidewalk, parking lot, plaza, transportation facility, school, place of amusement, park, playground, and any doorway, entrance, hallway, lobby, and other portion of any business establishment, an apartment house, or hotel not constituting a room or apartment designed for actual residence. 
"Solicit, ask or beg" means using the spoken, written, or printed word, or bodily gestures, signs, or other means with the purpose of obtaining an immediate donation of money or other thing of value. 
(Ord. 1791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.15.020 - Aggressive solicitation prohibited. 
A.  No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in an aggressive manner in any public place. 
B.  "Aggressive manner" means any of the following: 
1.  Approaching or speaking to a person, or following a person before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging, if that conduct is intended or is likely to cause a reasonable person to (i) fear bodily harm to oneself or to another, damage to or loss of property, or (ii) otherwise be intimidated into giving money or other thing of value; 
2.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking, or begging; 
3.  Intentionally blocking or interfering with the safe or free passage of a pedestrian or vehicle by any means, including unreasonably causing a pedestrian or vehicle operator to take evasive action to avoid physical contact; 
4.  Using violent or threatening gestures toward a person solicited either before, during, or after soliciting, asking, or begging; 
5.  Persisting in closely following or approaching a person, after the person solicited has been solicited and informed the solicitor by words of conduct that such person does not want to be solicited or does not want to give money or any other thing of value to the solicitor; 
6.  Using profane, offensive, or abusive language, which is inherently likely to provoke an immediate violent reaction, either before, during, or after solicitation; or 
7.  Intentionally touching or causing physical contact with another person or an occupied vehicle without that person's consent in the course of soliciting, asking, or begging. 
(Ord. 1791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.15.030 - All solicitation prohibited at specified locations. 
All solicitation shall be prohibited at the following specified locations: 
A.  Banks and Automated Teller Machines. No person shall solicit, ask, or beg within fifteen feet of any entrance or exit of any bank, savings and loan association, credit union, or check cashing business during its business hours or within fifteen feet of any automated teller machine during the time it is available for customers' use. Provided, however, that when an automated teller machine is located within an automated teller machine facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the automated teller machine facility. Provided further that no person shall solicit, ask, or beg within an automated teller machine facility where a reasonable person would or should know that he or she does not have the permission to do so from the owner or other person lawfully in possession of such facility. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to prohibit the lawful vending of goods and services within such areas. 
1.  Definitions. For purposes of this section: 
a.  "Automated teller machine" means any electronic information processing device, which accepts or dispenses cash in connection with a credit deposit or convenience account. 
b.  "Automated teller machine facility" means the area comprised of one or more automated teller machines and any adjacent space, which is made available to banking customers after regular banking hours. 
c.  "Bank" means any member bank of the Federal Reserve System, and any bank, banking association, trust company, savings bank, or other banking institution organized or operated under the laws of the United States, and any bank the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
d.  "Check cashing business" means any person duly licensed as a check seller, bill payer, or prorater pursuant to Division 3 of the California Financial Code, commencing with Section 12000. 
e.  "Credit union" means any federal credit union and any state-chartered credit union the accounts of which are insured by the Administrator of the National Credit Union Administration. 
f.  "Savings and loan association" means any federal savings and loan association and any "insured institution" as defined in Section 401 of the National Housing Act, as amended, and any federal credit union as defined in Section 2 of the Federal Credit Union Act. 
2.  Exemptions. The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to any unenclosed automated teller machine located within any building, structure, or space whose primary purpose or function is unrelated to banking activities, including but not limited to supermarkets, airports, and school buildings, provided that such automated teller machine shall be available for use only during the regular hours of operation of the building, structure, or space in which such machine is located. 
B.  Motor Vehicles and Parking Lots. 
1.  Motor Vehicles. No person shall solicit, ask, or beg from an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle while such vehicle is located with one hundred feet of any intersection that is controlled by an official traffic signal of the type set forth in Vehicle Code Section 21450, unless such person has received training in accordance with the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook ("WATCH") and evidence of such training is on file with the city of Lodi. No person shall approach an operator or occupant of a motor vehicle for the purpose of soliciting, asking, or begging while such vehicle is in a public place, unless such person has received training in accordance with the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook ("WATCH") and evidence of such training is on file with the city of Lodi. 
2.  Parking Lots. No person shall solicit, ask, or beg in any public parking lot or structure any time after dark. "After dark" means any time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise. 
3.  Exemptions. Subsection B of this section shall not apply to any of the following: 
a.  To solicitations related to business, which is being conducted on the subject premises by the owner or lawful tenants; 
b.  To solicitations related to the lawful towing of a vehicle; or 
c.  To solicitations related to emergency repairs requested by the operator or other occupant of a vehicle. 
C.  Public Transportation Vehicles and Stops. 
1.  Any person who solicits, asks, or begs in any public transportation vehicle, or within ten feet of any designated or posted public transportation vehicle stop, is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
a.  He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the agent of the owner, driver, or operator of a public transportation vehicle; the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; the agent of the owner or manager of a public transportation facility; a member of a security force employed by the public transportation facility; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Pen. Code, Section 830); or 
b.  Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section. 
c.  Subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the immediately preceding thirty days and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in subsection (C)(1)(a) of this section. 
2.  For purposes of this section, "public transportation vehicle" means any vehicle, including a trailer bus, designed, used, or maintained for carrying ten or more persons, including the driver; or a passenger vehicle designed for carrying fewer than ten persons, including the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. 
D.  Restaurants. Any person who solicits, asks, or begs in any outdoor or indoor dining area of a restaurant or other establishment serving food for immediate consumption is guilty of a violation of this section if: 
1.  He or she remains there after being asked to leave by the owner, manager, or supervisor of the restaurant or other food establishment; the agent of the owner, manager, or supervisor of the restaurant; a member of a security force employed by the restaurant; or by a peace officer, as defined in Chapter 4.5 of Title 3 of the California Penal Code (commencing with Pen. Code, § 830), acting at the request of any of the persons specified in this subdivision; or 
2.  Within the immediately preceding thirty days, he or she engaged in a solicitation at that location and had been asked to leave by a person specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section. 
3.  Subsection (D)(1) of this section is not violated if a person who has been requested to leave enters the property within the immediately preceding thirty days and solicits, asks, or begs with the express authorization of a person specified in subsection (D)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. 1791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
9.15.040 - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1791 § 1 (part), 2007)  
Chapter 9.16 - SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS 
 
9.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Peddler" means any person who sells and makes immediate delivery, or offers for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, merchandise or thing, in the possession of the seller, at any place in the city other than from a fixed place of business, and who does not follow a prearranged fixed route or serve purchasers in the city regularly and continuously. 
B.  "Solicitor" means any person who takes orders, or offers to sell or take orders for any goods, wares, merchandise or thing, for future delivery, or for services to be performed, at any place in the city other than a fixed place of business, and who does not follow a fixed route or serve prospective purchasers in the city regularly or continuously. "Solicitor" does not include salesmen or agents for wholesale houses or firms who sell to retail dealers for resale or sell to manufacturers for manufacturing purposes or to bidders for public works or supplies, or newspaper carriers. 
(Ord. 1607 § 3, 1995; Ord. 1352 §§ 1, 2, 1985)  
9.16.020 - Certificate of identification. 
Every person desiring to engage in soliciting/peddling as defined in this chapter from persons in residences and/or from commercial establishments, is required to make written application for a certificate of identification as hereinafter provided of the completed application. Such certificate shall be carried by the solicitor. 
(Ord. 1352 § 3, 1985)  
9.16.030 - Application for certificate of identification. 
A.  Application for a certificate of identification shall be made upon a form provided by the municipality. The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, to wit: 
1.  Name and address of present place of residence and length of residence at such address; also business address if other than present address; 
2.  Address of place of residence during the past three years if other than present address; 
3.  Age of application and date of birth; 
4.  Physical description of the applicant; 
5.  Name and address of the person, firm or corporation or association whom the applicant is employed by or represents; and the length of time of such employment or representation; 
6.  Name and address of employer during the past three years if other than the present employer; 
7.  Description sufficient for identification of the subject matter of the soliciting in which the applicant will engage; 
8.  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
9.  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any; 
10.  Whether or not a certificate of identification issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked; 
11.  Whether the applicant ever has been convicted of a violation of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States; 
12.  Names of magazines, journals or books; 
13.  Names of the three most recent communities where the applicant has solicited house to house; 
14.  Proposed method of operation; 
15.  Signature of applicant; 
16.  Social security number of applicant; 
17.  Present identification with a photograph and operators license number. 
B.  All statements made by the applicant upon the application or in connection therewith shall be under oath. 
C.  The applicant shall submit to fingerprinting by the police department at the municipality in connection with the application for the certificate. 
D.  All applicants are subject to fingerprinting and photograph at a fee according to the current city council resolution setting fees and the department of justice fee schedule. 
E.  The chief of police or his designee shall keep in their office an accurate record of survey of every application received and acted upon together with all other information and data pertaining thereto and all certificates of identification issued under the provisions of this chapter, and the denial of applications. Applications for certificates shall be numbered in consecutive order as filed, and every certificate issued, and any renewal thereof, shall be identified with the duplicate number of the application upon which it was issued. Upon completion of the application pursuant to this section the chief of police or his designee shall issue a certificate of identification. 
F.  No certificate of identification shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of the commission of a felony under the laws of the state or any other state or federal law of the United States, within five years of the date of application; nor to any person who has been convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter; nor to any person whose certificate of identification issued under this chapter has previously been revoked as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1352 § 4, 1985)  
9.16.040 - Revocation of certificate. 
A.  Any certificate of identification issued under this chapter shall be revoked by the chief of police if the holder of the certificate is convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, or has made a false material statement in the application, or otherwise becomes disqualified for the issuance of a certificate of identification under the terms of this chapter. Immediately upon such revocation, written notice thereof shall be given by the chief of police to the holder of the certificate in person or by certified United States mail addressed to his or her residence address set forth in the application. 
B.  Immediately upon the giving of such notice the certificate of identification shall become null and void. 
C.  The certificate of identification shall state the expiration date thereof. 
(Ord. 1352 § 5, 1985)  
9.16.050 - Notice regulating soliciting/peddling. 
A.  Every person desiring to secure the protection provided by the regulations pertaining to soliciting contained in this chapter, shall comply with the directions set out in this section. 
B.  Notice of the determination by the occupant of refusal of invitation to solicitors and/or peddlers, to any residence or commercial property, shall be given in the manner following: a weatherproof sign shall be exhibited upon or near the main entrance door to the residence or commercial establishment, indicating and giving notice of the determination by the occupant containing the applicable prohibitive language such as, but not limited to, words as follows: "No Solicitors/Peddlers Invited," "No Solicitation," No Peddling." 
(Ord. 1361 § 1, 1985: Ord. 1352 § 6, 1985)  
9.16.060 - Duty of solicitors/peddlers. 
A.  If the notice states "No Solicitors/Peddlers Invited" or other applicable prohibitive word, then the solicitor/peddler shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises. 
B.  Any solicitor/peddler who has gained entrance to any residence, whether invited or not, shall immediately and peacefully depart from the premises when requested to do so by the occupant. 
(Ord. 1361 § 2, 1985: Ord. 1352 § 7, 1985)  
9.16.070 - Uninvited soliciting/ peddling prohibited. 
It is declared to be unlawful and shall constitute a nuisance for any person to go upon any premises and ring the door bell upon or near any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant thereof and engage in soliciting as defined in this chapter, in defiance of the notice exhibited at the premises in accordance with the provisions of Section 9.16.060 of this chapter. 
(Ord. 1352 § 8, 1985)  
9.16.080 - Penalty. 
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be considered guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. 1352 § 9, 1985)  
9.16.090 - Application fee. 
At the time of filing an application for a certificate of identification, the applicant shall pay a fee in accordance with the following: 
A.  For each certificate of identification, a sum as adopted from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
B.  Fees prescribed heretofore in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city and does not exempt an individual or entity from obtaining a business license pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code. 
(Ord. 1352 § 10, 1985)  
Chapter 9.18 - VENDING ON STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PRIVATE PROPERTY[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1827, § 1, adopted Dec. 2, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 9.18, §§ 9.18.010—9.18-150, and enacted a new Ch. 9.18 as set out herein. The former Ch. 9.18 pertained to vending on streets, sidewalks and private property and derived from Ord. 1800 § 1 (part), 2007; Ord. No. 1816, § 1, 9-3-2008. 
 
9.18.010 - Declaration of purpose. 
The city council expressly finds that the vending of produce and prepared or prepackaged foods, goods, wares, and/or services on public streets, sidewalks, or alleys and on private property pose unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Lodi. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to provide those persons who engage in those types of vending operations with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Business owner" shall mean any person, firm, or corporation, which owns or controls any interest in any business engaged in vending as defined in Subsection J hereof. 
B.  "Commissary" shall mean a food establishment in which food, containers, equipment, or supplies are stored or handled for use in motorized food wagons or conveyance. 
C.  "Conveyance," as used in this chapter, means any vehicle (except motorized food wagons, as defined below), trailer, cart, wagon, or stand, with or without wheels, which may be moved from one place to another under its own power or by other means. 
D.  "Linear frontage" is the method used to determine distances as used in this chapter. 
E.  "Mobile food vendor" shall mean any person as defined in this chapter, who owns, controls, manages, and/or leases a motorized food wagon, conveyance or produce/seafood truck; and/or contracts with a person(s) to drive, operate, prepare foods, and/or vend from a motorized food wagon, conveyance or produce/seafood truck. 
F.  "Motorized food wagon" shall mean any vehicle as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code, which is equipped and used for retail sales of prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind on any public street, alley, highway, or private street, alley, or property within the city of Lodi, including a produce/seafood truck (as defined below) and a motorized food production unit (as defined below). For the purposes of this chapter, a motorized food wagon shall also include any trailer or wagon pulled by a vehicle. 
G.  "Motorized food preparation unit" means any vehicle or trailer and vehicle combination as defined in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code which is equipped to: 
1.  Prepare and sell; or 
2.  Cook and sell food products. 
H.  "Persons" shall mean any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors, and lessees of motorized food wagons and conveyances. 
I.  "Produce/seafood truck" means any vehicle as defined by Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code which sells raw produce or seafood 
J.  "Vend" or "vending" shall mean the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind from private or public property. 
1.  Vending from a motorized food wagon generally has the following characteristics: 
a.  Food is ordered and served from a take-out counter that is integral to the motorized food wagon and there is typically a space for customer queuing; 
b.  Food is paid for prior to consumption; 
c.  Food and beverages are served in disposable wrappers, plates, or containers; and 
d.  Food and beverages are prepared and sold for offsite consumption. 
2.  Vending from a conveyance generally has the following characteristics: 
a.  Food is paid for prior to consumption; 
b.  Food and beverages are served in disposable wrappers, plates, or containers; and 
c.  Food and beverages are prepared and sold for offsite consumption. 
3.  Vending from a produce/seafood truck generally has the following characteristics: 
a.  Food is paid for prior to consumption; and 
b.  Food is sold for offsite consumption and/or preparation. 
K.  "Vendor"/"operator" shall mean any person who sells and makes immediate delivery, or offers for sale and immediate delivery, any goods, wares, or merchandise, or drives, operates, vends, and/or prepares food on or from a motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.030 - Regulation of sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, or attempt to engage in vending or operate any vehicle or conduct any business for the purpose of vending from any vehicle, motorized food wagon or conveyance parked, stopped, or standing upon any public street, alley, highway, or property, or private street, alley, or property within the city of Lodi except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.040 - Permit to operate. 
A person desiring to engage in a vending operation, as defined by this chapter, shall submit a written application for a permit to operate to the city manager or designee in a form acceptable to and with all supporting information required by the city of Lodi. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee in an amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee shall be paid annually for such renewal application. Vendors must have the permit in their possession when vending. There must be at least one vendor with a valid permit present whenever vending is taking place. 
A.  A vendor must obtain a background check in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.16.030 of this code. 
B.  Every vendor shall obtain a city of Lodi business tax certification. 
C.  As part of the permit to operate application, the vendor or business owner shall provide the following: 
1.  Proof of current vehicle registration and a copy of an applicable vehicle insurance policy for any vehicles used in the vending activity. 
2.  Four photographs (showing different exterior views) of each motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
3.  A copy of a current San Joaquin County Environmental Health permit for any motorized food wagon. 
4.  A copy of the vendor or business owner's current business tax certification and applicable board of equalization seller's permit. 
5.  Vendor or business owner must show proof of payment to a commissary for the prior twelve months for all cases involving the reissuance of a permit; and proof of current payment for new vendors. 
6.  If the vendor is operating on private property, the business owner shall provide the following: 
a.  An affidavit in a form approved by the city from the property owner (if other than self) permitting the vendor to locate on the site; 
b.  A site plan, drawn to scale and with dimensions, indicating the location of all existing buildings, structures, driveways, parking spaces, traffic controls, and improvements, and the location or areas where the proposed vending activity, structures, and improvements related to the vending activity will be located upon the site; and 
c.  An affidavit from the business or location providing the required restroom facilities for food service workers, stating the hours that those facilities are being made available to the mobile food vendor. 
D.  The following may constitute grounds for denial of an application for a permit to operate: 
1.  The vending operation or activity as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the applicable building, zoning, housing, fire, safety, and health regulations under state law and this code; 
2.  The applicant is unable to obtain the required peddler's license, pursuant to LMC Section 9.16.030 due to a criminal background check; 
3.  The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had a permit to operate, peddler's license, or related permit, which was issued within the State of California, suspended or revoked; 
4.  The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a permit to operate; 
5.  There have been excessive calls for service to the Lodi Police Department within the twelve months preceding the application with inadequate response by the vendor or business owners or operators, involving the commission of crimes, disturbances, public nuisances, or applicable LMC violation investigations, which are located, committed, or generated on the premises of the vending operation. 
6.  Failure to obtain clearance from San Joaquin County Environmental Health for operation of a motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
E.  As an alternative to a denial of an application for a permit to operate for failure to meet the requirements of this chapter, the city manager or designee may issue a conditional permit to operate. Said conditional permit to operate shall be issued with conditions imposed on the operation of the premises. All conditions shall be complied with in order to maintain the conditional permit to operate in a valid status. Failure to comply with the imposed conditions will subject the conditional permit to operate to suspension and/or revocation procedures under this chapter or any other remedy authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.045 - Permit caps. 
A.  The total number of vendor permits issued pursuant to this section shall not exceed the numbers set forth below: 
1.  Motorized food preparation units: 22 
2.  Produce/seafood trucks: 3 
B.  In the event a vendor permit issued pursuant to this chapter is either revoked or is allowed by its holder to expire it shall immediately become null and void and shall be forfeited. Any permit forfeited under this chapter shall be available to any other person who first complies with all other applicable provisions of this chapter and this code. 
C.  In the event the holder of any vendor permit under this chapter ceases operations in Lodi, any permits issued pursuant to this section shall be transferable provided that the transferee meets all other provisions of this chapter. In the event of a sale, the seller's vendor permit shall immediately become null and void and the seller shall no longer conduct business pursuant to this chapter. Within five business days of any sale or transfer, the seller shall notify the city of such sale and shall provide any proof of sale as may be required by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.050 - Location. 
A.  A vendor may locate and operate in the public right-of-way subject to the following conditions: 
1.  A vendor shall not operate within three hundred feet of any school grounds, park, playground, or city operated recreation center. 
2.  A vendor shall not operate within one hundred feet of any street intersection. 
3.  In addition to the above, a vendor must comply with the following regulations, depending upon the type of use in which it is located: 
a.  Residential Use Area: 
i.  In a residential use area, a vendor shall move not less than four hundred feet at least every ten minutes and may not return to a previous location or within four hundred feet of a previous location on the same calendar day. 
ii.  Permitted hours of operation are from 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
iii.  A vendor may not be located within four hundred feet of another vendor. 
b.  Commercial Use Area: 
i.  In a commercial use area, a vendor shall move not less than four hundred feet at least every three hours and may not return to a previous location or within four hundred feet of a previous location on the same calendar day. 
ii.  Permitted hours of operation are from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
iii.  If a vendor is located in a commercial use area and is within four hundred feet of a residence, vendor shall comply with the requirements listed above for residential use area. 
c.  Industrial Use Area: 
i.  In an industrial use area, a vendor may operate twenty-three hours a day. 
ii.  If a vendor is located in an industrial use area and is also within four hundred feet of a residence, it shall comply with the requirements listed above for residential use area. 
4.  No vendor shall be located or maintained on public property, including bicycle pathways, inconsistent with any provision of this code. 
B.  A vendor may locate on private property subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Incidental to a primary use with the primary use having a valid city of Lodi business tax certification; 
2.  A vendor shall not be the primary use of a parcel unless the parcel is developed in accordance with the standards of the city's Development Code for that use and the zoning designation for the parcel. 
3.  A vendor shall not be permitted as an accessory use to a stand-alone parking lot. 
4.  A vendor cannot utilize, or be located on, parking spaces required for the primary use on the parcel. 
5.  A vendor cannot be located on a vacant, undeveloped parcel or lot. 
6.  A vendor must be located on a paved concrete or asphalt parking surface. 
7.  A vendor cannot interfere with access, aisles, circulation, driveways, or fire lanes and hydrants. 
8.  A vendor cannot interfere with pedestrian movement or create a pedestrian hazard. 
9.  Vending on private property within two hundred feet of a residential zone is permitted only through the provisions of a conditional permit to operate. Conditions will not be imposed in a manner that unreasonably prevents mobile food vendors from operating solely because they are within two hundred feet of a residential zone. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.060 - Exemption. 
A.  Any person engaged in vending conducted in connection with the operations of a state-certified open-air market or an authorized street fair or event under a special event permit, lease, real property license, agreement, or other entitlements issued by the city of Lodi. 
B.  Any person delivering any goods by vehicle where such goods have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods are being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of the point of sale. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to the sale or distribution of any newspaper, flier, or handbill. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.070 - Application of other laws and regulations. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter prohibiting the stopping or parking of a vehicle shall apply at all times or at those times specified by this chapter, except when it is necessary to stop a vehicle to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter imposing a time limit on stopping or parking shall not relieve any person from the duty to observe other more restrictive provisions of the California Vehicle Code, this code or any other ordinances of the city, prohibiting or limiting the stopping or parking of vehicles in specified places or at specified times. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.080 - Condition/appearance of vending site. 
A.  The vending site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. 
B.  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, or other site furniture, (permanent or otherwise) or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the vendor, except as permitted under the conditional permit to operate provisions of Subsection 9.18.040(E). 
C.  Should any other site improvements be needed for ongoing vending operations, the vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
D.  Exterior storage or display of refuse, equipment, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise associated with the vendor is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.090 - Condition/appearance of motorized food wagon or conveyance. 
A.  The vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current permits and licenses in or on their vehicle. 
B.  Any motorized food wagon or conveyance used in the course of vending shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water, and telecommunications. 
Should any utility hook-ups or connections to onsite utilities be required, the vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
C.  The vendor shall not discharge items from any motorized food wagon or conveyance vehicle onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm inlets, or streets. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.100 - Lighting. 
The vendor shall install adequate lighting to ensure customer safety. Lighting shall be directed downwards and away from public streets and adjacent properties. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.110 - Sanitation. 
A.  All motorized food wagons or conveyances shall operate out of a commissary pursuant to California Health and Safety Code Section 114287. 
B.  All motorized food wagons or conveyances shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the operation of such a vehicle, and the vendor of the motorized food wagon or conveyance shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a twenty-five-foot radius of the vehicle before such vehicle is moved. No vendor shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any such public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such vendor. 
C.  A motorized food wagon or conveyance shall comply with California Health and Safety Code Section 114299.5 regarding the availability of adequate toilet facilities for use by food service personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.120 - Safety and security. 
A.  No vending shall be permitted except after the motorized food wagon or conveyance has been brought to a complete stop and parked in a lawful manner. 
B.  The vendor shall install signage in a visible location indicating that loitering is not permitted and customers may only remain on the lot for up to fifteen minutes after receiving their food. 
C.  The vendor shall enforce the no loitering provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.130 - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter into law. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.140 - Penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to the following penalties: 
A.  Fines. 
1.  Violations are subject to the administrative enforcement provisions of this code and the fines established in LMC Section 1.10.260; 
2.  Three or more violations of this chapter during any one-year period shall be deemed misdemeanors, punishable as specified in Subsection 1.08.010(B) of this code. 
B.  Suspension/Revocation of Permit to Operate/Conditional Permit to Operate. 
1.  Procedure. In the event of a violation of the regulations of this chapter, the city manager or designee shall issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke the permit to operate. The vendor shall have the right to request a hearing, as provided in LMC Chapter 1.10, within ten days of service of the notice of intent. If no hearing is requested, the permit to operate shall be revoked or suspended upon the expiration of the appeal period set forth in LMC Chapter 1.10. 
2.  Basis for Suspension/Revocation of Permit to Operate: 
a.  Any permit to operate may be suspended and/or revoked by the city manager or designee after a review, where it is determined that: 
i.  The vendor has violated the provisions of this chapter; or 
ii.  The vendor has committed any act or engaged in action, which would constitute grounds for denial of a permit to operate pursuant to Subsection 9.18.040(D) of this chapter; or 
iii.  The vendor has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in conducting the vending operation or activity; or 
iv.  The vendor has failed to correct a violation under this chapter within the time period ordered by the city; or 
v.  The vendor has operated or continued to operate without a permit to operate or after a permit to operate has been suspended or revoked. 
3.  Basis for Suspension/Revocation of a Conditional Permit to Operate: 
a.  Any conditional permit to operate may be suspended or revoked for: 
i.  Any of the basis to suspend or revoke a permit to operate set forth herein; or 
ii.  Any violation of the terms of the conditional permit to operate. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
9.18.150 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any peace officer, or the code enforcement division of the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 1827, § 1, 12-2-2009)  
Chapter 9.19 - SIDEWALK VENDORS 
 
9.19.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The provisions of this chapter are intended to comply with Government Code Sections 51036 through 51039 (signed into law on September 17, 2018) and are enacted subject to the findings in this section. 
The city council finds that the vending of produce and prepared or prepackaged foods, goods, wares, and/or services on sidewalks poses unsafe conditions and special dangers to the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the city of Lodi. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to provide persons who engage in those types of vending operations with clear and concise regulations to prevent safety, traffic, and health hazards, as well as to preserve the peace, safety, and welfare of the community. 
The city council further finds that parks and nature areas are a finite and valuable resource within the city. Public parks are designed and maintained to support the recreational activities for which they were intended and have inadequate facilities such as restrooms, water, sanitary services, and pedestrian and vehicle traffic flow necessary to support commercial vending activities. It is the purpose and intent of the city council, in enacting this chapter, to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public by regulating the use of parks, nature areas, and recreation facilities, to ensure the public's use and enjoyment of natural resources and recreational opportunities, and prevent an undue concentration of commercial activities that unreasonably interfere with the scenic and natural character of the parks. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Persons" means any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation, and includes, but is not limited to, owners, operators, drivers, lessors, and lessees of conveyances. 
B.  "Roaming sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction. 
C.  "Sidewalk vendor" means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. "Sidewalk vendor" does not include a "peddler" or "solicitor" licensed pursuant to Chapter 9.16 of this code, or a "vendor"/"operator" licensed pursuant to Chapter 9.18 of this code. 
D.  "Stationary sidewalk vendor" means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. 
E.  "Vend" or "vending" means the sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, prepared, prepackaged, or unprepared, unpackaged food or foodstuffs of any kind from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one's person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. 
F.  "Vendor permit" means a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to engage in the sidewalk vending activities. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.030 - Regulation of sales. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to vend, or attempt to engage in vending or conduct any business for the purpose of vending upon a public sidewalk, other pedestrian path, or public recreational area, as defined in Section 12.12.010 of this code, within the city of Lodi except in accordance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.040 - Vendor permit. 
A person desiring to engage in vending, as defined by this chapter, shall submit a written application for a vendor permit to the city manager or designee in a form acceptable to and with all supporting information required by the city of Lodi. Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee in an amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Any such permit shall be required to be renewed annually and a separate nonrefundable, nontransferable application fee shall be paid annually for such renewal application. Sidewalk vendors must have a vendor permit in their possession when vending. There must be at least one vendor with a valid vendor permit present whenever vending is taking place. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.050 - Application for sidewalk vendor permit. 
A.  Application for a vendor permit shall be made upon a form provided by the city of Lodi. The applicant shall truthfully state, in full, the information requested on the application, to wit: 
1.  The name of the sidewalk vendor; 
2.  The current mailing address of the sidewalk vendor; 
3.  If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and mailing address of the principal; 
4.  A description of the food or merchandise offered for sale or exchange; 
5.  Period of time for which the certificate is applied; 
6.  The date, or approximate date, of the latest previous application for certificate under this chapter, if any; 
7.  Whether or not a vendor permit issued to the applicant under this chapter has ever been revoked; 
8.  Whether the applicant ever has been convicted of a violation of a felony under any state or federal laws of the United States; 
9.  A California driver's license or identification number, or an individual taxpayer identification number; and 
10.  Signature of applicant certifying that to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained on the form is true. 
B.  A sidewalk vendor must obtain a background check in accordance with the requirements of Section 9.16.030, subsections (C) through (F), of this code. 
C.  As part of the vendor permit application, the sidewalk vendor or business owner shall provide the following: 
1.  Four photographs (showing different exterior views) of each pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance used for vending; 
2.  A copy of a current San Joaquin County Environmental Health permit for each pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other non-motorized conveyance, if so required; and 
3.  A copy of the sidewalk vendor or business owner's current California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller's permit, unless exempt under state law. 
D.  The following may constitute grounds for denial of an application for a vendor permit: 
1.  The vending operation or activity as proposed by the applicant does not comply with all applicable laws including, but not limited to, the applicable building, zoning, housing, fire, safety, and health regulations under state law and this code; 
2.  The applicant is unable to obtain the required vendor permit, pursuant to L.M.C. Section 9.19.040 due to a criminal background check; 
3.  The applicant has, within three years immediately preceding the date of filing of the application, had a vendor permit, or related permit, which was issued within the State of California, suspended or revoked; 
4.  The applicant has knowingly made a material misstatement in the application for a vendor permit; 
5.  There have been excessive calls for service to the Lodi Police Department within the twelve months preceding the application with inadequate response by the sidewalk vendor, involving the commission of crimes, disturbances, public nuisances, or applicable Lodi Municipal Code violation investigations, associated with the vending operation. 
6.  Failure to obtain other permits or clearances necessary to conduct the proposed vending operations. 
E.  As an alternative to a denial of an application for a vendor permit for failure to meet the requirements of this chapter, the city manager or designee may issue a conditional vendor permit. Said conditional vendor permit shall be issued with conditions imposed on the vending operation. All conditions shall be complied with in order to maintain the conditional vendor permit in a valid status. Failure to comply with the imposed conditions will subject the conditional vendor permit to suspension and/or revocation procedures under this chapter or any other remedy authorized by law. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.060 - Application for stationary sidewalk vendor permit. 
Stationary sidewalk vendors must obtain a stationary sidewalk vendor permit by providing the following information in addition to the information required in Section 9.19.050 of this code: 
A.  Identify the location or locations of vending operations; 
B.  Any stationary vending operations located within the public right-of-way or park must obtain an encroachment permit or permits pursuant to Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 12.04. 
C.  Any stationary vending operations located within the public right-of-way must obtain a written permit from the city council as set forth in Section 10.44.080 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.070 - Location. 
A sidewalk vendor may locate and operate upon a public sidewalk, pedestrian path, or public park, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  A sidewalk vendor shall not vend within three hundred feet of any school grounds. 
B.  A sidewalk vendor shall not vend within one hundred feet of any street intersection. 
C.  A sidewalk vendor shall not vend on or from a street or private property. 
D.  A sidewalk vendor shall not locate in a place, or operate in a manner, that interferes with pedestrian travel or access or causes a violation of the Americans with Disabilities Act or other disability access standards. 
E.  A sidewalk vendor shall not locate in a place, or operate in a manner, that interferes with vehicle travel or parking. 
F.  A sidewalk vendor shall not vend within the immediate vicinity of an area designated for a temporary special permit issued by the local authority, provided that any notice, business interruption mitigation, or other rights provided to affected businesses or property owners under the city of Lodi's temporary special permit are also provided to any sidewalk vendors specifically permitted to operate in the area, if applicable. For purposes of this paragraph, a temporary special permit is a permit issued by the city of Lodi for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming, parades, or outdoor concerts. The prohibitions of this paragraph shall only be effective for the limited duration of the temporary special permit. 
G.  Sidewalk vendors shall not vend in areas located within the immediate vicinity of a permitted certified farmers' market or a permitted swap meet during the limited operating hours of that certified farmers' market or swap meet. A "certified farmers' market" means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agriculture Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter. A "swap meet" means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article. 
H.  Stationary sidewalk vendors must obtain an encroachment permit as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 12.04 when Vending from a stationary spot located within the public right-of-way. 
I.  In addition to the provisions above, a sidewalk vendor must comply with regulations specific to the following types of land uses: 
1.  Residential Use Area: 
a.  Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in areas that are zoned exclusively residential. 
b.  Roaming sidewalk vendors may operate only from 9:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. 
2.  Commercial Use Area: 
a.  Permitted hours of operation are from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
b.  If a stationary sidewalk vendor is located in a commercial use area and is within four hundred feet of a residence, sidewalk vendor shall comply with the requirements listed above for residential use area. 
3.  Industrial Use Area: 
a.  Permitted hours of operation are from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 a.m. 
b.  If a sidewalk vendor is located in an industrial use area and is also within four hundred feet of a residence, it shall comply with the requirements listed above for residential use area. 
4.  Public Parks: 
a.  Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited in recreational areas as defined in Section 12.12.010 of this code, public parks, and nature areas. 
b.  Vending is prohibited in nature areas, sports fields, grass areas, landscaped areas, beaches, swimming pool areas, picnic areas, and playground areas. 
c.  Vendors must stay on paved pedestrian paths. 
d.  Vending is prohibited on or from water or air. 
e.  Vendors must abide by all other applicable park rules, including, but not limited to, park closure hours. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.080 - Exemptions. 
A.  Any person engaged in vending conducted in connection with the operations of a state-certified open-air market or an authorized street fair or event under a special event permit, lease, real property license, agreement, or other entitlements issued by the city of Lodi. 
B.  Any person delivering any goods by vehicle where such goods have been ordered in advance for such delivery from any business located at a permanent location and which goods are being delivered from such location to the customer by vehicle, regardless of the point of sale. 
C.  This chapter shall not apply to the sale or distribution of any newspaper, flier, or handbill. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.090 - Vending conditions. 
A.  The vending site shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. 
B.  No tables, chairs, fences, shade structures, or other site furniture, (permanent or otherwise) or any freestanding signs shall be permitted in conjunction with the sidewalk vendor, except as permitted under the conditional vendor permit provisions of Subsection 9.19.050(E). 
C.  Should any other site improvements be needed for stationary sidewalk vending operations, the sidewalk vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
D.  Refuse must be removed at the end of each day. 
E.  The sidewalk vendor shall display, in plain view and at all times, current permits and licenses in or on their pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance. 
F.  Any pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance used in the course of vending shall be entirely self-sufficient in regards to gas, water, and telecommunications. 
G.  Should any utility hook-ups or connections to utilities be required, the sidewalk vendor shall be required to apply for appropriate permits to ensure building and public safety and consistency with applicable building and zoning regulations. 
H.  The sidewalk vendor shall not discharge items from any pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance onto the sidewalk, gutter, storm inlets, streets, public property, or private property without express written consent. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.100 - Health and sanitation. 
A.  Sidewalk vendors must comply with all applicable health and safety laws and regulations and obtain all necessary health and safety permits from appropriate regulatory agencies. 
B.  All pushcarts, stands, displays, pedal-driven carts, wagons, showcases, racks, or other nonmotorized conveyances shall be equipped with refuse containers large enough to contain all refuse generated by the vending operations. Sidewalk vendors shall pick up all refuse generated by such operation within a twenty-five-foot radius of the sidewalk vendor before such pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance is moved. No sidewalk vendor shall dispose of any trash or refuse in any public or private trash receptacle other than a trash receptacle owned, operated, or otherwise provided by and under the control of such sidewalk vendor. 
C.  A pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance shall comply with the California Health and Safety Code regarding the availability of adequate toilet and handwashing facilities for use by food service personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.110 - Safety and security. 
A.  No pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance may be left unattended or stored on public property. 
B.  A sidewalk vendor may not emit a noise that constitutes a nuisance as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 9.24.020, or that is excessive, offensive, or disturbing, as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 9.24.030. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.120 - Applicability of regulations to existing business. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance enacting this chapter into law. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.130 - Administrative penalties. 
Any person violating any provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter is subject to the following penalties: 
A.  Fines. 
1.  Standard administrative fines. 
a.  An administrative fine of two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation. 
b.  An administrative fine of five hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation. 
c.  An administrative fine of one thousand dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
2.  Reduced administrative fines. The following reduced administrative fine schedule shall apply when a sidewalk vendor provides proof of a valid vendor permit: 
a.  An administrative fine of one hundred dollars for a first violation; 
b.  An administrative fine of two hundred dollars for a second violation within one year of the first violation; and 
c.  An administrative fine of five hundred dollars for each additional violation within one year of the first violation. 
B.  No Criminal Penalties. 
1.  The provisions of this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor, and any person alleged to have violated this chapter shall not be subject to arrest except when otherwise permitted under law. 
2.  Failure to pay an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter shall not be punishable as an infraction or misdemeanor. 
C.  Assessment of Fines. 
1.  When assessing an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter, the city shall take into consideration the person's ability to pay the fine. The city shall provide the violator with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. The violator may request an ability-to-pay determination at adjudication or while the judgment remains unpaid, including when a case is delinquent or has been referred to a comprehensive collection program. 
2.  If a violator meets one of the following criteria described in California Government Code section 68632(a) or (b), the city shall accept, in full satisfaction, twenty percent of the administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter. 
a.  A person receiving public benefits under one or more of the following programs: 
i.  Supplemental Security Income (SSI) and State Supplementary Payment (SSP) (Welfare and Institutions Code section 12200 et seq.). 
ii.  California Work Opportunity and Responsibility to Kids Act (CalWORKs) (Welfare and Institutions Code section 11200 et seq.) or a federal Tribal Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (Tribal TANF) grant program (Welfare and Institutions Code section 10553.25). 
iii.  Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (Chapter 51 (commencing with Section 2011) of Title 7 of the United States Code) or the California Food Assistance Program (Welfare and Institutions Code section 18930 et seq.). 
iv.  County Relief, General Relief (GR), or General Assistance (GA) (Welfare and Institutions Code section 17000 et seq.). 
v.  Cash Assistance Program for Aged, Blind, and Disabled Legal Immigrants (CAPI) (Welfare and Institutions Code section 18937 et seq.). 
vi.  In-Home Supportive Services (IHSS) (Welfare and Institutions Code section 12300 et seq.). 
vii.  Medi-Cal (Welfare and Institutions Code section 14000 et seq.). 
b.  A person whose monthly income is one hundred twenty-five percent or less of the current poverty guidelines updated periodically in the Federal Register by the United States Department of Health and Human Services under the authority of paragraph (2) of Section 9902 of Title 42 of the United States Code. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.140 - Penalties—Suspension/revocation of vendor permit/conditional vendor permit. 
A.  Procedure. In the event of a violation of the regulations of this chapter, the city manager or designee shall issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke the vendor permit. The sidewalk vendor shall have the right to request a hearing, as provided in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10, within ten days of service of the notice of intent. If no hearing is requested, the vendor permit shall be revoked or suspended upon the expiration of the appeal period set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10. 
B.  Basis for Suspension/Revocation of Vendor Permit: 
1.  Any vendor permit may be suspended and/or revoked by the city manager or designee after a review, where it is determined that: 
a.  The sidewalk vendor has committed four or more violations of the provisions of this chapter during the term of the vendor permit; or 
b.  The sidewalk vendor has committed any act or engaged in action, which would constitute grounds for denial of a vendor permit pursuant to Subsection 9.19.050(D) of this chapter; or 
c.  The sidewalk vendor has engaged in fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements in conducting the vending operation or activity; or 
d.  The sidewalk vendor has failed to correct a violation under this chapter within the time period ordered by the city; or 
e.  The sidewalk vendor has operated or continued to operate without a vendor permit or after a vendor permit has been suspended or revoked. 
C.  Basis for Suspension/Revocation of a Conditional Vendor Permit: 
1.  Any conditional vendor permit may be suspended or revoked for: 
a.  Any of the basis to suspend or revoke a vendor permit set forth herein; or 
b.  Any violation of the terms of the conditional vendor permit. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
9.19.150 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any peace officer, or the code enforcement division of the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 1, 11-7-2018)  
Chapter 9.20 - REGULATING THE CONDUCT OF GARAGE SALES 
 
9.20.010 - Garage sale defined. 
"Garage sale" means a yard sale, patio sale, garage sale, or any similar sale of merchandise consisting of personal items, by an individual or group, for profit, when the merchandise to be sold is offered to the general public, all of which sales shall be conducted within a building and/or on private property in residential zones. "Garage sale" shall not include items purchased for resale. 
(Ord. 1431 § 1 (part), 1988)  
9.20.020 - Time, place and manner restrictions. 
A.  Garage sales shall be limited to two per calendar year, of a duration not longer than three consecutive days, or one garage sale per calendar year for a duration of not more than six days for each person, family, group or location. 
B.  Such garage sales shall not be conducted before seven a.m. or after seven p.m. on the permitted days. 
C.  Garage sales shall not be restricted as to location because of the zoning regulations, except that such sales may be conducted on private property and shall not be permitted on public sidewalks, alleys, streets or other public rights-of-way. 
(Ord. 1431 § 1 (part), 1988)  
9.20.030 - Signs. 
Signs advertising a garage sale may be placed or erected at any location where otherwise legally permissible, subject to the following conditions: 
A.  No such sign shall exceed four square feet in area; 
B.  No such sign shall be displayed more than twenty-four hours prior to, nor more than twenty-four hours following the event advertised thereon. All signs posted pursuant to this section shall specify on the face of such sign the dates of the garage sale advertised. 
(Ord. 1431 § 1 (part), 1988)  
9.20.040 - Violation. 
Every person who, for himself or herself or as an agent of another, commences, engages in, conducts or carries on any garage sale in violation of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. 
(Ord. 1431 § 1 (part), 1988)  
Chapter 9.24 - NOISE REGULATION 
 
9.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the words set out in this section shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Ambient noise" means the all-encompassing noise associated with a given environment, usually being a composite of sounds with many sources near and far as determined at any specific point. 
B.  "Clearly audible" means those sounds or noises which can be heard by any person of average or normal hearing capability. 
C.  "Commercial noise" means that noise or sound which is generated or created by the use, operation or maintenance of any commercial activity, including but not limited to the operation of machinery, construction equipment, manufacturing equipment, motor vehicles operated in conjunction with such use, and shall include but not be limited to compressors, fans, air conditioning units, and sound amplification systems utilized in conjunction with such functions. 
D.  "Decibel (db)" means a unit of level which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power; the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is ten times the logarithm to the base ten of this ratio; a unit of measure of sound (noise) level. 
E.  "Emergency work" means work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity, or work required to protect persons or property from imminent exposure to danger or damage, or work by public or private utilities when restoring utility service. 
F.  "Motor vehicle" includes any car, truck, motorcycle, motor scooter, and any and all self-propelled vehicles, as defined in the California Vehicle Code, including but not limited to mini-bikes and go-carts. 
G.  "Noise level" means the same as "sound level." The terms may be used interchangeably. 
H.  "Sound level" means the same as "noise level"; in decibels, that quantity measured with a sound level meter as defined herein, by use of the "A" frequency weighting and "fast" time averaging unless some other time averaging is specified. 
I.  "Sound level meter" means an instrument of sound including a microphone, amplifier, an attenuator, networks for at least the standardized "A" frequency weighing, and an indicating instrument having at least the standardized dynamic characteristic "fast," as specified in the American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters, S1.4-1971. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.020 - Public nuisance noise. 
The following special noise restrictions are established without regard to their sound level impact and may be enforced without the prerequisite of a sound level measurement. 
A.  General Noise Regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, and in addition thereto, it is unlawful for any persons to wilfully make or continue or permit or cause to be made or continued, any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise which unreasonably disturbs the peace and quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal noise sensitivity. 
B.  The standards which shall be considered in determining whether a violation of the provision of this section exists shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
1.  The volume of the noise; 
2.  The intensity of the noise; 
3.  Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual for the area and hour; 
4.  Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural; 
5.  The volume and intensity of the background noise, if any; 
6.  The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities; 
7.  The nature and the zoning of the area within which the noise emanates; 
8.  The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates; 
9.  The time of day or night the noise occurs; 
10.  The duration of the noise; 
11.  Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or noncommercial activity. 
This section shall be inapplicable to emergency work as defined herein. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.030 - Excessive, offensive or disturbing noise. 
The following activities are declared to cause excessive, offensive or disturbing noise in violation of this section, but said enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive: 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to sound any horn or other signaling device on any vehicle except as an emergency or danger warning signal. This provision shall be inapplicable to the sounding of any horn, bell, whistle, siren or other audible warning device which is operated in compliance with Section 7064 of the California Public Utilities Code, or with any other state or federal provision governing railroad operations. 
B.  It is unlawful to play or operate any drum, radio, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier, stereo, television, or other similar sound system, whether mobile or from a fixed location upon the public streets, public right-of-way or in public parks in such a fashion that it is clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet. The city council finds and declares that any sound or noise audible at such distance endangers the public safety and welfare by interference with normal human capability for hearing nearby traffic movement and warning signals. This section shall be inapplicable to radio systems operated under or pursuant to Federal Communications Commission licenses in the regular course of business. 
It is found and declared as a matter of legislative policy that the operation of the aforementioned equipment or instruments on the public streets and rights-of-way adjacent to public parks during the hours between ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to be clearly audible at a distance of fifty feet or greater shall constitute prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
C.  It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to cause, permit, or generate any noise or sound as described herein between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. which exceeds the ambient noise level at the property line of any residential property (or, if a condominium or apartment house within any adjoining apartment) as determined at the time of such reading by more than five decibels. This section shall be applicable whether such noise or sound is of a commercial or noncommercial nature. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.040 - Animal noises. 
Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, it is unlawful for any person to keep or maintain, or to permit the keeping or maintenance upon any premises owned, occupied or controlled by such person, any animal or animals which by any frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb or cause discomfort to any reasonable person of normal noise sensitivity. For purposes of this section, "frequent or long-continued noise" means any noise which is essentially continuous for ten minutes aggregate during any sixty-minute period. 
This section shall not apply to any kennel, cattery or animal hospital operated legally within the city. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.050 - Exemptions. 
This chapter shall not apply to the following: 
A.  Sirens or other similar emergency warning devices located upon any emergency vehicle as defined by the Vehicle Code, or upon the premises of any public safety agency; 
B.  Any bell, siren or similar device on any vehicle, which is required by law, and which is automatically activated by placing the vehicle transmission in reverse, or by any backing movement; 
C.  Any sound equipment operating under a city license or permit, or being utilized for an activity subject to First Amendment protection; 
D.  Emergency repair work as defined herein; 
E.  Events in public parks or other public places, sponsored by the city; 
F.  Noise necessarily generated in conjunction with health or sanitation services, including but not limited to refuse collection. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.060 - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.070 - Enforcement. 
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced by any peace officer, or the director of community development or his/her designee. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
9.24.080 - Severability. 
The provisions of this chapter are severable. If any part hereof is deemed unenforceable or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, all other provisions hereof shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1449 § 1 (part), 1989)  
Chapter 9.28 - GRAFFITI ABATEMENT 
 
9.28.010 - Findings. 
The city council finds that graffiti on public and private property contributes to the creation of blight, negatively affects the value of surrounding property, visually detracts from neighborhoods and generally lowers the quality of life in the city. The council further finds that graffiti is often related to the activities or territories of street gangs and its presence encourages proliferation of additional graffiti unless abated promptly. To promote the health, safety and welfare of the public, the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to alleviate vandalism and halt the spread of such nuisances. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Graffiti" means the unauthorized placing upon any public or private building, fence, structure or other property of any message, words, letters, pictures, symbols or other marking by scratching, carving, the spraying of paint, or the use of chalk, dye or other similar substance. 
B.  "Responsible party" means the owner, manager or person in lawful possession of property upon which graffiti has been placed. 
C.  "Unauthorized" means without the explicit consent of the owner or person in possession of or responsible party for the affected private property or the public official responsible for public property, to any act described in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.030 - Graffiti prohibited. 
It is unlawful for any person to scratch, carve, paint, chalk or otherwise apply any unauthorized graffiti on any public or privately-owned building, fence, structure or other property. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.040 - Removal of graffiti. 
When graffiti or other inscribed material is capable of being viewed from a public right-of-way or any place the public has a right to be, and the responsible party consents thereto or requests the cooperation of the city, the public works director may provide for the removal of such graffiti. If the director provides for such removal, he or she shall not authorize nor undertake to provide for the painting or repair of any more extensive area than that necessary to cover the graffiti. Prior to graffiti abatement by the public works department, the responsible party shall be required to execute a written release, holding the city harmless and acknowledging that the covering paint may not match the color of the structure upon which it is placed. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.050 - Sale or possession of pressurized paint cans. 
It is unlawful in the city for any person to sell, give, loan, exchange, or cause or permit to be sold, given, loaned or exchanged any pressurized can(s) containing any substance commonly known as paint or dye to any person under the age of eighteen years, unless such person is the parent or legal guardian of such minor. No person under the age of eighteen years shall purchase any pressurized can(s) containing paint or dye. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.060 - Possession of spray paint in public park, square, playground, swimming pool or recreational facility. 
No person shall have in his or her possession any pressurized can(s) containing paint or dye while in any city-owned public park, square, playground, swimming pool or recreational facility of the city. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.070 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter regulating the sale, furnishing or possession of spray paint shall not apply to: 
A.  Authorized employees of the city of Lodi; 
B.  Persons or firms under contract with the city while engaged in authorized activities under such contract; 
C.  Employees or agents of a firm or business utilizing such items in the normal course of business, while actually engaged in such employment activities. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
9.28.080 - Penalty. 
A violation of this chapter shall be an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars. 
(Ord. 1502 § 1 (part), 1990)  
Chapter 9.32 - SHOPPING CARTS  
Article 1. - Retail Establishment Shopping Cart Standards 
 
9.32.010 - Findings. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that shopping carts are removed and stolen from businesses and are abandoned throughout the city. 
B.  Shopping carts that have been removed, stolen, and abandoned present a threat to the public health and safety by obstructing pedestrian and vehicular traffic, creating blight, and resulting in the loss of personal property. 
C.  Stolen shopping carts are the result of theft and contribute to the perception of community blight in areas where they are abandoned and may encourage other crimes and reduce property values. 
D.  The city council finds and declares that removed, stolen, and abandoned shopping carts constitute a nuisance. 
E.  In enacting this chapter, the city council has been mindful of the preemptive effect of state law, in particular Business and Professions Code Sections 22435, et seq., (the state of California Shopping Cart laws) and, in reliance upon Business and Professions Code Section 22435.8, this chapter avoids any express conflict with state law. 
F.  The provisions of this ordinance are intended to complement the state of California Shopping Cart laws. 
G.  Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from instituting any appropriate legal procedures to abate, correct, enjoin or restrain any violation of this chapter, including civil or criminal proceedings. 
H.  The remedies and relief provided in this Article 2 shall be cumulative and in addition to any and all other remedies available to the city under this code and state law. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Business premises" means the premises or parking area of a retail establishment, including adjacent walkways, any loading area, and the parking area which shall include a parking lot or other property provided by a retail establishment for use by a customer for parking an automobile or other vehicle. 
B.  "Director" means the community development director. 
C.  "Enforcement officer" means the city manager or designee, and chief of police or designee. 
D.  "Removed shopping cart" means a shopping cart that has been removed from the business premises of the owner or lessee of the shopping cart without permission. 
E.  "Retail establishment" means a business, property, or legal entity located within a commercial, mixed use, or overlay zoning district, that provides or makes available shopping carts to its customers for use on its business premises. 
F.  "Sanitized" means one or more of the following measures: 
1.  Use of onsite shopping cart cleaning and sanitizing systems; 
2.  Pressure washing; 
3.  Steam cleaning; 
4.  Availability of shopping cart sanitization stations for customer use; 
5.  Availability of shopping cart liners for customer use or purchase; and 
6.  Any other measure approved by the community development director as a means of cleaning, sanitizing, or eliminating exposure to contaminants that may be found on shopping carts. 
G.  "Shopping cart" means a basket that is mounted on wheels or a similar device generally used in a retail establishment by a customer for the purpose of transporting goods of any kind. Shopping cart does not include a shopping cart sold to, or owned by a customer for his or her own personal use. 
H.  "Shopping cart activity" means the act of providing, or making available, shopping carts to the public for use on the business premises of a retail establishment. "Shopping cart activity" does not include the business activities of shopping cart sales, storage, or retrieval. 
I.  "Shopping cart identification signage" means signage that is permanently affixed or engraved to the surface of a shopping cart and provides the following information, as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1: 
1.  The identity of the retail establishment, or owner or lessee of the shopping cart, or both; 
2.  Notification to the public of the procedure to be utilized for authorized removal of a shopping cart from the business premises; 
3.  Notification to the public that the unauthorized removal of a cart from the business premises of a retail establishment, or the unauthorized possession of a shopping cart, is a violation of state law; and 
4.  A valid telephone number and/or address which can be used to return shopping carts that have been removed from the retail establishment. 
J.  "Unmarked shopping cart" means a shopping cart that is not marked with shopping cart identification signage as set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 22435.1 and defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.030 - General shopping cart standards. 
A.  A retail establishment's shopping cart activity shall not cause or result in adverse effects on the health, welfare, peace or safety of persons residing or working in the city. 
B.  A retail establishment's shopping cart activity shall not result in repeated nuisance activities within the city, including but not limited to, removed carts, litter, vandalism, visual blight, impeded or obstructed pedestrian or vehicle travel or interference with ADA access. 
C.  A retail establishment's use of shopping carts shall comply with all provisions of local, state and federal laws, regulations and orders, including but not limited to California Business and Professions Code Section 22435 et seq., as well as any condition imposed on any permit issued pursuant to applicable laws, regulations or orders. This includes compliance with annual city license and regulatory fees. 
D.  A retail establishment's use of shopping carts shall be compatible with, and not adversely affect the livability or appropriate development of abutting properties, the surrounding neighborhood, and the city. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.040 - Shopping carts must be retrieved within twenty-four hours. 
A.  Retail establishments shall ensure that all removed carts are retrieved within twenty-four hours of receiving notice of a complaint by any person or entity. 
B.  Retail establishments shall not fail to retrieve their removed carts within twenty-four hours of receiving notice of a complaint by any person or entity, more than twelve times in a calendar year. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.050 - Shopping cart retrieval program required. 
A.  All retail establishments shall have a shopping cart retrieval program in place that will retrieve removed carts and respond to complaints from the public or city in a manner that results in the retrieval of removed carts within twenty-four hours of notice. 
B.  All shopping carts shall be inspected to ensure that they are in good working order, have cart identification signage, and are sanitized prior to customer use. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.060 - Shopping carts must be secured after business hours. 
All shopping carts shall be locked or otherwise secured when a retail establishment providing such shopping carts is not open for business. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.070 - Shopping cart identification signage required. 
A.  Every shopping cart owned or used within the city by a retail establishment shall have clearly visible shopping cart identification signage permanently affixed to the shopping cart. Shopping cart identification signage shall be continuously maintained so that all required information is accurate, up to date, and clearly legible. 
B.  A retail establishment shall not offer or provide an unmarked shopping cart for use by its customers or the public. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.080 - Cart retrieval plan required. 
Every retail establishment shall prepare, submit, and implement, a specific written plan to prevent their respective customers from removing shopping carts from the retail establishment and to retrieve any shopping carts that have been removed therefrom. The plan must provide for the retrieval of removed shopping carts by its employees, or provide evidence of a contract with a shopping cart retrieval service as defined in California Business and Professions Code Section 22435.10. The plan must be provided to, and approved by, the director, whenever a retail establishment makes revisions to a plan, the revised plan must be submitted to the director for approval. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.090 - Business warning signs required. 
All retail establishments that furnish or make available shopping carts for use by customers shall post removal warning signage at all entrances to the business consisting of signage or text that is at least eighteen inches in width and twenty-four inches in height using block lettering not less than one-half inch in width and two inches in height containing a statement to the effect that the unauthorized removal of a shopping cart from a retail establishment, or unauthorized possession of a shopping cart in a location other than the business premises of the retail establishment, is a violation of state law and city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.100 - Employee training required. 
Retail establishments shall conduct regular and ongoing employee training to educate new and existing employees about procedures to prevent unauthorized shopping cart removal from the business premises, including, but not limited to, the operation of any on-site shopping cart retention system. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.110 - Shopping cart regulatory fee. 
A.  The intent and purpose of this section is to impose a regulatory fee on all retail establishments that use or provide shopping carts subject to this ordinance after the effective date of this ordinance. This fee shall provide for the enforcement and regulation of the applicable regulations set forth in this chapter. 
B.  The annual shopping cart regulatory fee may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The fee shall be calculated so as to recover the total cost of both administration and enforcement of the applicable regulations set forth in this chapter, including, for example, administering the program, inspection and compliance checks, documentation of violations, conducting administrative hearings and criminal prosecution of violators, but shall not exceed the cost of the total program. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.120 - Administrative enforcement. 
Article 1 of this chapter may be enforced administratively as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10. In determining whether a retail establishment has violated the shopping cart standards as set forth in this chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code, or as to the appropriateness of corrective actions, the enforcement officer and administrative hearing officer may consider: 
1.  The length of time the retail establishment has been out of compliance with shopping cart standards. 
2.  The impact of the violation of the shopping cart standards on the community. 
3.  Any information regarding the retail establishment's efforts to remedy the violation(s) of the shopping cart standards, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Calls to an enforcement officer by the retail establishment or its employees, or agents. 
b.  Requesting that persons engaging in activities causing violations of the shopping cart standards cease those activities, unless the retail establishment, or its employees or agents feel that their personal safety would be threatened by making that request. 
c.  Improvements made to the retail establishment's business premises or operations, including but not limited to voluntary installation of an on-site shopping cart retention system. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.130 - Administrative abatement hearing. 
The city council finds that a violation of Article 1 of this chapter is a public nuisance. The city may abate violations as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10, except that the following hearing procedures shall apply: 
A.  Businesses or persons subject to abatement shall be served with an abatement notice as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 1.10.310. 
B.  Once the director follows the procedures set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 1.10.310 and reasonable time for compliance has lapsed and the violations remain, and the citee has failed to take corrective actions to the remedy the nuisance, the matter may be set for an administrative abatement hearing. 
C.  The director shall set the matter for public hearing before the city council. 
D.  Written notice of the meeting shall be served at least thirty calendar days prior to the date of the hearing by posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place on or near the property and mailing copies of the notice by first class mail to the property address, current owner, and corporate headquarters or agent for service of process, if any. 
E.  Notice of the hearing shall include: 
1.  The date, time, and location of the hearing; 
2.  References to all code sections violated and descriptions of how each section is or has been violated; 
3.  References to the dates and locations of the violations; 
4.  A description of the consequences of failing to attend the hearing and comply; 
5.  A description of the hearing procedures and explanation of the right to present witnesses and evidence; and 
6.  Explanation and notice of post-hearing appeal rights and procedures. 
F.  The hearing shall be governed by the procedural rules set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 1.10.480. 
G.  The city council shall hear the evidence presented to determine whether, more likely than not, there has been a violation of the shopping cart standards set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 9.32.030 such that a nuisance has been created. 
H.  If the city council finds by majority vote of the council members present that a nuisance has been created, the city council shall direct the city manager to issue an administrative order, as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 1.10.500, setting forth the findings as stated in the record of the hearing and ordering the payment of any fines and/or the imposition of any remedies as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Section 9.32.140, and a reasonable deadline for compliance. 
I.  Notwithstanding the provisions provided herein, all other provisions in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10 shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.140 - Administrative abatement remedies. 
A retail establishment that has failed to comply with the shopping cart standards set forth in this Chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code and has caused a nuisance may be required to abate such nuisance by implementing an on-site shopping cart retention system consisting of one or more of the following measures: 
A.  Mechanical or electronic disabling devices on all shopping carts, which prevent the shopping cart from being removed from the business premises by locking the wheels automatically or otherwise preventing movement of the shopping carts off of the business premises. 
B.  On-site security staff to prevent customers from removing shopping carts from the business premises. 
C.  Bollards and/or other physical barriers around the business premises to prevent shopping cart removal, subject to compliance with all laws and approval of the city's fire marshal and community development department. 
D.  A system requiring a security deposit from customers for the use of shopping carts on the business premises. 
E.  Restricting the use of shopping carts outside the building of the retail establishment unless accompanied by an employee. 
F.  The rental or sale of shopping carts that can be temporarily or permanently used for the transport of purchased merchandise. 
G.  Any other measures recommended by the director as a means of preventing shopping carts from being unlawfully removed from the business premises. 
A nuisance created under Article 1 of this chapter may also be abated by the imposition of administrative fines as set forth in Section 1.10.260 of the Lodi Municipal Code. 
The abatement remedies imposed shall be proportional to the nature and extent of the nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
Article 2. - Prohibited Conduct 
 
9.32.150 - Unlawful to abandon shopping carts. 
It is unlawful for any person, or an agent thereof, to leave or abandon a shopping cart, or allow to be left or abandoned a shopping cart, upon any sidewalk, street, or other public place, or upon any private property, other than the business premises of the retail establishment owning or offering the shopping cart for use. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.160 - Unlawful to possess shopping cart without permission. 
Any person in possession of a shopping cart outside the business premises of the retail establishment owning or offering the shopping cart for use without the express prior written approval of the owner, unless the person is in the process of immediately returning the shopping cart to the owner, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Written permission to remove a shopping cart shall be valid for a period not to exceed seventy-two consecutive hours. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
9.32.170 - Penalties. 
A.  Any person violating this Article 2 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and may be subject to the penalties set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.08. 
B.  Each day a person is in violation of this Article 2 shall be considered a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. 1946, § 1, 9-6-2017)  
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters:  
Chapter 10.04 - WORDS AND PHRASES DEFINED 
Sections: 
 
10.04.010 - Definitions of words and phrases. 
A.  Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined but are defined in the California Vehicle Code ("VC") and subsequent amendments, such definitions shall apply. (Vehicle Code § 100 et seq.) 
B.  Sections of the Vehicle Code authorizing or relating to sections of this title are shown in parentheses and are included for information and reference only. 
C.  The following words and phrases when used in this title shall, for the purpose of this title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this chapter. 
1.  "Council" means the city council of the city of Lodi, California. 
2.  "Holidays," within the meaning of this title, are: 
a.  Any day adopted by council resolution; 
b.  January 1st (New Year's Day); 
c.  The third Monday in February (Washington's Birthday); 
d.  The last Monday in May (Memorial Day); 
e.  July 4th (Independence Day); 
f.  The first Monday in September (Labor Day); 
g.  The fourth Thursday in November (Thanksgiving Day); and 
h.  December 25th (Christmas Day). 
3.  "Loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. 
4.  "Parkway" means that portion of a street right-of-way between the roadway and the sidewalk. 
5.  "Passenger loading zone" means the space adjacent to a curb reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles during the loading or unloading of passengers. 
6.  "Police officer" means every officer of the police department of the city or any person authorized to direct or regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. 
7.  "Public works director" means the public works director and city engineer of the city. 
8.  "Traffic resolution" means the resolution adopted by the council and amended from time to time pursuant to the ordinance codified in this title which specifies traffic regulations and restrictions which shall be noticed by official traffic control devices. (Vehicle Code § 32.) 
9.  "Utility trailer" is any trailer or semitrailer used solely for the transportation of the user's personal property and that does not exceed a gross weight of ten thousand pounds. 
(Ord. 1752 § 1, 2004; Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.08 - TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION 
Sections: 
 
10.08.010 - Traffic engineering responsibilities. 
The public works director is responsible for providing the traffic engineering function for the city and is responsible for exercising the powers and duties with respect to traffic as provided in this title. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.12 - ENFORCEMENT AND OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.12.010 - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
Officers of the police department and such persons as are assigned by the police chief are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or other signal in conformance with traffic laws. Notwithstanding the provisions to the contrary contained in this title or the Vehicle Code, officers of the police department or fire department may direct traffic as conditions may require in emergencies. (Vehicle Code § 21100) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.12.020 - Required obedience to traffic regulations. 
Except as preempted by Vehicle Code § 21 regarding state law established violations, it shall be unlawful for any person to violate the traffic regulations as promulgated by this title or to fail to obey any device erected or maintained pursuant to this title or the traffic resolution. (Vehicle Code § 21461 et seq.). 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987) 
(Ord. No. 1859, § 1, 6-6-2012)  
10.12.030 - Unauthorized persons shall not direct traffic. 
No person shall direct or attempt to direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except in the following circumstances: 
A.  Officers of the police and fire departments as described in this chapter; 
B.  Persons authorized by the police chief; 
C.  Persons authorized by a police or fire officer in an emergency. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.12.040 - Obstruction or interference with police or authorized officers. 
No person shall interfere with or obstruct in any way any police officer or other officer or employee of the city in their enforcement of the provisions of this title or the traffic resolution. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark or object used by any person authorized by the city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations of this title shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this title, constitute such interference or obstruction. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.16 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 
Sections: 
 
10.16.010 - Authority to install traffic control devices (Vehicle Code §§ 21351, 21360). 
A.  As specifically authorized by the council in the traffic resolution, the public works director shall place and maintain traffic signals, and stop, speed limit, one way, weight limit, yield and parking restriction official traffic control devices as required by the Vehicle Code to make effective the provisions of city ordinances or resolutions. 
B.  The public works director shall place and maintain all other official traffic control devices deemed necessary to properly indicate and carry out the provisions of the Vehicle Code or the ordinances and resolutions of the city or to regulate, warn or guide traffic, unless otherwise directed by the council. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.16.015 - Traffic regulations on state highways. 
A.  Any provision of this chapter which regulates traffic or delegates the regulation of traffic upon state highways in any way for which the approval of the Department of Transportation is required by state law, shall cease to be operative six months after receipt by the city council of written notice of withdrawal of approval of the Department of Transportation. 
B.  Whenever this chapter delegates authority to a city officer, or authorizes action by the city council to regulate traffic upon a state highway in any way which by state law requires the prior approval of the Department of Transportation, no such officer shall exercise such authority nor shall such action by the city council be effective with respect to any state highway without the prior approval in writing of the Department of Transportation when and to the extent required by the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1557 § 1, 1992)  
10.16.020 - Authority to remove, relocate and discontinue traffic control devices. 
The public works director is authorized to remove, relocate or discontinue the operation of any traffic control device not specifically required by the Vehicle Code or installed under this title or the traffic resolution whenever the public works director determines in any particular case that the conditions which warranted or required the installation no longer exist. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.16.030 - Traffic control devices—Hours of operation. 
The public works director shall determine the hours and days during which any traffic control device shall be in operation or be in effect, except in those cases where such hours or days are specified in this title or by resolution of the council. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.16.040 - Unauthorized painting of curbs. 
No person or agency, unless authorized by the public works director, shall paint any street, sidewalk or curb surface; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to the painting of numbers on a curb surface by any person who has complied with the provisions of any resolution or ordinance of the city pertaining thereto. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.16.050 - Shrubbery, etc., obstructing visibility. 
Whenever the public works director finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree growing within the street right-of-way obstructs the view of any traffic control device or of any intersection, or any traffic upon the streets approaching such intersection, the public works director shall cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be removed or trimmed to remove the obstruction. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.16.060 - New pavement and freshly painted markings. 
No person shall drive any vehicle over or across any newly made pavement or freshly painted markings in any street when a barrier sign, cone marker or other warning device is in place warning persons not to drive over or across such pavement or markings. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.20 - SPEED REGULATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.20.010 - Speed zones. 
A.  The state traffic laws regulating the speed of vehicles shall be applicable upon all streets within the city except where special speed zones are established by council resolution in accordance with the procedures provided in the Vehicle Code. 
B.  Speed limits established in the traffic resolution pursuant to this section shall become effective when appropriate signs giving notice thereof are erected upon such street. (Vehicle Code § 22357 et seq.) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.20.020 - Regulation of speed by traffic signals. 
The public works director is authorized to regulate the timing of traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic in an orderly and safe manner at speeds slightly at variance from the speed otherwise applicable, and may erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof. (Vehicle Code § 22401) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.20.030 - Speed limit of vehicles in Lodi Lake Park. 
A.  All of that certain park belonging to the city known as Lodi Lake Park is a public playground and a place of public assemblage and all the highways and driveways in the park pass places of public assemblage and through such public playground, and all of such highways and driveways are subject to the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state and this title. 
B.  It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any such highways or driveways at a speed greater than fifteen miles per hour. The public works director is authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs, along the lines of such highways and driveways, giving notice of such speed limit. (Vehicle Code § 21113) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.20.040 - Speed limit of boats on Lodi Lake. 
It shall be prima facie unlawful for any person to operate any boat, vessel or water instrument upon Lodi Lake at a speed greater than five miles per hour. The public works director is authorized and directed to erect appropriate signs giving notice of such speed limit. (Harbors and Navigation Code Section 660) 
(Ord. 1553 § 1, 1992)  
Chapter 10.24 - TURNING MOVEMENTS 
Sections: 
 
10.24.010 - Regulation of turns at intersections. 
The public works director is authorized to place official traffic control devices within or adjacent to intersections controlling movements therein. Such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day. (Vehicle Code § 22101) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.28 - STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.28.010 - Authority for stop signs and yield signs. 
Through streets or intersections at which vehicular traffic shall stop or yield before entering the intersection may be designated in the traffic resolution. The public works director shall place and maintain official traffic control devices giving notice thereof and no such designations shall be effective until such devices are in place. (Vehicle Code §§ 21355 and 21356) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.32 - RAILROAD TRAINS 
Sections: 
 
10.32.010 - Railroad trains. 
No person shall operate any train or train of cars so as to permit the same to remain standing and block the movement of traffic upon any street for a period of time longer than ten minutes. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.32.020 - Train speed. 
The city may establish the maximum speed (subject to California Public Utilities Commission approval) that a train engineer or conductor may cause a train under their control to travel on or across a city street. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.36 - PEDESTRIANS' RIGHTS AND DUTIES 
Sections: 
 
10.36.010 - Crosswalks. 
A.  The public works director shall establish, designate and maintain crosswalks by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway where, in the public works director's opinion, there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway. 
B.  The public works director may install signs at or adjacent to an intersection or other appropriate locations directing that pedestrians shall not cross. It is unlawful for any pedestrian to cross at the location(s) prohibited by a sign. (Vehicle Code § 21106) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.40 - REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES 
Sections: 
 
10.40.010 - Bicycle license required. 
A.  All bicycles operated in the city shall be licensed and registered by the city. 
B.  Bicycle licenses shall be issued by the police chief. The police chief is authorized to issue rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this section or accompanying city council resolution, governing the issuance and display of bicycle licenses. 
C.  The police chief shall collect a fee as established by resolution of the city council from time to time for each license issued. 
D.  This section does not apply to bicycle manufacturers or dealers transporting, displaying or demonstrating bicycles, or to the operators of bicycles not residing within the city limits; provided that such operators not residing within the city limits have complied with any registration and licensing requirements of the local authority in which they reside. 
E.  The police department shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this section, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
(Ord. 1670 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.40.020 - Bicycle riding rules. 
A.  No person shall operate a bicycle on the sidewalk in a business district. 
B.  Persons operating bicycles on the sidewalks outside of the business district shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian approaching thereon, and shall exercise due care for the safety of any person upon the sidewalk. 
C.  Persons operating bicycles shall obey any signs posted in accordance with Section 10.40.040 regulating or prohibiting the riding, walking or parking of bicycles on any sidewalk or walkway. (Vehicle Code Section 21206) 
D.  Subsections A and C of this section shall not apply to police personnel acting within the course and scope of their employment. 
(Ord. 1670 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.40.030 - Posted property—Bicycling prohibited without permission. 
It is unlawful for any person to ride bicycles on any posted property without the written permission of the owner(s), tenant(s), or other occupant(s) in legal possession or control thereof. 
(Ord. 1670 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.40.040 - Posting and signing—Method. 
Property may be posted against the use of or riding of bicycles in the following manner: 
A.  If the property does not contain any lineal dimension exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding one hundred feet and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
B.  If the property has lineal dimensions exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding two hundred feet, and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
C.  Public sidewalks or walkways where bicycling is prohibited may be posted by the public works director with at least one sign per block, on each side where bicycling is regulated, or every three hundred feet, whichever distance is less. 
D.  "Signs" means a board, placard, card or similar device not less than twelve inches by eighteen inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, upon which appear the words "Bicycling Prohibited" or which contains a picture of a bicycle over which appears the international symbol for prohibition, a red circle and slash, along with reference to this chapter. Such sign may be painted directly upon a sidewalk, pavement or wall. 
(Ord. 1670 § 1 (part), 1999)  
10.40.050 - Violation—Infraction. 
A violation of this chapter of the municipal code shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. 1670 § 1 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.42 - SKATEBOARDS 
Sections: 
 
10.42.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Posted property" means any property specified in Sections 10.42.020 and 10.42.030 which is posted in the manner provided in Section 10.42.040. 
B.  "Signs" means a board, placard, card or similar device not less than twelve inches by eighteen inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, upon which appear the words "Skateboarding Prohibited" or which contains a picture of a skateboard over which appears the international symbol for prohibition, of a red circle and slash, along with reference to this chapter. Such sign may be painted directly upon a sidewalk, pavement or wall. 
C.  "Skateboard" means any device or conveyance with any number of wheels, with a riding surface of any design intended primarily for a person to stand upon with one or two feet, and which is designed to be or can be propelled by human power, and which is not classified as a bicycle or tricycle. 
(Ord. 1670 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.42.020 - Riding skateboards where prohibited. 
No person shall use or ride any skateboard or other similar device, in, upon, or around any on-site roadways, sidewalks, parking facilities or pedestrian walkways located on any city-owned property which has been appropriately signed under this chapter, nor upon any other public or private property where appropriate signs, as prescribed herein, have been posted. 
(Ord. 1670 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.42.030 - Posted property—Skateboards prohibited without permission. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or ride skateboards on any posted property without the written permission of the owners, tenant or other occupant in legal possession or control thereof. 
(Ord. 1670 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.42.040 - Posting—Method. 
Property may be posted against the use of or riding of skateboards on posted property in the following manner: 
A.  If the property does not contain any lineal dimension exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding one hundred feet and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
B.  If the property has lineal dimensions exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding two hundred feet and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
C.  Public sidewalks or walkways where skateboarding is prohibited shall be posted by the public works director with at least one sign per block, on each side where skateboarding is regulated, or every three hundred feet, whichever distance is less. 
(Ord. 1670 § 2 (part), 1999)  
10.42.050 - Violation—Infraction. 
A violation of this chapter of the municipal code shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. 1670 § 2 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.43 - REGULATIONS FOR ROLLER SKATES 
Sections: 
 
10.43.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Posted property" means any property specified in Sections 10.43.020 and 10.43.030 which is posted in the manner provided in Section 10.43.040. 
B.  "Signs" means a board, placard, card or similar device not less than twelve inches by eighteen inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height, upon which appear the words "Roller Skating Prohibited" or which contains a picture of roller skates over which appears the international symbol for prohibition, a red circle and slash, along with reference to this chapter. Such sign may be painted directly upon a sidewalk, pavement or wall. 
C.  "Roller skate" means as any device or conveyance with any number of wheels, tracks or gliding surface, whether off-set or in-line, worn on each foot, and which are designed to be or can be propelled by human power, and include "rollerblades." 
(Ord. 1670 § 3 (part), 1999)  
10.43.020 - Using roller skates where prohibited. 
No person shall roller skate in, upon, or around any on-site roadways, sidewalks, parking facilities, or pedestrian walkways located on any city-owned property which has been appropriately signed under this chapter, nor upon any other public or private property where appropriate signs, as prescribed herein, have been posted. (Vehicle Code Section 21969) 
(Ord. 1670 § 3 (part), 1999)  
10.43.030 - Posted property—Roller skating prohibited without permission. 
It is unlawful for any person to use or ride roller skates on any posted property without the written permission of the owner(s), tenant(s), or other occupant(s) in legal possession or control thereof. 
(Ord. 1670 § 3 (part), 1999)  
10.43.040 - Posting—Method. 
Property may be posted against the use of or riding of roller skates on posted property in the following manner: 
A.  If the property does not contain any lineal dimension exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding one hundred feet, and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
B.  If the property has lineal dimensions exceeding three hundred feet, by posting signs at each corner of the area and at intervals not exceeding two hundred feet, and, if such property has a definite entrance or entrances, at each such entrance. 
C.  Public sidewalks or walkways where roller skating is prohibited shall be posted by the public works director with at least one sign per block where roller skating is regulated, or every three hundred feet, whichever distance is less. 
(Ord. 1670 § 3 (part), 1999)  
10.43.050 - Violation—Infraction. 
A violation of this chapter of the municipal code shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. 1670 § 3 (part), 1999)  
Chapter 10.44 - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.44.010 - Public works director to maintain no stopping, no parking and restricted parking zones. 
A.  The public works director is authorized to maintain, by appropriate signs or by paint upon the curb surface, all no stopping zones, no parking areas and restricted parking areas, as required in the Vehicle Code and as described in this title or established by the council in the traffic resolution. 
B.  When such curb markings or signs are in place, no operator of any vehicle shall stop, stand or park such vehicle adjacent to any such legible curb marking or sign in violation of any of the provisions of this title or the traffic resolution. (Vehicle Code § 22500 et seq.) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.020 - Prohibited stopping, standing or parking. 
No person shall stop, park or leave standing any vehicle, whether unattended or attended, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the direction of a police officer or other authorized person or official traffic control device, in any of the following places: 
A.  In any area established by the council in the traffic resolution as a no parking area, when such area is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
B.  Within any parkway or on a sidewalk; 
C.  In any alley, except for the purpose of the loading or unloading of persons or materials; 
D.  On any street or public right-of-way where the use of such street or right-of-way or a portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair, or construction of the street or the installation of underground utilities; or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is authorized for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic; or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, tractors or structures of unusual size and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice of such no parking are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the effective time of such no parking; 
E.  On one side of the South Hutchins Street and Lower Sacramento Frontage Roads; such side to be the one adjacent to the major street; 
F.  In any area one hundred feet or less in length, where the public works director determines that the parking or stopping of any vehicle would constitute a traffic hazard or would endanger life or property, or on the approach to a traffic control device when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface; 
G.  In front of a wheelchair ramp when such place is indicated by appropriate signs or by red paint upon the curb surface. (Vehicle Code § 22500-1) 
(Ord. 1680 § 1, 1999; Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.030 - Parking for consecutive period of seventy-two hours—Prohibited. 
No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any vehicle shall park such vehicle upon any street or public right-of-way for more than a consecutive period of seventy-two hours. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.040 - Parking any vehicle, vessel, or trailer for purpose of sale prohibited—Restrictions. 
The city council finds and declares that the display of vehicles, vessels, or trailers for sale on public streets, right-of-ways, and public property causes a hazardous distraction for drivers and pedestrians and is therefore a nuisance. 
A.  It is unlawful to park upon any public street, right-of-way or public property any vehicle, vessel, or trailer for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicle, vessel, or trailer for sale. 
The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to vehicles parked for sale at the residence of the owner of said vehicle and the public streets immediately adjacent thereto. 
B.  It is unlawful for any person or firm to have parked contemporaneously on the public streets or rights-of-way anywhere within the city, three or more vehicles, vessels, or trailers for the principal purpose of displaying such vehicles, vessels, or trailers for sale. 
C.  Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, it is unlawful to park upon any public street, right-of-way or public place within two hundred feet of any signalized intersection or all-way stop controlled intersection or within seventy-five feet of any other intersection, any vehicle, vessel or trailer for sale. The city council finds and declares that vehicles, vessels or trailers parked within the stated distances of an intersection constitute a traffic hazard by distracting the attention of passing motorists and pedestrians away from other traffic moving through and about such intersections. 
D.  It is unlawful for any person or firm, upon property belonging to another, to park or display within thirty feet of the adjacent public street or right-of-way, as measured from the rear edge of the curb, gutter or sidewalk, or from the edge of the pavement if no curb, gutter or sidewalk exists, any vehicle, vessel, or trailer for sale, without first obtaining the express consent of the owner or person having control of such property. This section shall not apply to any private property appropriately zoned and licensed for the sale, repair, or storage of such vehicles, vessels, or trailers. 
E.  It is unlawful upon any public street, right-of-way or public property to park any vehicle, vessel, or trailer for the purpose of painting, greasing, or repairing such vehicle, vessel or trailer except for emergency repairs. 
F.  It is unlawful to park any vehicle, vessel, or trailer upon any public street or right-of-way for the purpose of washing or polishing such vehicle, vessel, or trailer or any part thereof when a charge is made for such service. 
(Ord. No. 1924, § 1, 7-6-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1924, § 1, adopted July 6, 2016, repealed the former § 10.44.040, and enacted a new § 10.44.040 as set out herein. The former § 10.44.040 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1685, § 1, adopted 1999; Ord. 1450, § 1, adopted 1989.  
10.44.050 - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
No person shall park any vehicle in such a position as to obstruct the normal movement of traffic or within the roadway as defined by a painted edge line. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.060 - No stopping in intersection that would obstruct traffic. 
No operator of any vehicle shall enter any intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle being operated without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.070 - Parking not to obstruct sight distance. 
No person shall park or leave standing a vehicle which is six feet or more in height, including any load thereon within one hundred feet of any intersection so designated. 
(Ord. 1680 § 2, 1999)  
10.44.080 - Unlawful parking—Peddlers, vendors. 
A.  Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall stand or park any vehicle, wagon or pushcart from which goods, wares, merchandise, fruits, vegetables or food stuffs are sold, displayed, solicited or offered for sale or bartered or exchanged, or any lunch wagon or eating car or vehicle, on any portion of any street or public right-of-way within the city except that such vehicles, wagons or pushcarts may stand or park only at the request of a bona fide purchaser for a period of time not to exceed ten minutes at any one place. The provisions of this subsection shall not apply to persons delivering such chapters upon order of or by agreement with a customer from a store or other fixed place of business or distribution. 
B.  No person shall park or stand on any street or public right-of-way any lunch wagon, eating cart, vehicle or pushcart from which any chapters of food are sold or offered for sale without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the council which shall designate the specific location in which such cart shall stand. 
C.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle or wagon used or intended to be used in the transportation of property for hire on any street while awaiting patronage for such vehicle or wagon without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the council which shall designate the specific location where the vehicle may stand. 
D.  Whenever any permit is granted under the provisions of this section and a particular location to park or stand is specified therein, no person shall park or stand any vehicle, wagon or pushcart on any location other than as designated in such permit. In the event that the holder of any such permit is convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction for violating the provisions of this section, such permit shall be forthwith revoked by the council upon the filing of the record of such conviction with the council and no permit shall thereafter be issued to such person until six months have elapsed from the date of such revocation. (Vehicle Code § 22455) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.090 - Temporary parking. 
A.  Restrictions. Whenever the public works director or the police chief determine that a traffic congestion is likely to result from the holding of public or private assemblages, gatherings or functions, or for other reasons, they shall have power and authority to order temporary signs to be erected or posted indicating that the operation, parking or standing of vehicles is prohibited on such streets as they shall direct during the time such temporary signs are in place. Such signs shall remain in place only during the existence of such emergency and the public works director shall cause such signs to be removed promptly thereafter. 
B.  Permit. Whenever construction work or other temporary activities interfere with normal parking, the finance director may issue temporary parking permits exempting vehicles from the street parking restrictions described in the traffic resolution. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.100 - Angle parking. 
On any of the streets or portions of streets established in the traffic resolution as angle parking zones, when signs or pavement markings are in place indicating such angle parking, it is unlawful for the operator of any vehicle to park said vehicle except: 
A.  At the angle to the curb indicated by signs or pavement markings allotting space to parking vehicles and entirely within the limits of said allotted space. 
B.  With the front wheel nearest the curb within six inches of said curb. (Vehicle Code § 22503) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.110 - Parking space markings. 
A.  The public works director is authorized to install and maintain parking space markings to indicate parking spaces where authorized parking is permitted. 
B.  When such parking space markings are placed on the street or parking lot, subject to other and more restrictive limitations, no vehicle shall be stopped, left standing or parked other than within a single space unless the size or shape of such vehicle makes compliance impossible. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.120 - Disabled persons' parking spaces. 
The public works director is authorized to designate exclusive disabled persons' parking stalls both on-street and in city operated parking lots in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code § 22511.7) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.125 - Electric vehicle charging stalls. 
A.  A person shall not park or leave standing a vehicle in a stall or space in a city-owned parking lot designated pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 22511 unless the vehicle is connected for electric charging purposes. 
B.  A person shall not obstruct, block, or otherwise bar access to parking stalls or spaces described in subsection A except as provided in subsection A. 
(Ord. No. 1881, § 1, 8-7-2013)  
10.44.130 - Establishment of restrictions and permit parking in parking lots. 
A.  The council may, in the traffic resolution, provide for and establish time restrictions and permit parking in city maintained parking lots and charge for the use of a parking space in said lots. 
B.  No person shall park or stand any vehicle in a permit parking lot contrary to the provisions of council resolutions adopted pursuant to this title. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.140 - Parking on city property. 
A.  The city manager shall have the authority to prohibit, limit or restrict the parking or standing of vehicles in parking lots at city facilities in order to provide orderly, efficient conduct of city business. City facilities include, but are not limited to, the Civic Center, Municipal Service Center, Hutchins Street Square, fire houses, parks and other city buildings, but do not include downtown public/permit parking lots. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.150 - Public works director to designate loading zones and passenger loading zones. 
A.  The public works director is authorized to determine the location of loading zones and passenger loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs or markings indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this chapter and the Vehicle Code are applicable, except as provided in this title. 
B.  "Loading zones" means no stopping, standing or parking at any time as indicated for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or freight; provided, that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of freight more than twenty minutes. Unless indicated otherwise, loading zone restrictions shall be in effect between ten a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays. 
C.  "Passenger loading zones" means no stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers, or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox, which shall not exceed three minutes, and such restrictions shall apply between nine a.m. and six pm. of any day except Sundays and holidays and except as follows: 
1.  When such zone is in front of a hotel or in front of a mailbox, the restrictions shall apply at all times. 
2.  When such zone is in front of a theater, school, park or church, the restrictions shall apply at all times except when such facility is closed. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.160 - Public works director to designate public carrier stops and stands. 
The public works director is authorized to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicabs stands, school bus stops and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such streets, and time restrictions for those stops and stands, in such places, and in such number as the public works director shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every such bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate official traffic control devices. 
(Ord. 1653 § 1, 1997: Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.44.170 - Disabled parking regulations. 
A.  No person shall violate the disabled parking related regulations set forth in Vehicle Code Sections 4461 or 22507.8. Any person cited for violating any provision of Vehicle Code Section 4461 or 22507.8 shall, in addition to any fine imposed by those sections, be assessed an additional penalty of one hundred dollars. 
B.  A violation of this section shall be an infraction punishable solely by the imposition of the fine set forth in subsection A of this section. 
C.  All revenue generated from the imposition of the penalty set forth in subsection A of this section shall be used to implement the enforcement provisions of the Vehicle Code relating to disabled parking spaces and placards within the city, and may not be used to supplant funds used for other general parking enforcement purposes. (Vehicle Code 4461.3). 
(Ord. 1749 § 1, 2004)  
Chapter 10.48 - PERMIT PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.48.010 - Zones on designated streets—Authorized. 
A.  The council may designate in the traffic resolution certain residential streets or any portions thereof as a preferential parking zone for the benefit of residents and merchants adjacent thereto, in which zone vehicles displaying a permit or other authorized indication may be exempt from parking prohibitions or restrictions otherwise posted, marked or noticed. 
B.  No preferential parking council resolution shall apply until signs or markings giving adequate notice thereof have been posted. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.48.020 - Permit—Issuance. 
Parking permits shall be issued by the finance director. The finance director is authorized to issue rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter or authorizing council resolution, governing the manner in which persons shall qualify for and display parking permits. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.48.030 - Fees. 
The finance director shall collect a fee as established from time to time by resolution of the council for each permit issued. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.48.040 - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any delivery vehicle, which vehicles are under the control of an individual providing service to property located on a street in a permit parking area, nor to any emergency motor vehicle including, but not limited to, an ambulance, fire engine or police vehicle. 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.52 - REGULATION OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLE TRAVEL AND PARKING 
Sections: 
 
10.52.010 - Vehicle weight limits in city streets. 
A.  Whenever the traffic resolution of the city designates and describes any street, portion thereof as a street or particular highway, the use of which is prohibited by certain vehicles, any commercial vehicle and/or by any vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight as is therein specified, the public works director shall erect and maintain appropriate signs on those streets affected. 
B.  No vehicle weight limit or restriction shall be established under this section without a public hearing. (Vehicle Code Section 21101.) 
(Ord. 1567 § 1, 1993: Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.020 - Vehicle size limits in city streets. 
A.  Whenever the traffic resolution of the city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street, the use of which is permitted by vehicles within the length limitations described in Section 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code, the public works director is authorized to designate such street by appropriate signs as a route for the movement of such vehicles. 
B.  When signs are erected giving notice thereof, streets or portions of streets are declared to be routes for the movement of vehicles within the maximum lengths allowed by Section 35401.5 of the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code § 35401.5) 
(Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.030 - Route restrictions. 
A.  When any commercial vehicle and/or maximum gross weight limit restrictions are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle not in compliance with the specified restrictions shall not drive on such street except as otherwise provided by city ordinance or in the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code § 21101) 
B.  Nothing in the ordinance codified in this title shall prohibit any vehicle exceeding the limits established under this chapter coming from an unrestricted street having ingress and egress by direct route to and from a restricted street when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor. (Vehicle Code §§ 35703, 35704) 
C.  When any truck length route is established under this chapter and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle not in compliance with the specified limits shall drive on such routes and none other except as otherwise provided by city ordinance or in the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code § 35401.5) 
(Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.040 - Permits. 
The public works director may issue permits in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Vehicle Code for the operation of vehicles exceeding the weight/length limitations imposed by this chapter and the Vehicle Code. (Vehicle Code §§ 35401.5, 35780 et seq.) 
(Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.050 - Parking restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of ten thousand pounds on any street in a residential district. For the purposes of this section, "residential district" means residentially zoned areas designated by the city zoning code (any "R" district) and includes schools, parks, playgrounds, community centers, churches, museums, golf courses (excluding miniature golf courses) and similar recreational uses of a noncommercial nature, and public utility service buildings where they are located in a residential district. 
B.  It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of ten thousand pounds on any street in a commercial or industrial zone except where specifically signed to allow commercial vehicle parking between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m. unless otherwise indicated. This subsection shall remain in effect until January 1, 2003, or until a private parking lot is developed or located in or near the city limits, at which time subsection C of this section shall become effective. 
C.  It is unlawful to park a commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating (GWR) of ten thousand pounds on any street in a commercial or industrial zone. 
D.  This section shall not prohibit parking of commercial vehicles in the process of being loaded or unloaded. 
(Ord. 1697 § 1, 2000; Ord. 1680 § 3, 1999)  
10.52.060 - Parking of trailers prohibited. 
A.  No person who owns or has possession, custody or control of any trailer or semitrailer shall park such trailer or semitrailer upon any street, alley, public way or public place, unless such trailer or semitrailer, at all such times it is so parked, is attached to a motor vehicle capable of providing the motive power for moving the trailer or semitrailer upon the street, alley, public way or public place. 
B.  This section shall not prohibit the parking of a trailer or semitrailer in the process of being loaded or unloaded, nor of a trailer or semitrailer which is disabled in such a manner and to such an extent that it requires some vehicle or facility other than its normal means of motivation to move the same along such street, alley, public way or public place; provided, however, such trailer or semitrailer so disabled may remain so parked while unattached to the motor vehicle described in this section only for the time necessary for the vehicle or facility to be provided for its removal, and in no event longer than two hours. 
C.  This section shall not apply to utility trailers as defined in this code or trailer coaches (travel trailers) as defined in the Vehicle Code. 
(Ord. 1752 § 2, 2004; Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.070 - Bus and utility vehicles. 
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to school buses and buses under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities Commission, or to any vehicle owned by a public utility or licensed contractor while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility. (Vehicle Code §§ 22512, 35704.) 
(Ord. 1410 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.52.080 - Parking noise restrictions. 
A.  It is unlawful on any public right-of-way to stop, park or leave standing for more than five consecutive minutes, a commercial vehicle exceeding a maximum gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand pounds within two hundred fifty feet of a residential district while operating diesel and/or auxiliary engines between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. Auxiliary engines include but are not limited to refrigerator units. This distance shall be measured in a straight line within the public right-of-way from the engine to the nearest point on the district boundary (i.e., not around corners or through private property). The term "residential district" is as defined in Section 10.52.050(A). (Vehicle Code 22507) 
B.  This section shall not prohibit parking of commercial vehicles in the process of being loaded or unloaded. 
C.  This section shall not apply to parking on state highways. 
(Ord. 1581 § 1 (part), 1993)  
Chapter 10.56 - REMOVAL OF VEHICLES 
Sections: 
 
10.56.010 - Removal from streets and/or from privately owned or publicly owned parking facilities. 
Any officer of the police department or regularly employed or salaried employee who is engaged in enforcing parking laws and regulations of the city may remove or cause to be removed a vehicle in accordance with the provisions of the Vehicle Code and the following: 
A.  Any vehicle that has been parked or left standing upon a street or alley for seventy-two or more consecutive hours. 
B.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street when such parking or standing is prohibited by ordinance or resolution and signs are posted giving notice of removal. 
C.  Any vehicle which is parked or left standing upon a street where the use of such street or any portion thereof is necessary for the cleaning, repair or construction of the street or for the installation of underground utilities, or where the use of the street or any portion thereof is necessary for the movement of equipment, tractors or structures of unusual size, and the parking of such vehicle would prohibit or interfere with such use or movement; provided, that signs giving notice that such vehicle may be removed are erected or placed at least twenty-four hours prior to the removal. (Vehicle Code § 22650 et seq.) 
(Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
10.56.020 - Removal from private property. 
A.  Findings and Declarations. In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the council makes the following findings and declarations: The accumulation and storage of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this chapter: 
1.  "Public property" does not include "highway." 
2.  "Owner of land" means the owner of the land on which the vehicle, or parts thereof, is located, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll. 
C.  Exceptions. This chapter shall not apply to: 
1.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or 
2.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is located behind a solid fence six feet or more in height or which is not plainly visible from a highway; or 
3.  A vehicle, or parts thereof, which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or junk dealer, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully-conducted business or commercial enterprise. Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code and this chapter. 
D.  Nonexclusive Regulations. This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
E.  Administration. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development director. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle, or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle (and to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof) declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
F.  Contractor or Franchise Holder—Entry to Remove Vehicle. When the council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person or persons, such person or persons shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. 
G.  Administrative Costs. The council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or parts thereof) under this chapter. 
H.  Community Development Director—Authority to Cause Abatement. Upon discovering the existence of an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, on private property or public property within the city, the community development director shall have the authority to cause the abatement and removal thereof in accordance with the procedure prescribed in this section. 
I.  Notice of Intention. A ten-day notice of intention to abate and remove the vehicle, or parts thereof, as a public nuisance shall be mailed by registered mail to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. The notice of intention shall be in substantially the following form: 
 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
(Name and Address of Owner of the Land) 
 As owner shown on the last equalized assessment roll of the land located at (address), you are notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Ordinance No._______, has determined that there exists upon said land an (or parts of an) abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle registered to _______, license number _______, which constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. _______. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice and, upon your failure to do so, the same will be abated and removed by the City and the costs thereof, together with administrative costs, assessed to your as owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located. 
 As owner of the land on which said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) is located, you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and, if such a request is not received by the Community Development Director within such 10-day period, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) as a public nuisance and assess the costs as aforesaid without a public hearing. You may submit a sworn written statement within such 10-day period denying responsibility for the presence of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) on said land, with your reasons for denial, and such statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing at which your presence is not required. You may appear in person at any hearing requested by you or the owner of the vehicle, or in lieu thereof, may present a sworn written statement as aforesaid in time for consideration at such hearing. 
 Notice Mailed _______ s/ _______ 
 (Date) Community Development Director 
 NOTICE OF INTENTION TO ABATE AND REMOVE AN ABANDONED, WRECKED, DISMANTLED, OR INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR PARTS THEREOF AS A PUBLIC NUISANCE 
 (Name and address of last registered and/or legal owner of record of vehicle—Notice should be given to both if different) 
 As last registered (and/or legal) owner of record of (description of vehicle—make, model, license, etc.), you are hereby notified that the undersigned, pursuant to Ordinance No. _______, has determined that said vehicle (or parts of a vehicle) exists as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle at (described location on public or private property) and constitutes a public nuisance pursuant to the provisions of Ordinance No. _______. 
 You are hereby notified to abate said nuisance by the removal of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) within 10 days from the date of mailing of this notice. 
 As registered (and/or legal) owner of record of said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle), you are hereby notified that you may, within 10 days after the mailing of this notice of intention, request a public hearing and, if such a request is not received by the Community Development Director within such 10-day period, the Community Development Director shall have the authority to abate and remove said vehicle (or said parts of a vehicle) without a hearing. 
 Notice Mailed _______ s/ _______ 
 (Date) Community Development Director 
J.  Public Hearing. Upon request by the owner of the vehicle or owner of the land, received by the community development director within ten days after the mailing of the notices of intention to abate and remove, a public hearing shall be held in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.10 of this code on the question of abatement and removal of the vehicle or parts thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicle, and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof against the property on which it is located. 
If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land within such ten-day period, said statement shall be construed as a request for a hearing, which does not require the owner's presence. Notice of the hearing shall be mailed, by registered mail, at least ten days before the hearing, to the owner of the land and to the owner of the vehicle, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If such a request for hearing is not received within said ten days after mailing of the notice of intention to abate and remove, the city shall have the authority to abate and remove the vehicle or parts thereof as a public nuisance without holding a public hearing. 
K.  Public Hearing by Administrative Hearing Officer. 
1.  All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the administrative hearing officer in accordance with Section 1.10 of this code, who shall hear all facts and testimony he or she deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or parts thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The administrative hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land may appear in person at the hearing or present a sworn written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with reasons for such denial. 
2.  The administrative hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action he or she deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. The administrative hearing officer may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or parts thereof if, in his or her opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the administrative hearing officer may find that a vehicle or parts thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative costs and the cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the land. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or parts thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site. 
3.  If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the owner of the land and that the owner has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the administrative hearing officer shall not assess the costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such owner of the land. 
4.  If the owner of the land submits a sworn written statement denying responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on his or her land but does not appear, or if an interested party makes a written presentation to the administrative hearing officer but does not appear, the owner or interested party shall be notified in writing of the decision. 
L.  Judicial Review. 
1.  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the administrative hearing officer in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
2.  Such appeal shall be heard by the council which may affirm, amend, or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate. 
3.  The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in this title. 
4.  In conducting the hearing, the council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. 
M.  Removal of Vehicles. Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision if such notice is required by subsection K of this section, or fifteen days after such action of the governing body authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removing it to a scrapyard or automobile dismantler's yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable, unless it is a vehicle which qualifies for either horseless carriage license plates or historic vehicle license plates pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 5004, in which case, it may be reconstructed or made operable. 
N.  Notice to Department of Motor Vehicles. Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or parts thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles identifying the vehicle or parts thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates, certificates of title and license plates. 
O.  Assessment of Costs. If the administrative costs and the cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to subsection K of this section are not paid within thirty days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. The assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. 
P.  Unlawful to Abandon, Park, Store or Leave Vehicle. It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon, park, store or leave or permit the abandonment, parking, storing or leaving of any licensed or unlicensed vehicle or parts thereof which is in an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative condition upon any private property or public property, not including highways, within the city for a period in excess of seven days unless such vehicle or parts thereof is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not plainly visible from the street or other public or private property, or unless such vehicle is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, or a junkyard, or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully-conducted business or commercial enterprise. 
Q.  Unlawful to Refuse to Comply With Order. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle, or parts thereof, or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. (Vehicle Code § 22660) 
(Ord. 1778 § 3, 2006; Ord. 1586 § 1, 1993; Ord. 1402 § 1 (part), 1987)  
Chapter 10.58 - POLICY AND PROCEDURES RELATING TO ADMINISTRATION OF PARKING CITATION VIOLATIONS 
Sections: 
 
10.58.010 - Purpose. 
Effective July 1, 1993 Assembly Bill 408 codified as Section 40200 et seq. of the Vehicle Code, decriminalized parking citations, removed parking citation processing from the courts and established a system of administrative adjudication for these offenses. 
In accordance with Assembly Bill 408, the city has assumed responsibility for parking citation processing and hereby implements a parking citation hearing examiner program as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1601 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.58.020 - Traffic hearing examiner. 
By resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, the city council shall designate a traffic hearing examiner, for an indefinite term, subject to removal by a majority vote of the council. The traffic hearing examiner shall be a city employee qualified to conduct the administrative review hearing objectively and in accordance with law. The traffic hearing examiner's continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation and benefits shall not be directly or indirectly linked to the amount of fines collected by the traffic hearing examiner or the city. 
(Ord. 1601 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.58.030 - Administrative adjudication manual. 
In order to provide for the hearing and disposition of contested cases involving parking violations of the California Vehicle Code and this code, the council by resolution shall adopt an administrative adjudication manual which will set forth the policies and procedures for conducting administrative review hearings in accordance with all applicable law. The manual may be amended by the council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 1601 § 1 (part), 1994)  
10.58.040 - Fee schedule. 
By resolution adopted pursuant to this chapter, the council shall adopt a schedule of penalties, administrative fees and any other related charges. The schedule may be amended by the council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. 1601 § 1 (part), 1994)  
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1948, § 1, adopted Feb. 21, 2018, repealed the former Ch. 12.04, §§ 12.04.010—12.04.430, and enacted a new Ch. 12.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 12.04 pertained to encroachments and derived from Prior code §§ 9A-1—9A-42; Ord. 1333 § 1(8)(A), adopted 1984; Ord. 1415 § 1, adopted 1988; Ord. 1667 § 1 (part), adopted 1998. 
 
Article I. - Generally 
 
12.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Applicant" means any person, as defined, that has filed an application to do work or encroach upon a public street or right-of-way as defined in this chapter. 
B.  "Director" means the public works director of the city. 
C.  "Encroach" and "encroachment" mean going upon, over, under or using any right-of-way in such a manner as to prevent, obstruct, damage, or interfere with the normal use of that way or property, and may include the performance thereon of any of the following acts: 
1.  Excavating or disturbing the right-of-way; 
2.  Constructing, placing, leaving, erecting or maintaining any post, sign, pole, fence, barricade, guardrail, wall, furniture, goods, equipment, construction material, loading platform or other structure or object on, over, or under the right-of-way; 
3.  Planting any tree, shrub or other growing thing within the right-of-way; 
4.  Placing or leaving on the right-of-way any rubbish, brush, earth, or other material of any nature whatever; 
5.  Constructing, placing, leaving, or maintaining on, over, under or within the right-of way any pathway, sidewalk, driveway, or other surfacing, any culvert or other surface drainage or subsurface drainage facility, or any pipe, conduit, or cable; 
6.  Traveling on the right-of-way by any vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of dimension, weight or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit; 
7.  Lighting or building a fire; 
8.  Constructing, placing, leaving, planting, or maintaining any structure, embankment, excavation, tree, or other object adjacent to the right-of-way which causes or will cause an encroachment; or 
9.  Other activities which may impede the normal access to the right-of-way. 
D.  "Permittee" means any person(s), as defined, that proposes to do work or encroach upon a public street or right-of-way as defined in this chapter and has been issued a permit for such encroachment by the director. All obligations, responsibilities and other requirements of the permittee, as described in this chapter, shall be binding on subsequent owners of the encroachment. 
E.  "Person" means a natural person(s), legal entity, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, and public agency or organization. 
F.  "Public street" means the full width of the right-of-way of any road, street, lane or alley used by or for the general public, whether or not those roads, streets, lanes, and alleys have been accepted as and declared to be part of the city system of public streets, except streets forming a part of the state highway system. 
G.  "Right-of-way" means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage, or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the use of the general public for street or highway purposes, public parks, and public property. 
H.  "Sidewalk seating area" means the use of a public sidewalk for the placement of tables, chairs, benches, and related items. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.020 - Public employees and contractors excepted. 
This chapter shall not apply to any officer or employee of the city in the discharge of his official duties, or to any work being performed by any person under contract with the city. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.030 - Emergency work. 
This chapter shall not prevent any person from maintaining any pipe or conduit lawfully on or under any public street, or from making excavation, as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when an urgent necessity therefor arises during the hours the offices of the city are closed, except that the person making an emergency use or encroachment on a public street shall apply for a permit therefor within one calendar day after the offices of the city are again opened. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.040 - Indemnification and insurance. 
Permittee shall be responsible for all liability imposed by law for personal injury or property damage proximately caused by work permitted and done by permittee under the permit, or proximately caused by failure on permittee's part to perform his obligations under such permit in respect to maintenance. If any claim of such liability is made against the city, its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, or agents, the permittee shall defend, indemnify and hold them, and each of them, harmless from such claim insofar as permitted by law. 
Prior to the issuance of a permit, the permittee shall provide to the city, in a form and in amounts acceptable to the risk manager, certificates of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured, covering the scope of work described in the permit and application. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.050 - Right of lawful use. 
Any permit granted under this chapter shall be subject to the right of the city, or any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of the right-of-way for any purpose for which it may be lawfully used, and no part of the right-of-way shall be unduly obstructed at any time. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
Article II. - Permits 
 
12.04.060 - Required. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a written permit, to: 
1.  Encroach or to make or cause to be made any encroachment of any nature whatever within, upon, over or under the limits of any right-of-way in the incorporated territory of the city; or 
2.  Make or cause to be made any alteration of any nature within, upon, over or under such right-of-way; or 
3.  Construct, put upon, maintain or leave on any right-of-way, or to cause to be constructed, put upon, maintained or left thereon, any obstruction or impediment of any nature whatever; or 
4.  Remove, cut or trim trees on such right-of-way; or 
5.  Set a fire on such right-of-way; or 
6.  Place on, over or under such right-of-way any pipeline, conduit or other fixture; or 
7.  Move over or cause to be moved over the surface of any right-of-way or over any bridge, viaduct or other structure maintained by the city any vehicle or combination of vehicles or other object of dimension or weight prohibited by law or having other characteristics capable of damaging the right-of-way; or 
8.  Construct, place, leave, erect, or maintain any sign, pole, fence, barricade, guardrail, furniture, goods, equipment, construction material, structure, wall, culvert or similar encroachment; or 
9.  Make any excavation or embankment in such a way as to endanger the normal usage of the right-of-way. 
B.  Before a vehicle or combination of vehicles or object of weight or dimension or other characteristic prohibited by law without a permit is moved on any right-of-way, a permit to do so must first be granted by the director as set forth in specifications established by the director, or as otherwise required by the director . 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.070 - Application. 
A.  The director shall prescribe and provide a regular form of application for the use of any applicant for a permit required by this chapter. The application form shall contain space for the name, address and principal place of business of the applicant, together with such detail as in the judgment of the director is necessary to establish the exact location, dimensions, duration, and purpose of the proposed use or encroachment. 
B.  The applicant shall enclose with, attach or add to the application for a permit a map, plat, sketch, diagram, or similar exhibit, and of a size and in such quantity as may be prescribed, on which shall be plainly shown any and all information necessary to locate, delineate, illustrate, or identify the proposed use or encroachment and the right of applicant to so use or encroach thereon. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.080 - Issuance. 
The written permits required by this article shall be issued by the director, at his or her discretion, subject to conditions set forth in this chapter or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.090 - Refusal—Grounds. 
No application will be approved nor permit issued for constructing or maintaining a loading platform upon or in the right-of-way of a public street or for erecting or maintaining therein or thereon a post, pole, column, or structure for support for advertising signs; or for any form of food vending by either stationary or mobile vehicles, carts, or other temporary structures, unless the applicant has obtained a written permit by the city council to park in the right-of-way pursuant to Section 10.44.080 of this code; or work that disturbs existing asphalt pavement on streets or alleys that have been resurfaced within the past five years. 
No application will be approved nor permit issued for encroachments that will adversely impact the health, safety, and welfare of the city or injure other property, whether real or personal. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 2, 11-7-2018; Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.100 - Refusal—Appeal. 
A.  Any person aggrieved by the refusal of a permit required by this article may appeal to the city council. Administration of this chapter is referred to the director. 
B.  If the city council finds all of the following to be true, the permit shall be granted: 
1.  The applicant will be substantially damaged by the refusal to grant the permit as requested. 
2.  No other reasonable method of obtaining the desired result is available except as proposed by the applicant. 
3.  The granting of the permit will not be materially detrimental to the public interest, safety, health and welfare or injurious to other property. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.110 - Term—Beginning work. 
The permittee shall begin work or use authorized by permit issued pursuant to this article within ninety days from date of issuance, unless a different period is stated in the permit. If the work or use is not begun within ninety days, or within the time stated in the permit, then the permit shall become void. A permit for continuing a use or maintaining an encroachment previously authorized shall be valid for a term of one year from date of issuance, unless sooner terminated by discontinuance of the use, or removal of the encroachment for which the permit was issued. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.120 - Completion of work. 
The permittee shall complete the work or use authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this article within the time and according to the terms specified in the permit. If the work is unduly delayed by the permittee and if the interest of the public reasonably so demands, the director shall have authority to complete the work or any portion thereof. The actual cost of such a work by the city plus twenty percent as an overhead charge shall be charged to and paid by the permittee or his surety. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.130 - Display. 
A.  The permittee shall keep any permit issued pursuant to this article at the site of work, or in the cab of a vehicle when movement thereof on a public street is involved, and the permit must be shown to any authorized representative of the director or law enforcement officer on demand. 
B.  A permit issued for continued use or maintenance of an encroachment may be kept at the place of business of the permittee or otherwise safeguarded during the term of validity, but shall be made available to an authorized representative of the director or law enforcement officer within a reasonable time after demand therefor is made. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.140 - Changes. 
No changes may be made in the location, dimension, character or duration of the encroachment or use as granted by the permit except upon written authorization of the director. No permit shall be required for the continuing use of maintenance of encroachments installed by public utilities, or for changes therein or thereto where such changes or additions require no excavation of the right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.150 - Fees. 
A.  The schedule of fees will be those recommended by the director and established and adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit with the city cash or check, in a sufficient sum to cover the fee for issuance of the permit, charges for field investigation, and the fee for necessary inspection, all in accordance with schedule established and adopted by the city council. 
B.  Public utilities may, at the director's option, make payment for the charges provided for in subsection A of this section as billed by the city instead of advance deposit as required in subsection A. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
Article III. - Bonds 
 
12.04.160 - Required. 
Unless this article is waived in the permit and prior to the issuance of a permit, the applicant must file with the director a bond equal to the cost plus twenty percent of the work required to be done in order to comply with all the terms and conditions of such permit as estimated by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.170 - Cash in lieu. 
In lieu of a surety bond required by Section 12.04.160, the applicant may deposit cash in the amount described in Section 12.04.160 to secure the performance of the terms and conditions of the permit and the compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.180 - Annual. 
As an alternative to the requirements of Section 12.04.160, the applicant may, upon approval of the director, annually file with the director a bond equal to the estimated costs plus twenty percent of the work required to be done in order to comply with all of the terms and conditions of permits issued during the year and to comply with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.190 - Continuing use. 
An applicant for a permit for a use or encroachment which is to continue or remain within, under or upon the right-of-way of a public highway beyond the time authorized for construction or installation shall file with the city clerk a cash deposit or surety bond equal to the cost plus twenty percent in order to make the right-of-way safe and convenient for travel to the general public. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.200 - Additional. 
The director may require an additional bond or cash deposit to supplement those required by Sections 12.04.160 to 12.04.190 at any time when in his or her opinion the amount of the bond or cash deposit previously made is insufficient. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.210 - Provisions. 
A.  The bonds provided for in this article shall be executed by the applicant or contractor doing work as principal and by a surety company authorized to do business in this state as a surety. The bond shall name the city as obligee and shall be conditioned as follows: 
1.  That each and all of the terms and conditions of the permit shall be fully performed and complied with to the satisfaction of the director; 
2.  That each and all of the provisions of this chapter are complied with. 
B.  An extension of time for performance of work may be granted by the director, but no such extension of time shall be valid unless written and no such extension shall release any surety company upon any bond. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.220 - Payment—Release. 
Any bond or cash deposit required by the director pursuant to this article shall be payable to the city. Upon satisfactory completion of all work authorized in the permit according to the terms of the permit and this chapter the bond or cash deposit shall be released. In the event of noncompliance, the city may deduct from the cash deposit the actual cost to the city plus twenty percent of work done by the city pursuant to Section 12.04.120 before returning the deposit to the depositor. In the event of a bond having been posted, the city may proceed against the surety and principal for the actual cost to the city plus twenty percent of work done by the city pursuant to Section 12.04.120. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.230 - Public utilities or agencies. 
Cash deposits or bonds will not be required of any public utility or public agency which is authorized by law to establish or maintain any works or facilities in, under or over any public street or right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
Article IV. - Practices and Requirements 
 
12.04.240 - Safeguards. 
A.  The permittee in the conduct of the work, use, or maintenance of an encroachment authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall comply with all applicable state, federal, and local laws, regulations, and orders and shall provide, erect or maintain such lights, barriers, warning signs, patrols, watchmen and other safeguards as are necessary to protect the traveling public. Any omission on the part of the director to specify in the permit what lights, barriers, or other protective measures or devices are required shall not excuse the permittee from complying with all requirements of law and appropriate regulations and ordinances for adequately protecting the safety of those using public streets. 
B.  A permittee making any excavation or erecting or leaving any obstruction within, under or upon the right-of-way, or causing the same to be made, erected or left, shall place and maintain lights at each end of the excavation or obstruction, at not more than fifty-foot intervals along the excavation or obstruction, from one-half hour before sunset of each day to one-half hour after sunrise of the next day, until the excavation is entirely refilled or the obstruction removed and the right-of-way made safe for use. In addition, reflectorized warning signs conforming to the requirements of the state division of highways shall be placed two hundred and four hundred feet from each excavation or obstruction, in such a position as to adequately warn public traffic. 
C.  The warning signs, lights and other safety devices shall conform to city requirements and the California Department of Transportation's manual. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.250 - Notice—Start of work. 
A.  Before beginning any work including excavation, construction of concrete sidewalks, curbs, gutters, or driveway approaches, planting, trimming or removing trees, making, placing, or causing an obstruction in the right-of-way, the permittee shall notify the director. 
B.  Before starting work on which an inspector is required, the permittee shall notify the director twenty-four hours in advance of beginning such work. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.260 - Notice—Completion of work. 
The permittee shall call the city to schedule a final inspection of the work. The permittee shall upon the completion of all work authorized in the permit, notify the director. No work is completed until notification of completion is given pursuant to this section and the work is accepted by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.270 - Interference with traffic. 
All work or use shall be planned and executed in a manner that will least interfere with the safe and convenient travel of the general public at the place where the work or use is authorized. Free and unobstructed access shall be provided to all mailboxes, fire hydrants, water gates, valves, manholes, drainage structures, or other public service structures and property as may be required for emergency use. Such public service structures or property shall not be removed or relocated without proper approval from the constituted authorities charged with their control and maintenance. The work area shall be confined so as not to obstruct roadways and walks unnecessarily. Temporary roadways, driveways, and walks for vehicles and pedestrians shall be constructed where required. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.280 - Restoration of street—Maintenance. 
A.  Upon completion of the work, acts or things for which the permit was issued, or when required by the director, the permittee shall replace, repair, or restore the public street or right-of-way at the place of work to the same condition existing prior thereto unless otherwise provided in the permit. The permittee shall move all obstructions, impediments, material, or rubbish caused or placed upon the right-of-way under the permit, and shall do any other work or perform any act necessary to restore the public street or right-of-way to a safe and usable condition. 
B.  After completion of all work, the permittee shall exercise reasonable care in inspecting and maintaining the area affected by the encroachment. For a period of one year after the completion of the work the permittee shall repair and make good any injury or damage to any portion of the public street or right-of-way which occurs as the result of work done under the permit, including any and all injury or damage to the public street or right-of-way which would not have occurred had such work not been done. By the acceptance of the permit the permittee agrees to comply with the above. The permittee shall, upon notice from the director, immediately repair any injury, damage or nuisance, in any portion of the public street or right-of-way resulting from the work done under the permit. In the event the permittee fails to act promptly or should the exigencies of the injury or damage require repairs or replacement to be made before the permittee can be notified or can respond to notification, the city may, at its option, make the necessary repairs or replacements or perform the necessary work and the permittee shall be charged with all expenses incurred in the performance of such work. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.290 - Relocation or removal. 
If any future construction, reconstruction, or maintenance work by the city on a public street or right-of-way requires the relocation, removal, or abandonment of installations or encroachments in, on or under the public street or right-of-way, the permittee owning, controlling or maintaining such installations or encroachments shall relocate, remove, or abandon the same at its sole expense. When removal, relocation, or abandonment is required, the director shall give the permittee a written demand specifying the installations or encroachment that must be removed, relocated, or abandoned. If such permittee fails to comply with such instructions, the city may cause the removal, relocation, or abandonment of the encroachment at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.300 - City specifications and standards. 
All work done under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall conform to specifications established by the director, or in the absence of established specifications to recognized standards of construction and approved practices in connection with the work to be done. All work shall be done subject to the supervision of, and to the satisfaction of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.310 - Small pipes—Surface cutting—Tunneling. 
Utility services and other small diameter pipes or rigid conduits shall be jacked, or otherwise forced underneath a paved surface. The paved surface of a road shall not be cut, trenched or otherwise disturbed unless specifically authorized in the permit. No tunneling will be permitted except as specifically set forth in the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.320 - Minimum cover. 
The minimum cover over any and all pipes or conduits larger than two and one-half inches installed within the right-of-way shall be three feet of earth or imported materials, unless otherwise specified in the permit. Within the public street, the minimum cover of three feet shall be measured from the surface, existing or planned. The director is authorized to permit installation of pipes or conduits where three feet of cover cannot be provided because of topography, structures, or other engineering necessity. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.330 - Backfilling. 
Backfilling of an excavation shall be in accordance with specifications established by the director or as otherwise required by him, or both as to material and method; and backfill shall not be placed in any excavation without compaction of the material used, the degree and method of compaction to be to the satisfaction of the director. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.340 - Heavy vehicles. 
When authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter to move a vehicle or combination of vehicles or load of dimension or weight in excess of that permitted by law, the permittee shall comply with the general law regulating travel over a public street, including posted signs or notices which limit speed or direction of travel, or weight which may be placed upon a structure or the width or height that may be moved on or over a public street, or otherwise restrict or control travel on a public street. The permittee shall at all times conform to and abide by the practice and procedure necessary to make safe and convenient the travel of the general public, and to keep safe and preserve the public highway over and on which movement is being made. Any violation of this section shall cancel the permit issued to the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.350 - Mailboxes. 
All mailboxes must be placed in accordance with the rules and regulations of the United States Post Office Department, but no box shall be so placed within the right-of-way as to endanger the life or safety of the traveling public. A permit is not required for the placing of mailboxes. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.360 - Trees. 
A.  The applicant for a permit to plant trees in the right-of-way of a public street shall show in his or her application the exact location of and the kind of trees to be planted. No change shall be made in either location of trees or in kind of trees without the written approval of the director. 
B.  The director may refuse to issue a permit authorizing the planting of trees in the right-of-way of a public street when, in his or her judgment, the location as described in the application, or the nature of growth above or below ground of the kind of tree proposed, will impede or inconvenience travel on a public highway or unduly disturb the right-of-way thereof, or in any way impede construction or maintenance of necessary facilities. 
C.  Trimming of trees will be permitted only when and in the manner authorized by a permit issued pursuant to this chapter in order that the shapeliness of the tree may be preserved. 
D.  An application for removal of a tree will be approved and a permit issued only when a necessity for removal exists, and adjacent property owners concur, or when deemed necessary by the director. When a tree is removed under authority of a permit, the entire stump shall be taken out for a distance of at least two feet below the ground surface unless otherwise specified in the permit, and the hole backfilled and tamped. All debris from trimming or removal shall be removed from the site and the right-of-way restored to its former condition. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.370 - Hedges, fences or other structures. 
A.  No hedge, shrub, or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure, or earth, gravel, rocks, artificial turf, pavers, brick, concrete, or any other material of any nature, except as provided in Section 12.04.380, shall be planted, erected, maintained, or placed in a right-of-way without a permit. 
B.  No hedge, shrub, or other planting whatever, fence or similar structure shall be maintained across any existing walkway in a sidewalk area or shoulder. The intent of this restriction is to keep free a walkway for pedestrians or other lawful public travel without interference by or with vehicular travel. No encroachment of any nature will be permitted or maintained which impedes, obstructs, or denies such pedestrian of other lawful travel within the limits of the right-of-way of a public street, or which impairs adequate sight distance for safe pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
C.  The permittee or the owner of the adjacent property shall maintain the hedges, shrubs, walls, fences, or similar structures erected for landscaping purposes in a neat and orderly condition at all times. If the encroachment is not maintained as specified in this chapter the director may direct the permittee or property owner to remove the encroachment and restore the right-of-way to its former condition, at the expense of the permittee or property owner. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.380 - Lawns. 
A.  Other provisions of this chapter notwithstanding, it is lawful for a person to plant and maintain a lawn of any grass, of a type not prohibited by other law, within the right-of-way of a public street without a written permit. However, the lawn shall not contribute to a dangerous condition of public property, and shall not extend into the traveled way of the public street or into the drainage ditches, gutter or other drainage facilities and shall comply with the water efficient landscape requirements set forth in Section 17.03.70. 
B.  The general public may not be denied the use of the planted area for pedestrian or other lawful travel. The city may use the planted area for any purpose whatever, and may issue a permit to any applicant to go on to perform the work or otherwise encroach pursuant to this chapter. If the lawn is damaged or disturbed in the course of an authorized encroachment, it shall be removed and replaced by the permittee unless the permit specifically states otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.390 - Marking street, sidewalk or curb. 
It is unlawful for any person, without first obtaining a permit, to solicit, on a commercial or donation basis, to place or maintain any number, figure, letter, carving, drawing, design or other marking upon any street, sidewalk or curb; except, that markings for the purpose of identifying survey, utility, or construction locations shall not be subject to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.400 - Monuments. 
Any monument of granite, concrete, iron, or other lasting material set for the purpose of locating or preserving the lines or elevation of any public street or right-of-way, property subdivision, or a precise survey point or reference point, shall not be removed or disturbed or caused to be removed or disturbed without first obtaining written permission from the director to do so, such permission to be granted in conformance with requirements as set forth in specifications established by the director and in the Senate Bill No. 1467, Chapter 400 and California Business & Professional Code Section 8771, as may be amended. Replacement of removed or disturbed monuments will be at the expense of the permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.410 - Gutter construction at driveways. 
The director shall have the power to require property owners to remove driveway approaches where they are an obstruction to the gutter and to reconstruct driveway approaches where drainage or other conditions are unsatisfactory. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.420 - Disused driveways. 
Where a curb has been broken to provide a driveway for a residence or a business and such driveway is no longer needed or used as a driveway, the owner of the property or owner or operator of the business shall remove the entire driveway and replace it with curb, gutter, and sidewalk conforming to the current city standards. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.425 - Sidewalk seating area. 
Establishment of a sidewalk seating area shall require the review and approval of an encroachment permit issued by the director and be consistent with the following standards: 
A.  Location. Sidewalk seating within the right-of-way is only permitted within the downtown as it is delineated in the "downtown development standards and guidelines" as approved by the city council. 
B.  Physical Requirements. 
1.  A minimum four-foot unobstructed sidewalk for pedestrians shall be maintained at all times from a table, chair, bench, display, planter, or any other appurtenance used as part of a sidewalk seating area. 
2.  No sidewalk seating area shall block access to or from a building. 
3.  All sidewalk furniture shall be removable and shall be removed, along with seats, tables, and other appurtenances if the business is closed for more than forty-eight hours unless otherwise approved by the director. 
4.  Any umbrella or similar feature shall be secured safely to a table, chair, or ground. 
5.  The design and appearance of all proposed improvements or furniture shall present a coordinated theme and shall be compatible with the establishment. 
6.  No signs shall be permitted in connection with a sidewalk seating area except as may be required by the city for reasons of public health or safety. 
C.  Maintenance. The permittee shall maintain the sidewalk area and the adjoining street, curb, and gutter in a neat, clean, and orderly condition at all times. This shall include all tables, chairs, benches, planters, or other appurtenances placed in the public right-of-way. Trash receptacles to serve the seating area shall be provided as required by the director. 
D.  Special Standards for Sidewalk Dining Areas with Alcoholic Beverage Service. 
1.  Alcoholic beverages may only be served in sidewalk seating areas which are established in conjunction with a restaurant. For purposes of this section, a restaurant is a business operating within an enclosed building, which has as its primary purpose, the serving of meals prepared on the premises which devotes the majority of its floor space to food preparation and dining, and where any bar or liquor service area is clearly subordinate in both area of the premises and gross receipts to the primary dining function of the restaurant. 
2.  The sidewalk seating area shall be physically separated from the rest of the sidewalk by a barrier as required by the State of California Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. The barrier shall be compatible with the appearance and design of the building and the rest of the sidewalk seating area. 
3.  No bar shall be allowed in the sidewalk seating area. 
4.  Empty beverage containers shall be removed from the sidewalk seating area as soon as possible. 
5.  The appropriate city of Lodi use permit and alcoholic beverage control license shall be obtained prior to the operation of a sidewalk seating area serving alcoholic beverages and shall be maintained continuously as long as alcoholic beverages are served in the sidewalk seating area. Loss of such permit or license shall automatically constitute termination of the city approval to serve alcoholic beverages in the sidewalk seating area. 
E.  Indemnification/Insurance. The permittee shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its elected and appointed officials, officers, employees, and agents from and against all claims, losses, damage, injury, and liability for damages arising from the permittee's use of the right-of-way. The permittee shall provide to the city, in a form and in amounts acceptable to the risk manager, certificates of insurance, naming the city as an additional insured covering the area subject to the permit. 
F.  Suspension of Permit. The director shall have the right to suspend or prohibit the operation of a sidewalk seating area or require removal at any time because of anticipated or actual problems or conflicts in the use of the sidewalk area. Such problems or conflicts may arise from, but are not limited to, scheduled festivals, parades, marches, and similar special events; repairs to the street, sidewalk, or other public facility; or from demonstrations or emergencies occurring in the area. To the extent possible, the city will give prior written notice of any time period during which the operation of the sidewalk seating area must be suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
Article V. - Violation—Penalty 
 
12.04.430 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  Any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
B.  In addition to any other remedies available at law, any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be liable to the city for all expenses and damages caused by any such violation. 
C.  In addition to any other remedies provided by this chapter, the Lodi Municipal Code, and or state law, there are hereby imposed the following administrative civil penalties for each violation of this chapter or the terms and conditions of any encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
1.  Any person initiating work within the public street or right-of-way without obtaining an encroachment permit shall be subject to and responsible for a fine in the amount of one thousand two hundred fifty dollars for a first violation, five thousand dollars for a second violation, and ten thousand dollars for a third or subsequent violation. 
2.  Any person in possession of a valid encroachment permit that initiates work within the public street or right-of-way, but fails to provide notification for inspection as required by this chapter of the Lodi Municipal Code and the permit shall be subject to and responsible for a fine in the amount of five hundred dollars for a first violation, two thousand five hundred dollars for a second violation, and five thousand dollars for a third or subsequent violation. 
D.  Each party violating any provision of this chapter or any encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day on which any such violation is committed, continued, or permitted by any such person. 
E.  In addition to any penalty, sanction, fine, or imprisonment, any person violating the provisions of this chapter or any encroachment permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall be required to pay any and all expenses of enforcement, including those costs necessary to inspect, remove and/or correct the violation. In addition to all remedies herein contained, the city may pursue all reasonable and legal means in collecting those sums authorized and due. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
12.04.440 - Declaration of nuisance. 
The city council finds and declares that an encroachment constitutes a nuisance and provides that an encroachment maintained in violation of this chapter may be removed and abated as such pursuant to Title 1, Chapter 1.10 of the Lodi Municipal Code. 
(Ord. No. 1948, § 1, 2-21-2018)  
Chapter 12.08 - PEDESTRIAN MALLS 
Sections: 
 
12.08.010 - Established. 
A pedestrian mall is established within the east one hundred and sixty feet of the east-west alley as shown in Block 9 on the map entitled "Mokelumne" which map is on file in the office of the county recorder. 
(Prior code § 21-12)  
12.08.020 - Vehicular traffic. 
All vehicular traffic shall be prohibited within the pedestrian mall established by Section 12.08.010 except that deliveries to the establishments facing on such pedestrian mall may be permitted by those vehicles and at such times of the day as may be subsequently established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 21-13)  
12.08.030 - Easements. 
Any easements for public utility lines located within the pedestrian mall established by Section 12.08.010 are reserved to the city. 
(Prior code § 21-14)  
Chapter 12.12 - RECREATIONAL AREAS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1954, § 1, adopted July 18, 2018, repealed the former ch. 12.12, §§ 12.12.005—12.12.550, and enacted a new ch. 12.12 as set out herein. The former ch. 12.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1902, § 1, adopted May 20, 2015. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
12.12.005 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the use of City parks and park facilities so that all persons may enjoy and make use of such parks and park facilities, and to protect the rights of those in the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.010 - Definitions 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms, phrases and words are defined as follows: 
A.  "Annual" when used to define the term of a Park Permit shall refer to a calendar year. 
B.  "Athletic Field" means a piece of land traditionally used for organized athletic or sporting event(s), including the adjoining spectator area. 
C.  "Commercial Activity" means soliciting, selling, hawking, peddling, advertising, promoting or providing any goods, wares, merchandise, services, liquids or edibles for human consumption, distributing circulars, or utilizing Recreational Areas to complete the terms of a sale or provide a service as a result of a sale, or for an activity utilizing Recreational Areas that is conducted by a business, its employees or agents. 
D.  "Department" means the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services Department. 
E.  "Director" means the person who holds the title of Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services director in the city. 
F.  "Recreational Area" means any area, including streets and sidewalks, that is publicly owned, controlled or used by the City of Lodi, and open to the general public for recreational purposes, regardless of any fee or age requirement. The term "Recreational Area" includes, but is not limited to, parks, picnic areas, playgrounds, sports fields, golf courses, walking paths, gardens, hiking trails, bike paths, riding trails, swimming pools, roller- and ice-skating rinks, skateboard parks, amusement parks, and beaches. 
G.  "Service Animal" means any guide dog, signal dog, or other animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of an individual with a disability, including, but not limited to, guiding individuals with impaired vision, alerting individuals with impaired hearing to intruders or sounds, providing minimal protection or rescue work, pulling a wheelchair, or fetching dropped items. 
H.  "Vehicle" means any wheeled conveyance, whether motor-powered, animal-drawn or self-propelled. The term includes any trailer in tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby carriages or strollers, and vehicles in the service of Recreational Areas. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.012 - Administration. 
A.  All Recreational Areas, as defined herein, are under the administrative jurisdiction of the Director. 
B.  The Director shall, in connection with his or her other duties, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.014 - Fees and charges. 
The Director shall, from time to time, submit a schedule of fees and charges to be imposed for the use of Recreational Areas under the Director's jurisdiction, which fees and charges shall be effective upon adoption thereof by resolution of the city council. The Director shall collect the fees and charges for the use of designated Recreational Areas. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Article II. - General Rules 
 
12.12.016 - Certain Recreational Areas restricted to specific users. 
The Director may designate in writing and by posting at the site, certain Recreational Areas or portions thereof, which are available for exclusive use only upon obtaining a Park Permit pursuant to Section 12.16.130. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.018 - Violation—Misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, unless otherwise specified, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding the maximum prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.020 - Domestic animals. 
A.  Animals Prohibited. Notwithstanding subsection B of this section, no person having care or custody of a dog or other domestic animal shall allow such animal in any Recreational Area, whether restrained or at large. For purposes of this section, an animal is "at large" unless tied, restrained by chain, strap or cord attached to its collar and actually held by some person or tied or restrained in an automobile or other vehicle, or unless staked or fastened or kept securely in an enclosure. This section shall not apply to dogs used by public law enforcement agencies, Service Animals, or to animals in parking lots or walkways adjacent to Recreational Areas. 
B.  Exceptions. The Director shall be authorized to designate, by appropriate signs, specified Recreational Areas, or portions of Recreational Areas in which it shall be permissible to allow dogs to be present without leashes or other restraints. The owner or handler of any dog present in such designated Recreational Areas shall be required upon request to present proof of a current rabies vaccination and licensing for such animal. 
C.  Cleanup Required. It shall be the duty of any person having care or custody of any animal in a Recreational Area to clean up after such animal. All waste shall be collected by such persons and deposited in an appropriate receptacle or container. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.030 - Solicitation. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall solicit alms or contributions for any purpose, whether public or private, without the explicit consent of the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.040 - Fires. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director. No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any Recreational Area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.045 - Glass bottles or similar containers, alcoholic beverages and/or tobacco products—Prohibited in certain posted recreational areas. 
The Director may designate, by appropriate signs, those Recreational Areas in which it shall be illegal to utilize or possess glass bottles or similar containers, alcoholic beverages and/or tobacco products of any nature. In such posted facilities, it is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession any bottle or similar glass container or to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or to smoke or otherwise use tobacco products. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.050 - Entering closed areas. 
A.  No person shall be present in any Recreational Area during the days and hours that such Recreational Area is designated by the Director as closed. Such days and hours shall be posted on signs at the entrances to such Recreational Area. 
B.  Further, no person shall enter or be in an area posted as "Closed to the Public," or any fenced Recreational Area in which the entry gates are locked, nor shall any person use, aid or abet the use of any such area in violation of the posted notices. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.055 - Interfering with parks, recreation and cultural services programs. 
No person shall be present on any schoolyard or park within ten feet of the field of play of any field being used by a Department affiliated youth program for play, practice, or a game unless that person: 
A.  Is a city approved volunteer or employee who has received Department of Justice fingerprint clearance; or 
B.  Is a youth member of the team and/or program. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.060 - Commercial activity. 
A.  No person in a recreational area shall engage in any commercial activity in a recreational area as defined in Section 12.12.010 without a park permit issued by the director or his/her designee as specified in Section 12.16.130. Such prohibition shall include sales activities that encroach on the sales rights of a vendor authorized to sell such products or services pursuant to a concession contract with the department. 
B.  Commercial activities, as defined in Section 12.12.010, are prohibited at Lodi Lake Park, except for those by a licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority of the director, those associated with a rental of a Lodi Lake Park facility with department permission, or photographers who have obtained a park permit from the department. 
C.  Commercial activities, as defined in Section 12.12.010, are prohibited in all recreational areas on weekends and city holidays except for those made by a licensed concessionaire acting by and under the authority of the director, those associated with a park facility rental with department permission, or photographers who have obtained a park permit from the department. 
D.  The provisions of this section do not apply to persons engaged in vending activity pursuant to Chapter 9.19 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 3, 11-7-2018; Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.070 - Advertising. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall announce, advertise or call the public attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.080 - Posting signs. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall paste, glue, tack or otherwise post any sign, placard, advertisement or inscription whatever, nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a Recreational Area, except for Department employees acting in the course and scope of their duties. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.090 - Vandalism of buildings and improvements. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall willfully mark, deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with or displace or remove any building, bridges, tables, benches, fireplaces, railings, paving or paving materials, water lines or other public utilities or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent, monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers, or other structures or equipment, facilities or park property or appurtenances whatsoever, either real or personal. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.100 - Removal of natural resources. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall dig or remove any beach sand, whether submerged or not, or any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, downed timber or other wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment, blasting or other means or agency. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.110 - Damaging trees and plants—Digging. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall damage, cut, carve, transplant or remove any tree or plant or injure the bark or pick the flowers or seeds of any tree or plant, nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to any tree or plant. A person shall not dig in or otherwise disturb grass areas, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or usefulness of any Recreational Area. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.120 - Climbing—Inappropriate sitting. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall climb any tree or wall, stand or sit upon monuments, vases, fountains, railings or fences or upon any other property not designated or customarily used for such purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.130 - Hunting—Wild animal molestation. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, kill, trap, chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal or bird, nor shall he remove or have in his possession the young of any wild animal, or the eggs or nest or young of any bird. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.140 - Feeding animals. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall give or offer, or attempt to give to any animal or bird any tobacco, alcohol or other known noxious substances. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.145 - Bathing, swimming and wading—Designated areas. 
No person in a park shall swim, bathe and/or wade in any waters or waterway in or adjacent to any Recreational Area, except in areas which have been designated by the Director as areas where the activity is allowed. The areas where swimming, bathing and/or wading is allowed shall have official signs erected, designating the areas, and giving notice that the activity is allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.150 - Bathing, swimming and waterskiing—Where permitted. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall swim, bathe, wade, or water ski in any waters or waterways in or adjacent to any Recreational Area, except in such waters and at such places as are provided therefor, and in compliance with such regulations as are set forth in this chapter or may be adopted, nor shall any person frequent any waters or places customarily designated for the purpose of swimming, bathing or waterskiing, or congregate thereat when such activity is prohibited by the Director upon a finding that such use of the water would be dangerous or otherwise inadvisable. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.160 - Bathing, swimming and waterskiing—Hours. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall frequent any waters or places designated for the purpose of swimming or bathing, or congregate thereat, except between such hours of the day as are designated by the Director for such purposes for each individual area. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.170 - Structures. 
No person in a recreational area shall erect, maintain, use or occupy any tent, shelter or structure of any kind unless there is an unobstructed view into such tent, shelter or structure from at least three sides; nor shall any guy wire, rope or extension, or exterior brace or support, be connected or fastened from any such structure to any other structure, stake, rock or other object outside of the structure. The Director may issue a written permit to allow the use of structures as set forth in Section 12.16.100. Issuance of a permit is in the sole discretion of the Director subject to appeal to the City Manager as set forth in Section 12.16.150 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.180 - Boating—Where permitted. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall bring into or operate any boat, raft or other watercraft, whether motor-powered or not, upon any waters, except at places designated for boating by the Director. Such activity shall be in accordance with applicable regulations as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or may thereafter be adopted. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.190 - Boating—Safety. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall navigate, direct or handle any boat in such a manner as to unjustifiably or unnecessarily annoy or frighten or endanger the occupants of any other boat. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.200 - Boating—Hours. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall launch, dock or operate any boat of any kind on any waters between the closing hour of the park at night and opening hour the following morning, nor shall any person be on, or remain on or in any boat during the closed hours of the Recreational Area, except as otherwise authorized by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.210 - Picnic areas—Use. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall picnic or lunch in a place other than those designated for that purpose. Attendants shall have the authority to regulate the activities in such areas when necessary to prevent congestion and to secure the maximum use for the comfort and convenience of all. Visitors shall comply with any directions given to achieve this end. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.220 - Picnic areas—Availability. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall violate the regulation that use of the individual fireplaces together with tables and benches follows generally the rule of "First come, first served." 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.230 - Picnic areas—Sharing. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall use any portion of the picnic areas or of any of the buildings or structures therein for the purpose of holding picnics to the exclusion of other persons, nor shall any person use such area and facilities for an unreasonable time if the facilities are crowded. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.240 - Picnic areas—Cleanup. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall leave a picnic area before the fire is completely extinguished and before all trash in the nature of boxes, papers, cans, bottles, garbage and other refuse is placed in the disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles are available, then refuse and trash shall be carried away from the park area by the picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.250 - Games. 
A.  No person in a Recreational Area shall take part in or abet the playing of any games involving thrown or otherwise propelled objects such as balls, stones, arrows, javelins or model airplanes except in areas set apart for such forms of recreation. The playing of rough or comparatively dangerous games such as football, baseball and quoits is prohibited except on the fields and courts or areas provided therefor. Roller skating shall be confined to those areas specifically designated for that pastime. 
B.  No person shall play or engage in any activity other than tennis or ancillary activities prior to playing tennis on park tennis courts without the Director's express permission. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.255 - Lodi Lake Nature Area—Prohibited activities. 
No person shall, within the nature area of Lodi Lake Park: 
A.  Ride, walk or operate any bicycle, tricycle, or similar human-powered conveyance, except upon the main trails, as designated by appropriate signs indicating bicycles are permitted. This section shall not apply to any law enforcement or parks department employee while carrying out his or her official duties, or any person with a physical disability; 
B.  Conduct or participate in any organized track and field or athletic event, without first obtaining written consent of the Director. As a matter of city policy to prevent overuse of and damage to the nature area, such consent shall be given only for cross country events and only to those organizations that had conducted cross country events in the nature area during the twelve-month period immediately prior to April 1, 1991. In the event any organization qualifying for cross country events under this section shall fail to conduct a cross country event during any twelve-month period, consent shall be denied thereafter. 
C.  Violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.257 - Exclusion of individuals. 
The Director may exclude from any Recreational Area any individual whose presence is detrimental to the enjoyment of the facility by others, or whose conduct is offensive to the public and a nuisance. Such person may appeal his exclusion to the City Manager pursuant to Section 12.16.210 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.258 - Use of Park equipment for exercise. 
A.  No person shall place any equipment or object to be used for fitness or athletic activity weighing more than twenty-five (25) pounds within any Recreational Area without prior written authorization by the Director. 
B.  The Director may authorize the use of equipment excluded under Section A above, with conditions, if he/she determines that the proposed use of such equipment: 
1.  Will not damage public property; 
2.  Will not interfere with the public's use and enjoyment of the Recreational Area; and 
3.  Will not interfere with the normal operations of the Recreational Area. 
C.  No person shall use picnic tables, barbecues, playground equipment or other Recreational Area amenities except for their intended use. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Article III. - Traffic 
 
12.12.260 - Motor vehicle laws. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall fail to comply with all applicable provisions of the state motor vehicle traffic laws in regard to equipment and operation of vehicles, together with such regulations as are contained in this chapter and other ordinances. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.270 - Direction. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall fail to obey all traffic officers and Department employees, such persons being authorized and instructed to direct traffic whenever and wherever needed in the Recreational Areas and on the highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto in accordance with the provisions of the regulations of this article and such supplementary regulations as may be issued subsequently by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.280 - Signs and signals. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall fail to observe carefully all traffic signs indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others posted for proper control and to safeguard life and property. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.290 - Use of roads. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall drive any vehicle on any area except the paved roads or parking areas, or such other areas as may on occasion be specifically designated as temporary parking areas by the Director. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.300 - Parking—Where permitted. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall park a vehicle in other than an established or designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with the posted directions and with the instructions of any attendant who may be present. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.305 - Lodi Lake Park—Vehicle entry restrictions. 
Lodi Lake Park—Parking Restrictions. 
A.  No person shall enter Lodi Lake Park in any vehicle unless the vehicle contains a properly displayed valid annual entry permit, issued by the city of Lodi, or purchases a day use entry pass from either the gate attendant or the self-pay station located at the entrance to Lodi Lake Park. The annual pass or daily pass must be displayed on the driver's side dashboard or hung from the rear-view mirror with the expiration date/issuance date visible from the exterior of the vehicle. 
B.  Annual permits for Lodi Lake Park can be purchased at the administrative offices of the Parks, Recreation and Cultural Services Department or from a park gate attendant when available. The fee for the annual permits will be established from time to time by council resolution. 
C.  Vehicles entering Lodi Lake Park without a valid annual permit or valid day use pass will be in violation of this chapter and subject to citation. 
D.  By resolution adopted pursuant to this section, council shall adopt a schedule of penalties, administrative fees and any other charges related to violation of this section. The schedule may be amended by council from time to time by resolution. 
E.  This section shall not apply to a governmental entity, special district, or public utility vehicles on the site in connection with the entities operations. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.310 - Parking—Double parking. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall double park any vehicle on any road or parkway unless directed by a Department official. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.320 - Bicycles—Safe operation. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall ride a bicycle other than on the right-hand side of the road paving as close as conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times operate their machines with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all turns, pass to the right of any vehicle they are overtaking and pass to the right of any vehicles they may be meeting. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.330 - Bicycles—Where permitted. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall ride a bicycle on other than a paved vehicular road or path designated for that purpose. A bicyclist shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over any grassy area or wooded trail or on any paved area reserved for pedestrian use. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.340 - Bicycles—Extra rider. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall ride any other person on a bicycle. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.350 - Bicycles—Rack use. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall leave a bicycle in a place other than a bicycle rack when such is provided and there is a space available. Violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.360 - Bicycles—Improper parking. 
No person in a Recreational Area shall leave a bicycle lying on the ground or paving, or set against trees, or in any place or position where other persons may trip over or be injured by them. Violation of this section shall be an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Article IV. - Enforcement 
 
12.12.370 - Authorized officers. 
The Director and park attendants shall, in connection with their duties imposed by law, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. For the purposes of such enforcement, the Director and any park attendant are "officers" who may issue citations to violators of this chapter pursuant to Chapter 1.08 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.380 - Ejection of violators. 
The Director and any park attendant have the authority to eject from the Recreational Area any person acting in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.390 - Seizure of property. 
The Director and any park attendant have the authority to seize and confiscate any property, thing or device in the Recreational Area in violation of this chapter or used in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Article V. - Skate Parks 
A.  Skateboarding, roller-skating, in-line skating, bicycling, and similar activities are prohibited in city parks and recreational facilities unless specifically authorized in areas designed by this article and as further designated by resolution of the city council. The City of Lodi designates and maintains as a skate park facility that area located within Kofu Park at 1145 South Ham Lane at Cardinal Street. The boundaries of the skate facility shall be defined by a fence and the signs required by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018) 
 
12.12.420 - Skate park regulations. 
The following regulations shall apply to the riding of skateboards, in-line skates, roller skates, or bicycles at, or any other use of, any facility or park owned or operated by the city of Lodi, which has been designated a skate park: 
A.  Within the skate park, it shall be unlawful for any person to: 
1.  Ride, operate, or use a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates or bicycle unless that person is wearing a helmet designed for skateboarding, roller-skating, in-line skating, and/or bicycle use with a chin strap, elbow pads designed for skateboarding, roller-skating, in-line skating and/or bicycle use with plastic elbow caps, and knee pads designed for bicycle, skateboard and/or in-line skating use with plastic knee caps, which equipment shall be in good repair at all times during use; 
2.  Ride, operate, utilize a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates unless such equipment is in good repair at all times during use; 
3.  Be on or use an individual apparatus within the skate park while another person is using it; 
4.  Place or utilize additional obstacles or other materials (including but not limited to ramps or jumps) within the skate park; 
5.  Use the skate park amenities when the surfaces of the amenities are wet or other conditions exist which would adversely affect the safety of bikers, skateboarders, or skaters; 
6.  Use, operate, or possess any source of amplified music, including but not limited to, stereos, boom boxes, and amplifiers; 
7.  Enter the concreted portion of skate park unless actively bicycling, skateboarding, or in-line skating in accordance with these regulations; 
8.  Use, consume, or have within his or her custody or control food, beverages, or tobacco within the concreted portion of the skate park; 
9.  Use, consume, or have within his or her custody or control alcohol or illegal drugs within the skate park; 
10.  Enter the skate park while under the influence of alcoholic beverages or illegal drugs; 
11.  Use or possess glass containers, bottles, or other breakable glass products within the skate park; 
12.  Use or engage in profanity, reckless and boisterous behavior (including, but not limited to, tandem riding, pushing, horseplay, and bullying), or any activity which could endanger the safety of persons using the skate park or spectators; 
13.  Engage in graffiti, tagging, or other defacing of city property or the properties of others; 
14.  Ride, operate, or utilize any device other than a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or in-line skates (prohibited devices include, but are not limited to, motor vehicles, motorized skateboards, and motorized skates) within the skate park; 
15.  No person shall enter or remain in or upon the skate park premises: 
a.  While closed, as determined by the parks and recreation department, or 
b.  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; 
16.  Use or have within his or her custody or control, board wax, within the skate park; 
17.  No person shall enter the skate park with any animal; and 
18.  No person under the age of twelve shall enter the skate park without being accompanied by a parent or guardian. 
B.  The skate park shall be posted with signs at the following locations: 
1.  At the entrance to the skate park; and 
2.  On the fences of the skate park, facing the interior of the skate park, and in such places inside the park as determined by the city. The signs shall not be less than two feet by three feet in size and shall use black letters on a white background. The signs may, but shall not be required to, summarize the regulations governing the use of the skate facility. Each sign shall contain, in letters not less than ½ inch in height, the following language: 
WARNING 
BICYCLING, SKATEBOARDING, AND IN-LINE SKATING ARE HAZARDOUS RECREATION ACTIVITIES. USE OF THIS FACILITY MAY RESULT IN SERIOUS INJURIES OR DEATH. THE CITY OF LODI DOES NOT ASSUME ANY RESPONSIBILITY FOR INJURIES OR DEATH. EACH PERSON ENTERING THE FACILITY ASSUMES ALL RISK OF INJURY OR DEATH. CALIFORNIA HEALTH AND SAFETY CODE § 115800. 
IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO RIDE, OPERATE, OR UTILIZE A BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, OR IN-LINE SKATES UNLESS THE PERSON IS WEARING A HELMET DESIGNED FOR BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, AND/OR IN-LINE SKATING WITH A CHIN STRAP, ELBOW PADS DESIGNED FOR BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, AND/OR IN-LINES SKATING USE WITH PLASTIC ELBOW CAPS AND KNEE PADS DESIGNED FOR BICYCLE, SKATEBOARD, AND/OR IN-LINE SKATING USE WITH PLASTIC KNEE CAPS, WHICH EQUIPMENT SHALL BE IN GOOD REPAIR AT ALL TIMES DURING USE. IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO RIDE, OPERATE, OR UTILIZE ANY DEVICE OTHER THAN NON-MOTORIZED BICYCLES, NON-MOTORIZED SKATE BOARDS, AND NON-MOTORIZED SKATES. IT IS UNLAWFUL FOR ANY PERSON TO SMOKE, CONSUME ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES, OR PLAY AMPLIFIED MUSIC WITHIN THE SKATE PARK. USERS UNDER THE AGE OF 12 MUST BE ACCOMPANIED BY A PARENT OR GUARDIAN. ANY PERSON FAILING TO COMPLY WITH THIS SECTION SHALL BE SUBJECT TO CITATIONS AND PENALTIES PURSUANT TO LODI MUNICIPAL CODE SECTION 1.08.010. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.430 - Violations. 
Every act prohibited or declared unlawful and every failure to perform an act made mandatory by this chapter shall be prosecuted as a misdemeanor for violations of subsections (A) (9), (10), (13), and (14) of Section 12.12.420. All other violations shall be prosecuted as an infraction as provided in Section 1.08.010 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Article VI. - Waterfowl and Migratory Birds 
 
12.12.510 - Purpose. 
A.  The purpose of this article is to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the city and its wildlife by prohibiting the feeding of waterfowl and migratory birds within city parks and lakes. Feeding waterfowl and migratory birds increases the potential for damage to the flora and fauna of public parks and lakes due to an accumulation of bird droppings, may harm water quality, and increase the potential for the spread of disease to city residents. 
B.  It is also the purpose of this article to protect the welfare of the waterfowl and migratory birds themselves, as wildlife studies have shown that feeding waterfowl and migratory birds can interrupt their normal migration patterns, cause nutritional problems, and promote the spread of bird diseases. 
C.  It is also the purpose of this article to minimize the attraction to waterfowl and migratory birds of residing within city parks and lakes by restricting their feeding and other acts that encourage the birds to halt their natural migration patterns. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.520 - Definitions. 
As used in this article, the terms listed below shall have the meaning assigned them. 
"Feed" or "feeding" means the placing, exposing, depositing, distributing, or scattering, directly or indirectly, of shelled corn, shucked or un-shucked, wheat or other grains, breads, popcorn, scraps, salt, or any other feed or nutritive substances likely to be eaten by waterfowl or migratory birds, in any manner or form, so as to lure, attract, or entice waterfowl or migratory birds to, on or over any such areas where such feed items or materials have been placed, exposed, deposited, distributed, or scattered. 
"Waterfowl and migratory birds" means those species of birds commonly known as "swans," "geese," and "ducks" and any other waterfowl or migratory birds under the jurisdiction of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.530 - Prohibited conduct. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to feed, in any public park or upon any public lake, or on any other property owned or operated by the city, any waterfowl or migratory birds. 
B.  It shall be unlawful to create or foster any condition or allow any condition to exist or continue, which results in a congregation or congestion of waterfowl or migratory birds in any public park or upon any public lake. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.540 - Violations and penalties. 
A.  Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable on conviction as set forth in Section 1.08.010(C) of this code. 
B.  Any person convicted of three or more violations of this article within the twelve-month period immediately preceding the commission of the latest offense shall have the offense charged as a misdemeanor, punishable as specified in Section 1.08.010(B) of this code. 
C.  The continuation of any violation of this article for each successive day shall constitute a separate offense, and the person committing the violation may be punished for each separate offense as provided herein. 
D.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the violation of any provision of this article may be subject to abatement by a restraining order or injunction issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
12.12.550 - Enforcement. 
This article may be enforced by a city police officer, animal control officer, code enforcement officer, or the Director or his/her designee. 
(Ord. No. 1954, § 1, 7-18-2018)  
Chapter 12.16 - PERMITS FOR USE OF CITY FACILITIES[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1954, § 2, adopted July 18, 2018, repealed the former ch. 12.16, §§ 12.16.010—12.16.040, 12.16.100—12.16.250, and enacted a new ch. 12.16 as set out herein. The former ch. 12.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1902, § 2, adopted May 20, 2015. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
12.16.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to establish the standards for issuance of park permits so that all persons may enjoy and make use of such Recreational Areas and to protect the rights of those in the surrounding areas. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.020 - Definitions. 
A.  Definitions in Section 12.12.010 shall apply to this chapter. 
B.  "Park Permit" is a document issued by the Department authorizing the holder's limited use of a Recreational Area. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.030 - Administration. 
A.  All Recreational Areas are placed under the administrative jurisdiction of the Director. 
B.  The Director shall, in connection with his other duties, diligently enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.040 - Fees and charges. 
The Director shall, from time to time, submit a schedule of fees and charges to be made for the use of the facilities and equipment under the Director's jurisdiction, which fees and charges shall be effective upon adoption thereof by resolution of the city council. The Director shall collect the fees and charges for the use of Recreational Areas. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
Article II. - General Rules 
 
12.16.100 - Activity requiring a park permit. 
The following activities are prohibited in all recreational areas unless a park permit from the director is issued: 
A.  Any event in which twenty-five or more people are taking part, or any event that is advertised to the public. 
B.  An assembly for the collective participation in, or preparation for, a game, practice, scrimmage, or clinic, for an organized league, affiliation, team or club. 
C.  Any event conducted by a business, its employees or agents. 
D.  Commercial activity as defined in Section 12.12.060, with the exception of vending activity pursuant to Chapter 9.19 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1960, § 4, 11-7-2018; Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.110 - Park permit application. 
A.  A person who desires a park permit shall file an application with the Director on a form provided by the Department. Priority for reserved use of Athletic Fields shall be given to City of Lodi residents and groups. The information required in a park permit application shall include: 
1.  The identification of the applicant; 
2.  The name, address and phone number of the person, group, organization or corporation sponsoring the activity; 
3.  The nature of the proposed activity; 
4.  The dates, hours, and Recreational Area for which the permit is desired; 
5.  An estimate of attendance; 
6.  Assurance of responsibility for cleaning the Recreational Area, if required; 
7.  Identification, address and telephone number(s) of the security personnel applicant will provide, if required, and 
8.  Other information which the Director considers reasonably necessary to evaluate the application. 
B.  A park permit may not be issued for an activity which is likely to be attended by more than 100 people unless an application for the permit is received by the Director at least thirty days before the date of the proposed activity for which the permit is sought. The Director may waive the thirty-day period rule proposed if the applicant waives the right to appeal denial. 
C.  The park permit application shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by city council resolution, as amended from time to time. The Director, in his or her sole discretion, may waive or reduce the fee. 
D.  Each park permit applicant shall be provided a copy of the regulations governing the use of Recreational Areas. 
E.  The Director may impose as a condition to the issuance of a park permit, requirements considered necessary for the protection, health and safety of persons or property or both in light of the nature of the activity for which the permit is sought and the number of persons likely to be in attendance. 
F.  Indemnification. The Director may require an applicant to enter into an agreement with the city to indemnify and hold the city harmless from all injuries and damage resulting from the permitted use. 
G.  Insurance. The Director may require an applicant to provide the city with proof of insurance prior to using the Recreational Area. Type of insurance and minimum amounts of coverage will be set by the City's Risk Manager. 
H.  Bond for Security Costs. Where necessary for the protection of public property, the Director may require that the permittee provide either city approved private security or a bond or a cash deposit sufficient to cover the actual costs for police security and potential damage to city property. The actual cost is computed by determining the number of additional police officers that will be required for the event, the number of hours the officers will be on duty for the event, and the city's fully burdened cost of providing officers on an hourly basis. 
I.  No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, given away or dispensed at any Recreational Area without prior written consent of the Director, and with the understanding that the applicant must also apply to the California Alcoholic Beverage Control Department for additional permits as required by State law. 
J.  Any youth group making an application for the use of any Recreational Area must be a group with a constitution and/or bylaws, which meets regularly, has a slate of officers, and has an advisory adult leader who will take the responsibility to sign the application. The adult leader would assume responsibility for damage to Recreational Area amenities, as well as the deportment of the group while they are using the Recreational Area. Minors are to be under the supervision of a responsible adult at all times during the use of the facility. Any exceptions can be made at the discretion of the Director when applicable 
K.  The fees established under this chapter shall be paid seven days in advance of the use of any Recreational Area, with the exception of Hutchins Street Square. Fees for use of Hutchins Street Square shall be paid ninety (90) days in advance. No reservation for any Recreational Area will be considered complete until payment of the appropriate fee(s). 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.120 - Standards for issuance of permit. 
A.  The Director shall issue a park permit upon finding that: 
1.  The proposed use of the Recreational Area will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the general public enjoyment of the Recreational Area; 
2.  The proposed use will not unreasonably interfere with or detract from the promotion of public health, welfare, safety and recreation; 
3.  Every condition, including, where applicable, the payment of fees, approval of the Department, proof of insurance coverage, and applicable requirements under this Chapter are met; 
4.  The proposed use is not reasonably anticipated to incite violence, crime or disorderly conduct; 
5.  The proposed use will not incur unusual, extraordinary, or burdensome expense or security operation by the Department; 
6.  The Recreational Area is not reserved for other use; 
7.  The applicant agrees to comply with the conditions of approval imposed by the park permit. 
B.  The Director shall deny the application if the Director finds that any of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That the application reveals that the city has no Recreational Area that will accommodate the activity of the applicant; 
2.  That the proposed activity is of a size or nature that requires the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city, as to hinder police protection to the city as a whole; 
3.  That the applicant refuses to agree in writing to comply with all conditions in the park permit; 
4.  That the applicant failed to file a timely, complete application; 
5.  That the proposed activity violates federal, State or local laws or regulations; 
6.  In the case of a park permit for a Commercial Activity, a park permit for a Commercial Activity has been issued for the same date and times in the same recreational area; or 
7.  The proposed activity is not allowed under Section 12.12.060. 
C.  Any denial of an application for park permit shall specify the grounds therefor. Any person or entity whose application has been denied by the Director may appeal the denial to the City Manager, pursuant to the procedure as set forth in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.130 - Permit required. 
No person shall use any Recreational Area when payment of a fee is required, until a permit for such use has been issued by the Department and all necessary fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.140 - Contract. 
If the Director determines that a contract for the use of the premises is required, the Director shall furnish a form of contract to the applicant for execution, which shall thereafter be submitted to the city attorney for approval. The city manager is authorized and directed to execute such approved contract for and on behalf of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.150 - City manager review. 
The City Manager may review any determination of the Director in regard to such applications, permits or contracts required by this Chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.160 - Fraud. 
No person shall apply for a permit to use any of premises under this chapter for any purpose with the intent to defraud the city of any fee or fees. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.170 - Insurance. 
A.  The Director may require an applicant to provide insurance adequate to cover potential loss due to injury or damage arising out of the permitted event. If insurance is required, a copy of the policy or certificate of insurance, along with necessary endorsement, must be provided to the Director not less than ten days before the date of the event. The user of any Recreational Area may be required to indemnify or hold harmless the city, its officers, directors or employees from any loss, liability or damage arising out of, as the result of, or in connection with the use of the Recreational Area, equipment or services of the city, its officers or employees, including all costs of defending any claim arising as a result thereof. In such case, the applicant shall present the city with evidence of a policy of insurance, effective throughout the period of use, in an amount and fashion as determined by the City's Risk Manager. 
B.  Policies of insurance shall not be cancellable without fifteen days' prior written notice to the city, and shall name city as an additional insured. 
C.  Evidence of products liability coverage may be required in an amount not less than one hundred thousand dollars. 
D.  The person or persons to whom a park permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or injury sustained to any person whatever by reasons of the negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit has been issued. 
E.  If food or alcoholic beverages or nonalcoholic beverages are sold or served at the event, the insurance policy must include an endorsement for product and/or liquor liability. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.180 - Priority of park permit. 
A.  A person who uses a fee facility without a permit or a posted picnic area or park facility which has been reserved for exclusive use, shall vacate the area when the holder of a park permit arrives on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.190 - Exhibiting permit. 
A person who claims to have a park permit for use of a Recreational Area shall produce and exhibit a copy of the permit upon the request of a Department employee, code enforcement officer or city police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.200 - Permit exemptions. 
A maximum of 24 people may use, occupy, or remain in an unfenced Athletic Field that is not otherwise being used or occupied by a person or group with a park permit issued pursuant to this chapter, without a permit, provided such use or occupancy is not intended to and does not occur on a recurring basis (defined as two (2) or more times per month), and is not a Commercial Activity. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.210 - Appeals. 
Any person or entity may appeal the decision of the Director to the city manager. The applicant must file said appeal with the city clerk within five calendar days of the Director's decision. The city manager or designee, shall hold a hearing within twenty-one business days of the filing of the appeal, at which time the Director may present any and all evidence, testimony and information relevant to the denial or exclusion from the premises. The city manager shall, within five business days of the appeal hearing, issue a decision either affirming the denial of the application or exclusion of the activity by the Director, or directing the Director to issue the requested permit or allowing the activity at issue. The decision of the city manager is final and not subject to further appeal. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.220 - Regulation authority. 
The Director may establish and post regulations governing the use of the Recreational Areas which are not inconsistent with regulations contained in this chapter and which promote the public health, safety, and the preservation of City property. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.230 - Revocation. 
The Director shall have the authority to revoke a park permit upon a finding of a violation of any rule, regulation or ordinance, or upon good cause shown. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.240 - Possession and display. 
The permittee or applicant shall have a copy of the park permit in his/her possession and shall produce same upon request made by any Department employee, code enforcement officer or city police officer. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
12.16.250 - Violation—Infraction. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not exceeding the maximum prescribed by law. 
(Ord. No. 1654, § 2, 7-18-2018)  
Chapter 12.20 - NUMBERING BUILDINGS 
Sections: 
 
12.20.010 - Required—Figure specifications. 
All persons having charge either as owner, agent or otherwise of any building within the city, whether residence or business property, and which building is not numbered according to the system of numbering prescribed by this chapter shall cause the same to be numbered by placing on such building the correct number thereof in a conspicuous place in metal figures not less than three inches in diameter. 
(Prior code § 5-8)  
12.20.020 - New buildings. 
Every owner, or agent of such owner, of any house, whether residence or business property, erected within the city after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall, within thirty days after the completion of such building, cause such building to be numbered according to the system of numbering such buildings prescribed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-9)  
12.20.030 - Occupancy equals completion. 
The occupancy of any building shall be equivalent to completion of the building for the purpose of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-10)  
12.20.040 - System. 
The following system is established and adopted for numbering buildings in the city: 
A.  Buildings shall be numbered north and south from Pine Street and east and west from Sacramento Street allowing twenty-five feet of space for each number and one hundred numbers to the block. 
B.  The buildings on the north side of streets running east and west shall take the odd numbers and the buildings on the south side the even numbers. On streets running north and south the buildings on the west side shall take the odd numbers and the buildings on the east side the even numbers. 
(Prior code § 5-11)  
Chapter 12.24 - UNDERGROUND UTILITIES 
Sections: 
 
12.24.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Commission" means the Public Utilities Commission of the state. 
B.  "Person" means individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees. 
C.  "Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures" means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. 
D.  "Underground utility district" or "district" means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.24.030. 
E.  "Utility" means all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. 
(Prior code § 25A-1)  
12.24.020 - Hearing on necessity. 
The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. 
(Ord. 1333 § 1(9)(G), 1984; prior code § 25A-2)  
12.24.030 - Resolution establishing district. 
If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area composing such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. 
(Prior code § 25A-3)  
12.24.040 - Overhead construction or maintenance—Unlawful. 
Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.24.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when such overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as such overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.24.090, and for such reasonable time required to remove such facilities after such work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 25A-4)  
12.24.050 - Overhead construction or maintenance—Emergency work. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed fourteen days, without authority of the city council in order to provide emergency service. The city council may grant special permission on such terms as the city council may deem appropriate in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. 
(Prior code § 25A-5)  
12.24.060 - Excepted facilities. 
This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities: 
A.  Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer; 
B.  Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting; 
C.  Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited; 
D.  Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred volts; 
E.  Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street or alley; 
F.  Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services; 
G.  Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts; 
H.  Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. 
(Prior code § 25A-6)  
12.24.070 - Notice. 
A.  Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. Such city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission or adopted by the city. 
B.  Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. 
(Prior code § 25A-7)  
12.24.080 - Responsibility of utility companies. 
If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.080, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission or adopted by the city. 
(Prior code § 25A-8)  
12.24.090 - Responsibility of property owners. 
A.  Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure in a district shall perform construction and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.24.080 and the termination facility on or within such building or structure being served, all in accordance with applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission or adopted by the city. 
B.  In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting such property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.24.030, the city engineer shall post written notice in a conspicuous place on the property being served and give written notice by mail to all customers being billed for the utility on the property being served, and thirty days thereafter shall have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to such property. 
(Prior code § 25A-9)  
12.24.100 - Responsibility of city. 
The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed under this chapter in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified, in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.24.030. 
(Prior code § 25A-10)  
12.24.110 - Extension. 
In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.24.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. 
(Prior code § 25A-11)  
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapters:  
Chapter 13.04 - SERVICE GENERALLY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1917, § 1, adopted November 18, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 13.04, §§ 13.04.010—13.04.130, and enacted a new Chapter 13.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1856, adopted Feb. 1, 2012. 
 
13.04.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases when used in this chapter shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Delinquent bills" means all accounts that have not been paid to the city within twenty-six days after the issue date of the bill for the services provided for by this chapter. 
B.  "Director of finance" means the person named from time to time by the city manager to be in charge of the financial records and accounts of the city. 
C.  "Electric connection" means all wires, insulators, conduits, fuse blocks, fuses, and switches up to and including the meter used to connect the consumer's electric wiring to the city's electrical distribution system. 
D.  "Refuse collection service" means that service described in Chapter 13.16 relating to garbage. 
E.  "Sanitary sewer tap" means all connections, valves, pipes, and fittings used to connect the customer's sewer system to the city sewer mains. 
F.  "Service" means the supplying of water, electrical energy, the collection of solid waste refuse, and the disposal of sewage. 
G.  "Sewage disposal service" means that service provided for in Chapter 13.12 relating to sewers. 
H.  "Water tap" means the connection valves, pipes, and fittings used to connect the customer's water system to the city water mains. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.020 - Application for service or discontinuance. 
All applications for service or discontinuance of service shall be made to, and on forms provided by, the director of finance. The director of finance shall issue all orders for services, changes, or discontinuances. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.025 - Deposits. 
A.  Services. A deposit for the furnishing or continuance of service may be required by the director of finance. Such deposit shall not exceed the estimated amount of charges for two months' service. 
B.  No United States Issued Identification. In addition to a deposit for services, the director of finance may require a deposit not to exceed the estimated amount of charges for two months' services of a customer who is unable to provide a United States issued identification. 
C.  Length of Deposit. 
1.  Deposits for services shall remain on the account until twelve consecutive billing periods have passed without late charges being assessed, unless the account is discontinued prior to such event. Return of deposit amounts shall be in the form of credit to the account, unless the account is discontinued, in which case the deposit shall be applied to the final billing and any excess shall be returned to the customer by check. 
2.  Deposits for no United States issued identification shall remain on the account until the account is discontinued, or until valid United States issued identification is provided. Return of deposit amounts shall be in the form of a credit to the account, unless the account is discontinued, in which case the deposit shall be applied to the final billing and any excess shall be returned to the customer by check. A non-U.S. identification deposit will not be required where at least one U.S. Identification exists on the account. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.030 - Bill payment and delinquency. 
A.  Payment. All bills for the services enumerated in this chapter are due and payable upon receipt thereof, at the finance division, Lodi, California, and become delinquent twenty-six days after the issue date of the bill. 
B.  Delinquency and Termination of Services. The director of finance shall send notice of delinquent bills, and if all delinquent charges for services are not paid within ten days after mailing this notice, then the director of finance may discontinue all service furnished to the customer by the city. Within this ten-day notice period, the director of finance shall provide a notice forty-eight hours prior to discontinuance of services. Termination of utility services shall be in accordance with Government Code Section 54346. 
1.  In no event will water service be terminated for non-payment sooner than one hundred twenty days after the issue date of the bill or the accrual of delinquent utility charges in excess of three thousand dollars, whichever occurs first. Forty-eight hours prior to termination of water service, the account holder shall receive personal notification of the city's intent to terminate service; in the event the account holder cannot be located the property where service is provided will be posted with a notice of termination. 
C.  Appeal. Prior to any discontinuance of service furnished to the customer by the city, the customer may request the opportunity to be heard as to any adjustment or cancellation of any bill. The hearing shall be held before the director of finance or designee. In the event of a discontinuance of service, as provided in this subsection, the director of finance may require as a condition precedent to the resumption of service that the customer pay: 
1.  All amounts due and owing; 
2.  A disconnection/reconnection charge as determined by city council resolution, for each occasion that the city has to disconnect and/or reconnect service discontinued for nonpayment of utility services; and 
3.  A deposit in an amount not exceeding the estimated amount of charges for two months' service. 
The director of finance or designee may waive delinquent amounts and negotiate a repayment schedule for up to three months (within any twelve-month period) when in the opinion of the director of finance or designee the customer can demonstrate financial hardship. No more than two repayment schedules may be allowed in any twelve-month period. 
D.  Closing Bills. Closing bills are due on the date on which service is discontinued. 
E.  Penalties. Delinquent bills shall be assessed penalties which will be set from time to time by city council resolution. The penalties may be waived by the director of finance when the customer can present evidence of financial hardship or convincing information that timely payment could not have been reasonably expected. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.040 - Connections generally. 
No person except a duly authorized employee of the city shall make any water, electrical, or sewer service connection to the city supply lines. Alternatively, an encroachment permit may be issued for water and sewer connections to the city supply lines if the work is to be performed by a state licensed contractor under contract with the property owner. Water and sewer tapping includes bringing the supply lines to a point six inches inside the property line. Electrical connection includes the service drop and necessary meter. On all new and reconstructed buildings where water, sewer, and electrical connections are involved, the equipment and equipment locations must be approved by the inspecting authority. 
A service charge will be charged to the applicant when trouble calls involve customer caused service interruptions. All costs of water tapping and sewer connections shall be borne by the applicant and shall be charged at actual cost to the city. However, a flat rate may be established by the provisions of Section 13.04.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.050 - Connection charges. 
The public works director may, with the approval of the director of finance, establish or change rates charged for water and sewer connections based on the average cost to the city for such connections made within the preceding six-month period. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.060 - Apartments and flats. 
When more than one flat, apartment, building, or premises is supplied through one water tap, each occupant may pay his own water and sewage bill if flat rates apply. However, if at any time the water is used by an occupant and such fact is not reported to the city, the director of finance may require that the owner or the owners' agent-in-charge pay all the water and sewage charges applying to the flats, apartments, buildings, or premises being supplied through one tap. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.070 - Restriction or interruption. 
The city reserves the right to limit the amount of water supplied to any customer or to different parts of the city should it appear necessary to do so, and shall not be liable for temporary discontinuance of any service while making repairs or replacements. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.080 - Connection or reconnection by plumbers. 
No plumber shall leave water turned on at any newly erected building unless it is by consent of the city, nor shall he connect or reconnect any service found shut off at the service stop. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.090 - Right of access for inspection. 
Authorized employees of the city shall have the right of access to any premises receiving any service named in this chapter at reasonable hours for the purposes of inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.100 - Pipe and facility maintenance. 
The owner or occupant of premises where city services are supplied shall keep all service pipes, valves, connections or other facilities used in connection with such supply in good repair at all times, and the city shall not be liable for damage sustained by reason of such owner or occupant's neglect. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.110 - Service only to contracted premises. 
No person shall supply service to any premises other than the one to which the service contract applies. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.120 - Bill adjustment. 
Application for the adjustment or cancellation of a bill any consumer believes to be inconsistent with the provisions of this code or other ordinances of this city relating to water, electric, refuse collection, and sewage services shall be made to the director of finance. Appeal from the decision of the director of finance may be made to the city manager whose decision may, upon request, be subject to a final review by the city council. Decisions of the city council are final. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.130 - Low income adjustments. 
The rates for residential refuse collection service, as they now exist or may hereafter be modified under this chapter, shall be reduced as established by resolution for those residential accounts in the names of persons meeting the eligibility criteria for applicable electric service discounts as provided in this title. Proof of eligibility will be required by the city to qualify for the rate adjustments provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
13.04.140 - Tampering with or destruction of utility systems or equipment. 
Damage or destruction to city utility equipment or systems, including water meters, water or sewer lines, electric meters, or electric lines or connections, in addition to the diversion of water to bypass a meter or energy theft diversion, are each punishable as a misdemeanor, in addition to any administrative fee or penalty which may be imposed under this code. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 1, 11-18-2015)  
Chapter 13.08 - WATER SERVICE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1917, § 2, adopted November 18, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 13.08, §§ 13.08.010—13.08.290, and enacted a new Chapter 13.04 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from prior code §§ 26-2—26-12; Ord. No. 1333, 1984; Ord. No. 1446, 1989; Ord. No. 1509, 1991; Ord. No. 1527, 1991; Ord. No. 1541, 1991 and Ord. No. 1870, adopted February 20, 2013. 
 
Article I. - Generally 
 
13.08.010 - Setting of rates. 
The schedule of water rates will be those established and adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.020 - Rates outside city. 
The city will not normally serve water outside the city limits. In those cases where it is authorized by the city council, the rate shall be one hundred fifty percent of the rate for service inside the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.030 - Rates by contract. 
In cases not provided for by this chapter, the rate may be fixed by special contract, as agreed upon by the director of finance and the public works director on behalf of the city, and the water user involved. If such rates cannot be agreed upon, the city council shall fix and determine proper rates, and such determination shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.040 - Commencement and end of charges. 
Water charges shall in all cases commence to accrue when water is turned on, at rates proportioned for the period from that date until the following last day of the billing period, as may be established by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.050 - Metered service. 
A.  Meters will be required on all new residential, commercial, and industrial water services covered by the following conditions: 
1.  All new property annexations to the city requesting city water service; 
2.  All existing parcels which have had no previous city water service and city water service is requested; 
3.  When a parcel is split, water services to all parcels will be metered; 
4.  All parcels at which a single family dwelling(s) is being replaced by multiple family units or a nonresidential use; 
5.  At all parcels where off-site improvements are required; 
6.  When any water customer requests water service upsizing or relocating. 
7.  Meters and appurtenant facilities are the property of the city. 
8.  The city shall have the right of access to the customer's premises at all reasonable hours for any purpose related to the furnishing of water service including, but not limited to, meter reading, testing, inspection construction, maintenance and repair of meter. Service may be refused or disconnected if permanent safe accessibility is not provided by the customer or property owner. Upon termination of service the city shall have the right of access to the service premises to shut off or remove the water meter and service. 
9.  Water meters shall only be installed on water services connected to the city owned water main, unless otherwise approved by the city council. 
B.  Metered water service shall be installed on all existing residential, commercial, and industrial users when the public works director determines the installation of metered water service to be in the best interest of the city. The property owner is required to pay the meter purchase charge based upon size as determined from time to time by city council resolution. City facilities are exempt from meter purchase charges. 
C.  Meters on existing commercial and industrial water services not covered under subsection A of this section shall be installed by the city at the city's expense. Meters and installation costs on all new water services and those covered in subsection A of this section shall be installed by the city, but shall be paid for by the property owner as determined by city council resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.055 - Testing water meters. 
A.  Any metered customer may request in writing that the meter through which water is being furnished be examined and tested by the public works department to determine whether the meter is registering accurately the amount of water that is being delivered through it. Upon receipt of such request, the department shall examine and test the meter. If the meter is found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, the customer's water bill will be adjusted accordingly. If the meter is found to register a variance of three percent or less, no bill adjustment will be made. Meter testing will be performed at customer's request, at no charge to the customer, not more than once every twelve months, if the variance is over three percent. If the variance is less than three percent, the customer will be charged a meter test fee, in an amount determined by city council resolution, on the customer's utility bill. 
B.  If a customer requests more frequent meter testing, the customer's request shall be accompanied by a deposit of an amount equal to the meter testing fee. Upon receipt of such request, the department shall examine and test the meter. If the meter is found to register over three percent more water than actually passes through it, the customer's water bill will be adjusted accordingly and the meter test fee shall be returned, without interest. If the meter is found to register a variance of three percent or less, no billing adjustment will be made and the meter test fee will be retained by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.060 - Oversized meter development impact fee. 
A.  For single family residential services that require automatic fire protection systems pursuant to state law, Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 15.04 or 15.40, the increased connection and meter size will not be assessed an additional fee associated with the fire protection system requirement. Connection fees and monthly service fees shall be based on the required service size as determined by the Uniform Plumbing Code without consideration for any fire protection system requirement. 
B.  For non-residential and multi-family water services that include or require automatic fire protection systems pursuant to Lodi Municipal Code Section 15.20.160 or Chapter 15.40, the increased connection and meter size will not be assessed an additional fee associated with the fire protection system requirement. Connection fees and monthly service fees shall be based on the required service size as determined by the Uniform Plumbing Code without consideration for any fire protection system requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.070 - Tampering with city property—Bypassing meters. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person not authorized by the city to do so to tamper with any gates, valves, service cocks, fire hydrants, meters or any of the city's property accessory or appurtenant to the water distribution system, to break the seal on any water meter, or to cause water to bypass any water meter. 
B.  If city confirms an illegal tampering, bypass or diversion of water at or from city facilities has occurred, the customer will be charged a tampering/bypass inspection fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by city council resolution. In addition to the tampering/bypass fee, violation of this section is punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.080 - Turning off during fires. 
In the case of fire or other emergency, when directed by the city all faucets, taps or other means of letting water run shall be turned off immediately by every owner or occupant and not opened until the fire is extinguished or the emergency resolved. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.090 - Billing adjustments. 
When it is found that any charges for water service, meters, connections, installations, abandonments, tampering/bypass etc., have been incorrectly billed or that no billing has occurred, the city has the right to make adjustments as determined by the public works director. Billings for undercharges or credits for overcharges shall be subject to the three-year limitation period found in the California Code of Civil Procedure, Section 338. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
Article II. - Main Extensions 
 
13.08.100 - Policy. 
The city council is desirous of adopting a water main extension policy that is fair and equitable to all developing properties and that provides that the cost of extensions shall be distributed among subsequently developing properties connecting thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.110 - Application—Determination of necessity. 
A.  Whenever a property owner is desirous of obtaining water service, an application shall be made to the public works director for water service. 
B.  The public works director shall determine the closest adequate water main and, if an extension is necessary, indicate the size of the main to be extended, and the limits of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.120 - Applicant's obligation. 
Whenever the public works director determines that a water main extension is necessary, the applicant will be required to install at his own expense the water main extension in accordance with engineering plans furnished by applicant and approved by the public works director. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the current city design standards and this article. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.130 - Mains to extend full frontage. 
In every case where a water main is to be tapped to serve a parcel, the same shall be extended the full frontage of the parcel, including any crossings required in the city master water plan. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.140 - Minimum size. 
The minimum size water main shall have a nominal inside diameter of six inches except as approved by the public works director in accordance with the city public improvement design standards. In areas zoned or master planned for commercial and industrial uses, the minimum size shall be eight inches in diameter. Larger size mains may be required as determined by the public works director from the city master water plan. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.150 - Fire hydrants. 
The installation of fire hydrants or provisions for fire hydrants shall be included in any main extension and the cost of such hydrants shall be paid for by the applicant. Fire hydrant location and type shall be as approved by the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.160 - Oversized mains. 
Whenever the city requires that a water main larger than eight inches in diameter be installed in order to serve additional property or to conform to the water master plan, the applicant may apply for reimbursement from the benefiting properties that are served by the oversized pipe. A reimbursement application for the difference in cost between the actual water main to be constructed and an eight-inch diameter water main may be obtained through the city. The reimbursement shall be made in accordance with Section 17.62.050 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.170 - Testing of approved backflow prevention assemblies. 
A.  The customer is responsible for the cost of and scheduling arrangements for an annual testing and inspection of the approved backflow prevention assembly by the following method: 
1.  Testing by Certified Tester. Customers shall use a certified tester to inspect and test an approved backflow prevention assembly at least once per year. The results of the test shall be reported to the city within thirty days of the completion of the test. Annual test results shall be due no later than September 30th of each calendar year. 
B.  Should a customer fail to comply with the annual testing procedure by September 30th, the city may arrange for testing of the assembly by a licensed contractor and the customer will be billed for the cost of such testing plus a fifteen percent administrative fee with his regular monthly water bill, which shall be due and payable in full within thirty days of receipt of bill. 
C.  Assemblies which fail to pass inspection and testing by private certified testers shall be repaired and maintained in accordance with Section 13.08.180 of this article. The customer shall bear the cost of repairs and additional testing if his device fails a test. The city reserves the right to require more frequent testing or to perform additional testing by city personnel when, in the opinion of the director, it is necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.180 - Maintenance and repair of approved backflow prevention assemblies 
A.  The customer shall be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the approved backflow prevention assembly. The customer shall at all times maintain the assembly in proper working order as a condition of continued water service. If an approved backflow prevention assembly should fail to pass inspection and testing pursuant to Section 13.08.180 of this article, the customer shall within thirty days after written notification of results provide for the repair of the assembly by the following method: 
1.  Repair by Private Personnel. Backflow prevention assemblies shall be repaired by private personnel. Repairs and satisfactory re-testing of the assemblies by a certified tester shall be documented and submitted on an approved form to the city. Failure by the customer to repair an approved backflow prevention assembly within thirty days of being notified by the city in writing shall result in the termination of water service. 
B.  Water service will be restored upon presentation of the approved form showing that the necessary repairs and successful re-testing have been done. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
Article III. - Water Conservation 
 
13.08.220 - Waste. 
The waste of water is prohibited and any waste shall make the person subject to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.230 - Defined. 
"Waste of water" includes but is not limited to any of the following acts or omissions, whether willful or negligent: 
A.  Failure to repair or correct a controllable leak or discharge of water, excessive overspray, and/or low head fixture leakage that results in the flow of water to an impervious surface; 
B.  The watering of lawns, flower beds, landscaping, ornamental plants or gardens on days or at times other than those allowed in Section 13.08.240 of this article; 
C.  Washing of sidewalks, driveways, parking areas, tennis courts, patios, streets or other exterior paved areas or buildings except when required to remove any spillage of substances that may be a danger to public health or safety; 
D.  Washing with water any motor vehicles, trailers or movable equipment other than with a bucket and rinsing the vehicle or equipment by use of a hose for not more than three minutes; 
E.  Use of a hose without a positive shut off nozzle; 
F.  The excess watering of any area so that water flows into a gutter or any drainage area; 
G.  The unnecessary running of water in any residential, commercial or industrial establishment onto the floor, pavement, ground or into any drain or drainage area, with any equipment or in any way; 
H.  Watering of lawns or landscapes during or within forty-eight hours following a measurable rain; 
I.  Operation of a water fountain or other decorative water feature that does not use recirculated water. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.240 - Watering days/hours. 
A.  Days. The watering of lawns, flower beds, landscaping, ornamental plants or gardens throughout the year shall be allowed as follows: 
1.  Premises having odd numbered street addresses on Wednesday, Friday and Sunday; 
2.  Premises having even numbered street addresses on Tuesday, Thursday, and Saturday; 
3.  No watering will be allowed on Mondays. 
B.  Hours. Watering of lawns, flower beds, landscaping, ornamental plants or gardens shall not be allowed at any hour between the hours of ten a.m. and six p.m. 
C.  City owned parks, due to their size and use patterns, are exempt only from the provisions of Sections 13.08.240(A) and 13.08.240(B) of this code. 
D.  Upon city declaration of a local water shortage or a state of emergency declared by the governor concerning California's water supplies, the public works director or designee may impose revised and/or additional water conservation measures on residential, commercial, and industrial water users. No person shall use, or cause to be used, city water in violation of such limitations. Violations of revised and/or additional conservation measures imposed under this section are punishable as a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.250 - Enforcement procedures. 
A.  Whenever the city becomes aware of a waste of water, the city shall notify the person at the premises where the waste of water occurred by delivering an information sheet. The information sheet shall describe the waste of water in order that it be corrected, cured or abated immediately or within seventy-two hours. In addition, the information sheet may be given to any other person known to the city who is responsible for that waste of water or the correction thereof and may be delivered to the premises every time a waste of water occurs. Additionally, a written notice stating the date(s), time(s) and type(s) of water waste shall be delivered to the person who regularly receives the utility bill for the premises where the wasting occurred. 
B.  In the event of a second waste of water within a consecutive twelve-month period, the city will send a written notice assessing a surcharge in an amount determined from time to time by city council resolution, and the surcharge shall be added to the next monthly utility bill for the property on which the waste of water occurred. 
C.  In the event of a third waste of water within twelve months of any previous waste of water, a written notice will be mailed assessing a surcharge in an amount determined from time to time by city council resolution and the surcharge shall be added to the next monthly utility bill for the property on which the waste of water occurred. 
D.  In the event of a fourth waste of water within twelve months of any previous waste of water, a written notice will be mailed assessing a surcharge in an amount determined from time to time by city council resolution, and the surcharge shall be added to the next monthly utility bill for the property on which the waste of water occurred. 
E.  In the event of a fifth waste of water within twelve months of any previous waste of water, a written notice will be mailed assessing a surcharge in an amount determined from time to time by city council resolution, and the surcharge shall be added to the next monthly utility bill for the property on which the waste of water occurred. If the property is not already metered, the city may also require the owner or user to pay for the cost of installation of a water meter service as a prerequisite to continuing water service. The city may also install a flow restriction device on the water service and require the owner or user to pay for the costs of installation and/or removal. 
F.  In the event of any subsequent waste of water within twelve months of any previous waste of water, the city may disconnect a customer's water service for willful violations of restrictions in this chapter, in addition to assessing a surcharge in an amount to be determined from time to time by city council resolution. The property owner or user will be required to pay all outstanding utility charges, fees, penalties and surcharges, in addition to a reconnection charge in an amount to be determined from time to time by city council resolution, prior to reconnection of water services. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.260 - Strict application. 
If the public works director or designee determines the strict application of any of the provisions of this article may cause undue hardship or public health and safety risk, or if other special circumstances exist, the strict application of this article may be waived. Requests for relief under this article must be received by the city at least twenty-four hours prior to special circumstances. Special circumstances would include, but not be limited to: newly planted areas, newly seeded areas, washing down after cement work and pressure washing a building before painting. The decision of the public works director may be appealed to the city council as described in Section 13.08.270 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.270 - Appeals. 
If the ruling made by the public works director or designee is unsatisfactory to the person requesting consideration, the person may, file an appeal directed to the city manager or designee, whose decision may, upon request be subject to final review by the city council. The public works director or designee's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration except that any surcharges assessed under this article will be stayed until the city council has made its decision. Decisions of the city council are final. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.280 - Violation—Infraction. 
In addition to the administrative enforcement procedures and surcharges set forth in this article, each violation of this article may be punishable as an infraction. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
13.08.290 - Emergency water conservation—Purpose. 
The purpose of emergency water conservation is to assist meeting water pressure and/or supply demands when the water system cannot or may not be adequate and the failure to meet such demands may result in harm to the water system and/or jeopardize the health and safety of the public. In addition, emergency water conservation serves to protect water supplies during drought conditions. The public works director or designee shall determine the degree of emergency and determine what additional restrictions of water use or other appropriate actions must be taken to protect the water system, supply demands, and the citizens of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1917, § 2, 11-18-2015)  
Chapter 13.10 - CROSS CONNECTIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General 
 
13.10.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is (1) to protect the public potable water system against actual or potential cross connections by isolating within the premises, contamination or pollution that may occur because of some undiscovered or unauthorized cross connection on the premises; (2) to eliminate existing connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water that are not approved as safe and potable for human consumption; (3) to eliminate cross connections between drinking water systems and other sources of water or process water used for any purpose which may jeopardize the safety of the drinking water supply; (4) and to prevent the making of cross connections in the future. 
The latest edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control Procedures and Practices prepared by the State Department of Health Services is also made part of these regulations. These regulations are adopted in accordance with Title 17 entitled Regulations Relating to Cross Connections of the State Administrative Code. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
13.10.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, terms shall be as adopted in the latest edition of the Manual of Cross Connection Control Procedures and Practices prepared by the State Department of Health Services. 
A.  "Approved water supply" means any potable water supply approved by the health agencies of the state, county and city. 
B.  "Auxiliary water supply" means any water supply on or available to a premises other than the public potable water supplied by the city. 
C.  "Backflow" means the flow of water or any other substance into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any other source than the public water system. Backflow can be caused by either backpressure or backsiphonage. 
D.  "Backflow prevention device" means a device or means, which has been approved by the city, designed to prevent backflow. 
E.  "City" means the city of Lodi, San Joaquin County, California. 
F.  "Consumer" or "user" means the owner or operator of a private water system having a service from a public water system. 
G.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the potable water system by any foreign substance. 
H.  "Cross connection" means an unprotected actual or potential connection between a potable water system and any source or system containing unapproved water or any other substance. 
I.  Hazard, Degree of. "Degree of hazard" means an evaluation of the actual or potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system as determined by the city. 
J.  "Multiple service" means two or more water service connections at a single premise. 
K.  "Premises" means a parcel of real estate including any improvements thereon which is determined by the city to be a single user for purposes of receiving, using and paying for service. 
L.  "Public water system" means the potable water supply system operated by the city from city wells to the consumers' service connections. 
M.  "Service connection" means the terminal end of a service from the public water system, i.e. where the city loses jurisdiction and sanitary control at its point of delivery to the consumer's water system. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
Article II. - Regulations 
 
13.10.030 - Where protection is required. 
A.  Each service connection to premises having an auxiliary water supply shall be protected against backflow into the public water system. 
B.  Each service connection to premises on which any substance is or may be handled such that entry into the on-site water system is possible shall be protected against backflow of the substance into the public water system. This shall include the handling of process waters and water originating from the public water system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
C.  Each service connection to any premises that have internal cross connections unless such cross connections are abated to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
13.10.040 - Type of protection. 
The protective device required shall depend on the degree of hazard. In determining the degree of hazard and type of backflow prevention device to be required, the following criteria shall be used: 
A.  At the service connection to any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply handled in a separate piping system with no known or easily established cross connections, the public water supply shall be protected by a double check valve assembly. 
B.  At the service connection to any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply where cross connections are known to exist which cannot be practically eliminated, or where the auxiliary water supply may be contaminated, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
C.  At the service connection to any premises on which a substance that would be objectionable but not hazardous to health is handled in such a manner that may permit its entry into the water system, the public water system shall be protected by a double check valve assembly. 
D.  At the service connection to any premises on which any material dangerous to health, or toxic substances handled in toxic concentrations, is handled in such a manner that may permit its entry into the on-site water system, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
E.  At the service connection to any sewage treatment plant, sewage pumping station, storm water pumps or reclaimed water reuse areas, the public water system shall be protected by an air gap separation or a reduced pressure principle backflow device. 
F.  At the service connection to hospitals, medical and dental facilities, mortuaries, food or beverage processing facilities, chemical facilities, water systems with chemical additives, irrigation systems, laundries, laboratories, pet hospitals, metal processing facilities, petroleum or gas handling facilities, plating facilities, rubber facilities, cement or concrete mixing facilities, or other premises where the city determines that a special hazard exists, the public water system shall be protected by a backflow prevention device as determined by the degree of hazard. 
G.  At all service connections to premises having a multiple service with no known cross connections or special hazards, the public water system may be required to be protected by double check valves, and where there may be cross connections or special hazards, the public water system shall be protected by reduced pressure principle devices. 
H.  Where a booster pump is installed on the service to any premise, such pump shall be equipped with regulating devices such that the inlet pressure will not fall below 10 psig. 
I.  New commercial/industrial shell buildings with unknown future uses shall leave sufficient space (one foot per diameter inch of service, plus one foot) after the meter box for possible future installation of a backflow prevention device. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
13.10.050 - Responsibilities. 
A.  It is the responsibility of the city to make the determination that a service connection, or the handling of substances within the premises served, constitutes a hazard to the public water system and to determine the degree of hazard and establish the requirements for protection. 
B.  It is the responsibility of the consumer, at his own expense, to install, maintain and operate approved backflow prevention devices as directed by the city. The consumer shall be responsible to have tests made at least once a year, or more often in those instances where successive tests indicate defective operation of the backflow prevention devices, by an approved backflow prevention device tester. The records of such tests, repairs or overhauls shall be kept and copies submitted to the city. It is also the responsibility of the consumer to prevent cross connections, or pollutants or contaminates from entering their potable water system(s). The consumer's responsibility begins at the service connection and shall include any and all on-premise water distribution piping. The consumer shall allow the public works director or his agents ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection of either the consumer's water system or backflow prevention device(s). 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
13.10.060 - Approval of backflow prevention device testers. 
A.  The city shall maintain in a list of approved backflow device testers. No person shall test and/or make reports of tests of backflow prevention devices unless the person's qualifications have been established to the satisfaction of the city. 
B.  Every person desiring to qualify as a backflow prevention device tester shall make application to the public works department of the city, and shall have a current city business license. 
C.  The city will evaluate the applicant's qualifications as a backflow prevention device tester. Any or all of the following may be considered in approving a tester. 
1.  Certification as a backflow prevention device tester with the American Water Works Association (AWWA); 
2.  Completion of approved courses in backflow prevention device testing; 
3.  Experience in backflow prevention device testing; 
4.  Oral and/or performance evaluations conducted by the city. 
D.  Approval will be revoked from any tester who fails to comply with any of these regulations or falsifies inspection or maintenance reports. Testers will not be eligible for reapproval for two years. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
Article III. - Enforcement 
 
13.10.070 - Discontinuance of service. 
A.  The city shall have the authority to discontinue water service to any premises where: 
1.  Unprotected cross connections are found to exist; 
2.  A backflow prevention device has been altered, bypassed or removed; 
3.  A backflow prevention device has not been properly tested, maintained or repaired; 
4.  The consumer has not taken proper action as determined by the city to be necessary to protect the potable water supply. 
B.  The water service is to remain discontinued until such corrections are made. The consumer will be charged for the turning off and on of the water service an amount to be determined by the city. 
(Ord. 1378 (part), 1986)  
Chapter 13.12 - SEWER SERVICE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1819, adopted Feb. 18, 2009, repealed the former Ch. 13.12, Art I, §§ 13.12.010, 13.12.020, Art II, §§ 13.12.030, 13.12.040, §§ 13.12.060—13.12.110, § 13.12.115, §§ 13.12.120—13.12.160, Art III, §§ 13.12.170—13.12.190, 13.12.195, §§ 13.12.200, 13.12.210, § 13.12.215, §§ 13.12.200—13.12.260, Art IV, §§ 13.12.270—13.12.290, Art V, §§ 13.12.300—13.12.340, § 13.12.370, Art VI, §§ 13.12.420—13.12.550, Art VII, §§ 13.12.560—13.12.650, and enacted a new Ch. 13.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 13.12 pertained to sewer service and derived from Ord. 1613 (part), 1995; Ord. 1639 § 1, 1996; Ord. 1764 § 1, 2005; Ord. 1768 § 1 (part), 2006; Ord. 1803 § 1 (part), 2007. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
13.12.010 - Purpose and policy. 
These wastewater discharge regulations set uniform requirements for discharges of domestic, industrial waste and storm drainage water into the city sewerage system to enable the city to comply with the administrative provisions of the Clean Water Grant Regulations, water quality requirements set by the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the applicable effluent limitations, national standards of performance, toxic and pretreatment effluent standards, and any other discharge criteria which are required or authorized by state or federal law, and to derive the maximum public benefit by regulating the quality and quantity of wastewater discharged into those systems. To the extent federal or state requirements and any amendments thereto are more stringent or different than the provisions provided herein (including 40 CFR 403) such provisions shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.020 - Definitions. 
Unless otherwise defined in this chapter, terms shall be as adopted in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater, published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Environment Federation. Waste constituents and characteristics shall be measured by the approved methods as defined below. The following words shall have these meaning(s): 
1.  "Approved methods" means the analytical methods listed in the Federal Register 40 CFR Part 136, unless expressly stated, or as established by federal or state regulatory agencies. 
2.  "Authorized representative" means a person duly authorized by corporate resolution or other legally enforceable authorizing document on file with the POTW to perform all acts required by this Chapter. 
3.  "Bedroom(s)" means room(s) of a residential user designed or used primarily for sleeping purposes, as determined by the city, based on criteria such as those rooms having closets. 
4.  "Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)" means the amount of dissolved oxygen required to meet the metabolic needs of aerobic microorganisms in water containing organic matter as determined by approved methods and, unless otherwise noted, exerted in a period of five days at twenty degrees Celsius. 
5.  "By-pass" means an intentional diversion of waste or wastewater from any portion of an industrial user's treatment facility. 
6.  "Capacity" or "impact fee" means a charge as described in this chapter, levied on construction or on new, expanded, or ongoing activity, which uses publicly-owned treatment works (POTW) capacity and other wastewater facilities associated with growth. The fee is normally paid at the time of issuance of a building permit. 
7.  "Chemical oxygen demand (COD)" means the oxygen equivalent of that portion in a sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant as determined by approved methods. 
8.  "Commercial user" means any user of the sewerage system except those specifically classified as residential user or industrial user. 
9.  "Community sewer or collection system" means a sewer owned and operated by the city tributary to the treatment plant. It includes, but is not limited to, sanitary and industrial, pumping stations, siphons, canal crossings, manholes and sewers leading from the property line or easement line to the collection sewer. 
10.  "Compatible pollutant" means biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids and fecal coliform bacteria, plus additional pollutants identified in the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
11.  "Contamination" means an impairment of the quality of the receiving waters by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
12.  "Control authority" means the White Slough Water Pollution Control Facility. 
13.  "Dissolved solids" means residue upon evaporation of water after filtration as determined by approved methods. Also termed "total dissolved solids" or "TDS." 
14.  "Domestic sewage" means the waterborne wastes derived from the ordinary living processes and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal, without special treatment, into the domestic system. 
15.  "Domestic system or sanitary sewer system" means a portion of the sewerage system and treatment facility used primarily for domestic sewage. 
16.  "Employee" means, for "unit of measure" purposes, the total number of all classifications of employees from all shifts that physically work at the site producing the wastewater discharge. Temporary or part-time employees shall be prorated to their time equivalent to a full time employee. 
17.  "Federal Act or Federal Regulations" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, PL 92-500, and any amendments thereto; as well as any guidelines, limitations and standards promulgated by the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Act including the Federal Register, 40 CFR Subchapter IV for pretreatment regulations and the Federal Clean Water Act. 
18.  "Fixed total dissolved solids" means residue upon evaporation of water and heating to five hundred and fifty degrees centigrade after filtration as determined by approved methods. 
19.  "Gpd or gpd" means gallons per day. 
20.  "High strength user" means a user with discharge volume in excess of 2.0 MGY or a daily average waste strength in excess of the limitations in Section 13.12.110 or in excess of either three hundred milligrams per liter BOD or three hundred milligrams per liter SS or nine hundred milligrams per liter COD or as determined by the public works director. 
21.  "Holding tank waste" means any domestic waste from holding tanks, contained in vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, vacuum tank trucks, or other stationary or mobile sources. 
22.  "Industrial system" means the portion of the sewerage system used primarily for industrial waste, which is compatible for discharging directly into the ponding and irrigation system at the treatment plant. Waste not suitable for direct application to land is prohibited in the industrial system, which includes, but is not limited to, contents of chemical toilets, septic tanks, waste holding tanks, waste sumps, and domestic sewage. 
23.  "Industrial user" means a user subject to regulation by Clean Water Act Section 307(b), (c) or (d) or 40 CFR 403.3(i) and (j) who discharges industrial waste into the sewerage system. 
24.  "Industrial waste" means the waterborne waste and wastewater from any production, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including institutional and commercial operations, where water is used for the removal of significant quantities of waste other than from human habitation of premises connected to the domestic or industrial sewers. Contents of chemical toilets, septic tanks, waste holding tanks and waste sumps shall not be classed as industrial waste. 
25.  "Interference" means the inhibition or disruption of the sewer system, treatment processes or operations of the treatment plant which contributes to the violation of its discharge requirements including inhibition or disruption of sludge disposal practices or compliance with any of the statutory authorities listed in the Federal Register 40 CFR Part 403.3(k). 
26.  "MGD" or "mgd" is the abbreviation for million gallons per day. 
27.  "MGY" is the abbreviation for million gallons per year. 
28.  "Mass emission rate" means the weight of material discharged into the sewerage system during a given time interval. Unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per day of a particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
29.  "Moderate strength user" means users with a wastewater strength of less than three hundred milligrams per liter of BOD and SS and having a waste flow less than 2.0 MGY. 
30.  "National pretreatment standard, pretreatment standard or standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Clean Water Act Section 307(b) and (c) which applies to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits established pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5. 
31.  "Natural outlet" means any outlet into a watercourse, ditch, pond, lake or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
32.  "New source" means an industrial user discharging, or planning to discharge, from a source at which: 
a.  Construction is carried out at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  Construction totally replaces the process, or production equipment that produces, the wastewater at an existing source; or 
c.  The wastewater producing process constructed is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. 
33.  "Nuisance" means anything which is injurious to health, or is offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property so as to interfere with the comfort or enjoyment of life or property, or which affects at the same time an entire community or neighborhood or any considerable number of persons, although the extent of the annoyance or damage inflicted upon individuals may be unequal. 
34.  "Pass through" means the introduction of a pollutant by a user into the sewerage system which leaves the treatment plant in quantities or concentrations that alone or in conjunction with other sources, cause a violation of the city's discharge requirements. 
35.  "Permit" means wastewater discharge permit issued by the public works department. 
36.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or public agency, including the state of California and the United States of America. 
37.  "pH" means the negative logarithm of the hydrogen-ion activity in moles per liter of solution as determined by approved methods. 
38.  "Pollutant" means any substance which can cause pollution. 
39.  "Pollution" means an alteration of the quality of the receiving waters by waste to a degree which unreasonably affects such waters for beneficial use or facilities which serve such beneficial uses. Pollution may include, but not be limited to, contamination. 
40.  "Pretreatment" means the treatment or flow limitation of industrial wastes prior to discharge to the city sewerage system. 
41.  "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard, imposed on an industrial user (40 CFR 403.3(t). 
42.  "Private sewer, building sewer or house service sewer" means that part of the building sewer beginning at the junction, thereof, with the building plumbing or drainage system and terminating at the property line or at the easement line. 
43.  "Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)" means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. This includes sewers, pipes and other conveyances if they convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. 
44.  "Residential user" means a single-family house or each unit of a duplex, flat, group dwelling, apartment or any other living accommodation which has facilities for sleeping and the preparation of food, whether sanitary facilities connected to the collection system are provided for the occupants, thereof, whether or not such sanitary facilities are installed therein or connected thereto; living accommodations designed or used for short-term transient lodging which are rented to other than the controlling occupant of the premises shall be considered as a commercial unit. 
45.  "Settleable solids" means that portion of matter present in sewage, industrial waste or waters introduced into the storm drains that readily settles out of the carrier liquid in a quiescent state as determined by approved methods. 
46.  "Sewage" means the waterborne wastes received from human habitation and use of premises for residential, commercial, institutional and industrial purposes. 
47.  "Sewage service charge" means a regular charge for each user based upon each user's proportional use of the sewerage system. 
48.  "Sewage service unit" or "SSU" is defined as each increment of flow equal to the flow from an average two-bedroom residence (one-hundred and ninety-four gallons per day) and having a strength less than three hundred milligrams per liter biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) and suspended solids (SS). 
49.  "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit which carries sewage and/or industrial wastes and to which storm, surface and ground waters are not intentionally admitted. When used in this chapter, "sanitary sewer" means those pipelines operated primarily for the collection of domestic sewage. "Industrial sewer" means those pipelines operated primarily for the collection of industrial waste. 
50.  "Sewerage system" means all works for collecting, pumping, treating, disposing, storing or reclaiming sewage, industrial waste and/or storm water. 
51.  "Significant industrial user" means: 
a.  All industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR Chapter I, subchapter N; and 
b.  Any other industrial user that: discharges an average of twenty-five thousand gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the control authority on the basis that the industrial user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement (in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6)). (40 CFR 403.3(v)(1). 
52.  "Significant noncompliance" means a violation meets one or more of the following criteria: 
a.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I); 
b.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC=1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
c.  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(I) daily maximum, long-term average, instantaneous limit, or narrative standard) that the POTW determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public); 
d.  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority under paragraph (f) (1)(vi)(B) of 40 CFR 403.8 to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
e.  Failure to meet, within ninety days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
f.  Failure to provide, within forty-five days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
g.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; 
h.  Any other violation or group of violations, which may include a violation of best management practices, which the city determines will adversely affect the operation of implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
53.  "Slug" means a sudden large increase or decrease (factor of two or more) from normal waste volume or concentration. 
54.  "Slug discharge" means any discharge of a nonroutine, episodic nature including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary batch discharge. 
55.  "Storm drain system" means any portion of the sewerage system used for the conveyance of stormwater or surface or subsurface drainage water. 
56.  "Storm sewer" means those pipelines operated primarily for the collection of stormwaters. 
57.  "Suspended solids" or "SS" or "TSS" means that portion of residue present in sewage, industrial waste or waters introduced into the storm drains that is retained on a filter (nonfilterable) as determined by approved methods. 
58.  "Treatment plant" means the White Slough Water Pollution Control Facility of the city, and includes but is not limited to the domestic sewage treatment facilities, industrial waste treatment facilities, sludge disposal facilities and irrigatable lands. 
59.  "Unpolluted water" means water to which no constituent has been added, either intentionally or accidentally, which would render such water unacceptable to the agency having jurisdiction, thereof, for disposal to the storm drain system or natural drainages or directly to surface waters. 
60.  "User" means any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of wastewater or stormwater into a sewerage system. 
61.  "Waste" includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, washing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
62.  "Wastewater" means waste and water, whether treated or untreated, discharged into or permitted to enter a sewer. 
63.  "Wastewater constituents and characteristics" means the individual chemical, physical, bacteriological and radiological parameters and such other parameters that serve to define, classify or measure the contents, quality and strength of wastewater as determined by a state certified laboratory, and the volume, rate of flow or other parameters that serve to define quantity. 
64.  "Wastewater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the city for a user to discharge into a sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Article II. - Discharge Restrictions 
 
13.12.030 - Prohibited discharges. 
No person shall discharge into the sewerage system, natural outlet, street or earth surface, wastes which cause, threaten to cause, or are capable of causing, either alone or by interaction with other substances, any of the following: 
A.  Fire or explosion or injury in any way to the sewerage system or the operation of the treatment plant. Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene, alcohols, solvents, sulfides or any other substance with a closed cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit or (sixty degrees Celsius) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21 or which causes two consecutive readings on an explosion hazard meter at any point in the sewerage system to be more than five percent, or any single reading more than ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LEL); 
B.  Obstruction of flow in a sewerage system or injury of the system or damage to the sewerage collection, or treatment facilities by ashes, cinders, sand, mud, grit, straw, offal, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, sawdust, manure or other solid or viscous substances capable of causing obstruction of the flow or other interference with the proper operation of the sewerage system as determined by the public works director; 
C.  Acute worker health and safety problems resulting from the presence of toxic gases, vapors or fumes within the POTW per 40 CFR 403.5(b)(7); 
D.  A nuisance or prevention of the effective maintenance or operation of the sewerage system, through having or creating a strong, unpleasant odor; 
E.  Air pollution by the release of toxic or malodorous gases or malodorous gas-producing substances; 
F.  Interference or pass through at the treatment plant affecting wastewater treatment, land disposal or sludge or scum processing and disposal; 
G.  A detrimental environmental impact or a nuisance in the waters or wastewaters of the state or a condition unacceptable to any public agency having regulatory jurisdiction over the city; 
H.  Discoloration, or any other condition, in the quality of the city's treatment plant effluent and/or storm system discharge in such a manner that receiving water quality requirements established by law or other contracts cannot be met by the city; 
I.  Conditions at or near the city's treatment facilities which violate any statute or rule, regulation or ordinance of any public agency of state or federal regulatory body; 
J.  Quantities or rates of flow or pollutants which cause interference or overload the city's sewerage system or treatment facilities or cause excessive city collection or treatment costs or hamper treatment facility operation; 
K.  Pollutants which can cause corrosive structural damage to the sewerage system or treatment facilities; 
L.  Influent to the treatment plant to be over one hundred four degrees Fahrenheit (forty degrees Celsius); 
M.  Waters or waste with a pH factor lower than six or higher than eleven; 
N.  Any discharge which has an average daily concentration exceeding the following technically based local limits: 
Toxicant 	Maximum Allowable 
Concentration (mg/L) 	
Arsenic 		2.5 
Cadmium 		0.5 
Chromium, total 		29 
Copper 		3.0 
Cyanide, total 		1.4 
Lead 		4.0 
Mercury 		0.8 
Nickel 		13 
Silver 		2.9 
Zinc 		3.5 
 
O.  Discharges of new or increased contributions of pollutants, or changes in the nature of pollutants, to the POTW by industrial users where such contributions do not meet applicable pretreatment standards and requirements or where such contributions would cause the POTW to violate its NPDES permit per 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(i); 
P.  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origins in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
Q.  Discharges which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261; 
R.  Discharges containing concentrations of tetrachloroethylene (PCE) or trichloroethylene (TCE) exceeding five micrograms per liter for any grab sample. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.040 - Storm drainage and groundwater. 
Rainwater, groundwater, street drainage, subsurface drainage, roof downspouts, exterior foundation drains, groundwater from cleanup operations, or other sources of drainage water shall not be discharged through direct or indirect connections into a domestic system. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.060 - Septic tanks. 
No person shall use a septic tank for disposal of wastewater if the property to be served is within one hundred feet of the domestic system unless permitted by the public works director. Where such domestic sewer exists and buildings are inhabited or used by human beings, the property owner(s) shall install lateral service connection(s) in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.065 - Trucked/hauled wastes. 
No person shall discharge trucked or hauled pollutants except at discharge points designated by the city of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.070 - Radioactive wastes. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any radioactive waste into a sewerage system except: 
A.  When the person is authorized to use radioactive materials by the State Department of Health or other governmental agency empowered to regulate the use of radioactive materials; and 
B.  When the waste is discharged in strict conformity with current California Radiation Control Regulations (California Administrative Code, Title 17) and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission regulations and recommendations for safe disposal; and 
C.  When the person is in compliance with all rules and regulations of all other applicable regulatory agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.080 - Garbage grinders. 
A.  Wastes from garbage grinders shall not be discharged into a domestic sewer system except: 
1.  Wastes generated in normal preparation of food by residential users; or 
2.  Where the user has obtained a permit for that specific use from the city, and agrees to undertake whatever self-monitoring is required to enable the public works director to equitably determine the user charges based on the waste constituents and characteristics. 
B.  Garbage grinders must shred the waste to a degree that all particles will be carried freely under normal flow conditions prevailing in the domestic sewer. Garbage grinders shall not be used for grinding plastic, paper products, inert materials or garden refuse. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.090 - Direct discharge—Use of service sewer. 
No person shall discharge any substances directly into a manhole or other opening in a sewerage system except through an approved private sewer or house sewer lateral. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.100 - Holding tank waste. 
A user proposing to discharge holding tank domestic waste into a domestic sewer must secure a permit for each separate discharge. This permit shall state the specific location of discharge, the time of day the discharge is to occur, the volume of the discharge, the wastewater constituents and characteristics and origin of such wastes. Holding tank wastes discharged at the treatment plant facilities may be given a discharge permit which would apply to more than one separate discharge at the discretion of the public works director. If a permit is granted for discharge of such waste into the domestic sewer, the user shall pay the applicable user charges and fees and shall meet such other conditions as required by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.110 - Restricted discharges. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to a sewerage system any of the following without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit that specifically permits such waste discharge characteristics: 
A.  Discharges containing metal pickling or etching wastes or plating solutions, whether neutralized or not; 
B.  Discharges containing phenols or other taste-producing and odor-producing substances in concentrations exceeding limits which may be established by the public works director as necessary to meet water quality requirements; 
C.  Slug discharges into the collection system at temperatures exceeding one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (sixty degrees Celsius) or exceeding one hundred ten degrees Fahrenheit (forty-three degrees Celsius) for any eight-hour period; 
D.  Materials which exert or cause in the sewerage system or receiving waters unusual concentrations either of inert suspended solids (such as but not limited to, soil solids, fuller's earth, lime slurries, lime residues, plastics or ash); 
E.  Discharges containing fixed total dissolved solids (such as, but not limited to, sodium chloride, sodium sulphate or other inorganic salts) in such quantities to cause the effluent TDS of the treatment plant to exceed five hundred milligrams per liter. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.115 - Grease, oil, and sand interceptors. 
Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided by the discharger when they are necessary for the proper handling of wastes containing grease in excess of one hundred fifty milligrams per liter of animal and vegetable origin and fifty milligrams per liter of mineral origin, or any flammable wastes, sand, grit and other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved in writing, prior to installation, by the public works director, and shall be located so as to be readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Grease and oil interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction, watertight, usually a minimum of one thousand gallons and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place, are gastight and watertight. Grease and/or oil/sand interceptors shall be constructed in any place or building having a capacity to serve group meals or commercial and industrial cleaning facilities. Where installed, all grease, oil, sand and grit interceptors shall be maintained by the owners at owner's expense in continuous efficient operation at all times. Materials collected shall not be reintroduced into the sewerage system. Records of all maintenance, cleaning and hauling of materials shall be maintained by the owner and such records shall be available at all times for inspection by city personnel. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.120 - Federal pretreatment requirements. 
Users in industrial categories subject to the categorical pretreatment standards development by the EPA under the Clean Water Act of 1977 (PL 95 217) 33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq. are required to achieve limitations based on best practical control technology (BPT) immediately and best available technology economically achievable (BAT) by July 1, 1983, in accordance with Sections 301 and 304. New sources are required to comply with new source performance standards (NSPS) based on best available demonstrated control technology (BDT) for industrial users in terms of concentration and equivalent mass values. Users must comply with pretreatment standards promulgated pursuant to Section 307 and the Federal Register 40 CFR Subchapter IV. Dilution of any discharge may not be used to comply with any pretreatment standards. Categorical industrial users must submit baseline monitoring reports, compliance schedule reports, ninety-day compliance reports, and periodic reports on continued compliance as required including all information required by 40 CFR 403.12(l) and such reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and meet certification requirements of 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii) and 403.12(b)(6) and be retained for a minimum of three years (or period of litigation, whichever is longer). The city may issue standards more stringent than the federal standards if the public works director determines that the limitations in the federal standards are not sufficient to: 
A.  Protect the operation of the city's treatment facilities; or 
B.  Comply with water quality standards, sludge disposal or effluent limitations specified in the city's National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit; 
C.  Meet technically based local limits, which must be calculated per federal pretreatment program guidelines. The city must annually provide public notification of industrial users which during the previous twelve months significantly violated applicable pretreatment standards. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.125 - Required reports. 
The reports required by Section 13.12.120 shall comply with the following regulations: 
A.  Baseline Report. 
1.  Reporting requirements for industrial users upon effective date of categorical pretreatment standard-baseline report. Within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or one hundred eighty days after the final administrative decision made upon a category determination submission under § 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing industrial users subject to such categorical pretreatment standards and currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to a POTW shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in paragraphs (b)(1)- (7) of 40CFR 403.12(b)(1)-(7). At least ninety days prior to commencement of discharge, New Sources, and sources that become industrial users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall be required to submit to the control authority a report which contains the information listed in paragraphs (b)(1)-(5) of 40CFR 403.12. New sources shall also be required to include in this report information on the method of pretreatment the source intends to use to meet applicable pretreatment standards. New sources shall give estimates of the information requested in paragraphs (b)(4) and (5) of 40 CFR 403.12. 
a.  Identifying Information. The user shall submit the name and address of the facility including the name of the operator and owners; 
b.  Permits. The user shall submit a list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility; 
c.  Description of Operations. The user shall submit a brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classification of the operation(s) carried out by such industrial user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow Measurement. The user shall submit information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from each of the following: 
i.  Regulated process streams; and 
ii.  Other streams as necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of § 403.6(e). (See paragraph (b)(5)(iv) of 40 CFR403.12. 
The control authority may allow for verifiable estimates of these flows where justified by cost or feasibility considerations. 
e.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
i.  The user shall identify the pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process; 
ii.  In addition, the user shall submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration (or mass, where required by the standard or control authority) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Both daily maximum and average concentration (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. In cases where the standard requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user shall submit documentation as required by the control authority or the applicable standards to determine compliance with the standard; 
iii.  The user shall take a minimum of one representative sample to compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of this paragraph; 
iv.  Samples should be taken immediately downstream from pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists. If other wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to pretreatment the user should measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined wastestream formula of Section 403.6(e) in order to evaluate compliance with the pretreatment standards. Where an alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in accordance with Section 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with supporting data shall be submitted to the control authority; 
v.  Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis shall be performed by using validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator; 
vi.  The control authority may allow the submission of a baseline report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data provides information sufficient to determine the need for industrial pretreatment measures; 
vii.  The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place, of sampling, and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles and expected pollutant discharges to the POTW; 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by an authorized representative of the industrial user (as defined in paragraph (l) of this section) and certified to by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) and/or additional pretreatment is required for the industrial user to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements; and 
g.  Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards; the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. 
i.  Where the industrial user's categorical pretreatment standard has been modified by a removal allowance (Section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (Section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (Section 403.13) at the time the user submits the report required by paragraph (b) of this section, the information required by paragraphs (b)(6) and (7) of 40 CFR 403.12 shall pertain to the modified limits. 
ii.  If the categorical pretreatment standard is modified by a removal allowance (Section 403.7), the combined wastestream formula (Section 403.6(e)), and/or a fundamentally different factors variance (Section 403.13) after the user submits the report required by paragraph (b) of this section, any necessary amendments to the information requested by paragraphs (b)(6) and (7) of 40 CFR 403.12 shall be submitted by the user to the control authority within sixty days after the modified limit is approved. 
2.  Compliance schedule for meeting categorical pretreatment standards. The following conditions shall apply to the schedule required by paragraph (b)(7) of 40 CFR 403.12: 
a.  The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial user to meet the applicable categorical pretreatment standards (e.g., hiring an engineer, completing preliminary plans, completing final plans, executing contract for major components, commencing construction, completing construction, etc). 
b.  No increment referred to in paragraph 2.a. of this section shall exceed nine months. 
c.  Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the industrial user shall submit a progress report to the control authority including, at a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the industrial user to return the construction to the schedule established. In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the control authority. 
B.  Compliance Report. Report on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any industrial user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the control authority a report containing the information described in paragraphs (b) (4)-(6) of 40 CFR 403.12. For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in Section 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. 
C.  Periodic Reports on Continued Compliance. 
1.  Any industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard (except a non-significant categorical user as defined in Section 403.3(v)(2)), after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the control authority during the months of June and December, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the control authority or the approval authority, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such categorical pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period for the discharge reported in paragraph (b)(4) of 40 CFR 403.12 except that the control authority may require more detailed reporting of flows. In cases where the pretreatment standard requires compliance with a best management practice (or pollution prevention alternative), the user shall submit documentation required by the control authority or the pretreatment standard necessary to determine the compliance status of the user. At the discretion of the control authority and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the control authority may modify the months during which the above reports are to be submitted. 
2.  The control authority may authorize the industrial user subject to a categorical pretreatment standard to forego sampling of a pollutant regulated by a categorical pretreatment standard if the industrial user has demonstrated through sampling and other technical factors that the pollutant is neither present nor expected to be present in the discharge, or is present only at background levels from intake water and without any increase in the pollutant due to activities of the industrial user. This authorization is subject to the following conditions: 
i.  The control authority may authorize a waiver where a pollutant is determined to be present solely due to sanitary wastewater discharged from the facility provided that the sanitary wastewater is not regulated by an applicable categorical standard and otherwise includes no process wastewater. 
ii.  The monitoring waiver is valid only for the duration of the effective period of the permit or other equivalent individual control mechanism, but in no case longer than five years. The user must submit a new request for the waiver before the waiver can be granted for each subsequent control mechanism. 
iii.  In making a demonstration that a pollutant is not present, the industrial user must provide data from at least one sampling of the facility's process wastewater prior to any treatment present at the facility that is representative of all wastewater from all processes. 
The request for a monitoring waiver must be signed in accordance with paragraph (l) of this section and include the certification statement in Section 403.6(a)(2)(ii). Non-detectable sample results may only be used as a demonstration that a pollutant is not present if the EPA approved method from 40 CFR part 136 with the lowest minimum detection level for that pollutant was used in the analysis. 
iv.  Any grant of the monitoring waiver by the control authority must be included as a condition in the user's control mechanism. The reasons supporting the waiver and any information submitted by the user in its request for the waiver must be maintained by the control authority for three years after expiration of the waiver. 
v.  Upon approval of the monitoring waiver and revision of the user's control mechanism by the control authority, the industrial user must certify on each report with the statement below, that there has been no increase in the pollutant in its wastestream due to activities of the industrial user: 
Based on my inquiry of the person or persons directly responsible for managing compliance with the Pretreatment Standard for 40 CFR ___________ specify applicable National Pretreatment Standard part(s)], I certify that, to the best of my knowledge and belief, there has been no increase in the level of ___________ [list pollutant(s)] in the wastewaters due to the activities at the facility since filing of the last periodic report under 40 CFR 403.12(e)(1). 
vi.  In the event that a waived pollutant is found to be present or is expected to be present based on changes that occur in the user's operations, the user must immediately: Comply with the monitoring requirements of paragraph (e)(1) of 40 CFR 403.12 or other more frequent monitoring requirements imposed by the control authority; and notify the control authority. 
vii.  This provision does not supersede certification processes and requirements established in categorical pretreatment standards, except as otherwise specified in the categorical pretreatment standard. 
3.  The control authority may reduce the requirement in paragraph (e)(1) of 40 CFR 403.12 to a requirement to report no less frequently than once a year, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the approval authority, where the industrial user meets all of the following conditions: 
i.  The industrial user's total categorical wastewater flow does not exceed any of the following: 
(A)  0.01 percent of the design dry weather hydraulic capacity of he POTW, or five thousand gallons per day, whichever is smaller, as measured by a continuous effluent flow monitoring device unless the industrial user discharges in batches; 
(B)  0.01 percent of the design dry weather organic treatment capacity of the POTW; and 
(C)  0.01 percent of the maximum allowable headworks loading for any pollutant regulated by the applicable categorical pretreatment standard for which approved local limits were developed by a POTW in accordance with Section 403.5(c) and paragraph (d) of 40 CFR 403.12; 
ii.  The industrial user has not been in significant noncompliance, as defined in Section 403.8(f)(2)(viii), for any time in the past two years; 
iii.  The industrial user does not have daily flow rates, production levels, or pollutant levels that vary so significantly that decreasing the reporting requirement for this industrial user would result in data that are not representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period pursuant to paragraph (g)(3) of 40 CFR 403.12; 
iv.  The industrial user must notify the control authority immediately of any changes at its facility causing it to no longer meet conditions of paragraphs (e)(3)(i) or (ii) of 40 CFR 403.12. Upon notification, the industrial user must immediately begin complying with the minimum reporting in paragraph (e)(1) of 40 CFR 403.12; and 
v.  The control authority must retain documentation to support the control authority's determination that a specific industrial user qualifies for reduced reporting requirements under paragraph (e)(3) of 40 CFR 403.12 for a period of three years after the expiration of the term of the control mechanism. 
4.  For industrial users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established by the control authority in accordance with the procedures in Section 403.6(c), the report required by paragraph (e)(1) of 40 CFR 403.12 shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed only in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), the report required by paragraph (e)(1) shall include the user's actual average production rate for the reporting period. 
D.  Categorical Pretreatment Standard Compliance Reports. Significant non-categorical industrial users must submit to the control authority at least once every six months (on dates specified by the control authority) a description of the nature, concentration, and flow of the pollutants required to be reported by the control authority. In cases where a local limit requires compliance with a best management practice or pollution prevention alternative, the user must submit documentation required by the control authority to determine the compliance status of the user. These reports must be based on sampling and analysis performed in the period covered by the report, and in accordance with the techniques described in part 136 and amendments thereto. This sampling and analysis may be performed by the control authority in lieu of the significant non-categorical industrial user. 
E.  The reports required by paragraphs A, B, C and D at this section must be based on data obtained through appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, which data are representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period as required by 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3). 
F.  If any industrial user subject to the reporting requirement in paragraphs C or D of this section monitors any regulated pollutant at the appropriate sampling location more frequently than required by the control authority, using the procedures prescribed below, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
1.  All analyses shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the administrator pursuant to section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR part 136 and amendments thereto or with any other test procedures approved by the administrator. (See, [Sections] 136.4 and 136.5.) Sampling shall be performed in accordance with the techniques approved by the administrator. Where 40 CFR part 136 does not include sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutants in question, or where the administrator determines that the part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed using validated analytical methods or any other sampling and analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the POTW or other parties, approved by the administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.130 - Industrial waste permits. 
Source control of industrial discharges shall be accomplished by use of a permit and monitoring system as described in this chapter. Discharge of industrial waste from any person within the city onto land or to any natural outlet may be permitted only if the discharge complies with all requirements of the regional water quality control board and of all other local, state and federal laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.140 - Other legal restrictions. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to limit any additional requirements that may be imposed by the county health officer, by the regional water quality control board, fish and game, or by other governmental agencies having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.150 - Connections outside city. 
A.  Whereas: 
1.  San Joaquin County will retain its authority over land use approval for wineries located within county jurisdiction. 
2.  The city of Lodi's general plan contains the following land use element goals: 
a.  Policy LU-A.1— The city shall seek to preserve Lodi's small-town and rural qualities. 
b.  Policy LU-A.4—The city shall promote reinvestment in downtown Lodi and in the Eastside area that upgrades the general quality of development in these areas. 
c.  Goal LU-B—To preserve agricultural land surrounding Lodi and to discourage premature development of agricultural land with nonagricultural uses, while providing for urban needs. 
d.  Policy LU-B.1—The city shall encourage the preservation of agricultural land surrounding the city. 
e.  Policy LU-B.2—The city should designate a continuous open space greenbelt around the urbanized area of Lodi to maintain and enhance the agricultural economy. 
f.  Policy LU-B.6—The city shall encourage San Joaquin County to retain agricultural uses on lands adjacent to the city. 
g.  Goal LU-D—To promote and retain development in downtown Lodi. 
h.  Policy LU-D.1—The city shall preserve and promote downtown Lodi and the city's social and cultural center and an economically viable retail and professional office district. 
i.  Policy LU-D.3—The city shall enhance pedestrian activity and pedestrian amenities in downtown Lodi. 
3.  The city encourages compact development and discourages leapfrog development and urban sprawl within the Highway 12/Interstate 5 corridor, all of which would be inconsistent with the above general plan goals. The city's general plan is committed to the above goals within its own boundaries as well, stating the following: 
a.  A-5 The city shall require specific development plans in areas of major new development. 
b.  E-2 The city shall promote downtown Lodi as the primary pedestrian-oriented, commercial area of Lodi. 
c.  E-4 The city shall ensure the new commercial development be designed to avoid the appearance of strip development. 
d.  E-7 In approving new commercial projects, the city shall seek to ensure that such projects reflect the city's concern for achieving and maintaining high quality development. 
4.  Providing wastewater treatment service to Flag City on the condition that service not be afforded to developments that conflict with the goals set forth herein furthers those goals by concentrating development in an existing county service area with set boundaries. 
5.  County acknowledges the goals set forth in the Lodi general plan as set forth above and has similar provisions in its general plan which encourage agricultural uses, compact land use and development, and discourage "leap frog development" and "urban sprawl." Toward these ends, the county general plan provides: 
a.  To make efficient use of land and promote a functional development pattern with varied and compatible land uses. 
b.  To minimize the effect on agricultural lands and other environmental resources while providing for orderly growth. 
c.  To create a visually attractive county. 
d.  To avoid the problems and costs imposed on local government by development that does not have adequate services. 
e.  Rural communities shall: 
i.  Be planned to have minimal growth, mainly infill development, with expansion discouraged; 
ii.  Be planned to serve the immediate needs of the community's residents or the surrounding agricultural community; 
iii.  Have a minimum land area of fifty acres or have been identified on the general plan 1995 map as a residential area. 
f.  Development shall be orderly and compact. 
g.  Development should occur on vacant lots within existing communities as "infill" before extending beyond the current developed areas of a community. 
h.  Freeway Service. 
i.  Function. Provide for commercial uses oriented almost exclusively to serving the needs of the freeway traveler. 
ii.  Typical Uses. Travel-related businesses including gasoline service stations, food and beverage sales, eating and drinking establishments, and hotels and motels. 
iii.  Development and Locational Criteria. Freeway service areas shall be: 
(A)  Designated only adjacent to full freeway interchanges where development will be easily accessible and visible to the freeway traveler; 
(B)  Limited in number to encourage clustering of uses at selected interchanges; 
(C)  Limited in area in order to reduce impacts on surrounding land uses and control the physical and visual extent of these areas; 
(D)  Developed so that buildings occupy no more than sixty percent of the lot and are no more than three stories in height; and 
(E)  Designed in an attractive manner that creates a favorable impression of the county by considering the overall site design, landscaping, scale of development, signage, relationship to adjacent uses, circulation and parking, and architecture. 
6.  There is a need for upgraded sewer treatment facilities to service Flag City and the parties wish to cooperatively ensure that any development that occurs in Flag City is orderly, compact and in compliance with the goals of the city and county general plans. 
B.  Now therefore be it further ordained as follows: 
1.  Service Outside Lodi. Except as set forth below, no discharge from private facilities or properties outside the city of Lodi shall be allowed into the domestic sewerage or storm drainage systems. The city council may by contract allow connection from: (1) winery facilities outside Lodi to the industrial sewerage system on the terms set forth in this section so long as the system has adequate existing capacity to service the waste (2) publicly owned wastewater systems ("public district") to the domestic wastewater treatment system on terms set forth in this section so long as the system has adequate existing capacity to service the waste. 
2.  Terms of Private Industrial Connection. Any winery wastewater connection permitted pursuant to the contract called for in this section shall contain the following minimum terms: 
a.  Permit. Applicant shall comply with the terms of the industrial system discharge permit to be issued by the city, which will include but not be limited to limitations on flow, BOD, ph, TDS, and suspended solid concentrations and prohibitions on discharge of hazardous waste in conformance with the city's discharge permit. 
b.  Rate/Surcharge. Winery's rate for discharge shall be set at one hundred fifty percent of the city's standard published rate for industrial waste. 
c.  Capacity Charge. Winery shall pay a one-time capacity charge based on annual flow and BOD loading prior to connection per this chapter. 
d.  Non-Assignment. Applicant may not sell capacity or accept wastewater from other locations. 
e.  Downtown Retail Presence. Applicant shall open and operate a wine tasting room to market its products in downtown Lodi during the entire term of its connection to the city's sewer system. The establishment shall be operated within the following minimum requirements: 
i.  It shall be at least five hundred square feet, have its products available for sampling and sale, and be open a minimum of forty hours per week, including Saturday and Sunday and shall be located in downtown Lodi as defined by the area bordered by Church Street, Lodi Avenue, Lockeford Street, and the Union Pacific Railroad tracks. 
ii.  If this condition cannot be met within twelve months of connection, applicant shall pay an annual downtown development and promotional in-lieu fee in the amount established by the city council. The fee shall be retroactive for one year and shall be assessed annually (until such time as the requirements of subsection i of this paragraph have been satisfied) as annually adjusted according to the Bay Area-All Items Consumer Price Index. If condition i. above cannot be met within six years of connection, this agreement will terminate and applicant will be required to make alternate arrangements for its wastewater. 
f.  Annexation. Applicant, in consideration for receiving city sewer service, will consent to the annexation to the city of Lodi of its property served by the city industrial sewerage system, waives any right to protest the annexation, and assigns to the city any right to vote on the annexation. Annexation shall occur when and if the city deems the annexation of the subject property feasible and advisable. In the event the annexation is sought by applicant, applicant agrees to pay city an amount to cover the subject property's proportionate share of the costs to conduct the annexation. In the event that the applicant does ultimately connect to city service, applicant agrees to enter into a short-form memorandum of agreement expressing the obligations of this paragraph in recordable form. 
3.  Terms of Public District Connection. Any delivery of wastewater permitted pursuant to this section shall be subject to the following minimum terms: 
a.  Permit. Public district shall comply with the terms of a discharge permit to be issued by the city which will include but not be limited to limitations on maximum flow, BOD, ph, TDS and suspended solid concentrations and prohibitions on discharge of hazardous waste in conformance with the city's NPDES permit. The terms of this discharge permit will be no more stringent than those required under the city's NPDES permit. However, city may change the terms of the discharge permit without notice if necessary to comply with state or federal requirements. 
b.  Volume. Limits will be set by contract that cannot exceed the White Slough Wastewater Treatment Plant's capacity. 
c.  Rate/Surcharge. Public district's charges will be as established by the city for its high strength customer users plus a surcharge in an amount to be set by contract. 
d.  Capacity Charge. Public district shall pay a one-time capacity charge based on the then-current rates for new city development at the time of connection. (These charges are adjusted annually). Additional capacity charges at the current city rates will apply for each increment of effluent over the amount initially paid. Capacity charge reductions or credits may be granted for steps taken by public district to minimize impacts to city's overall treatment plant capacity through pre-treatment, off-peak delivery, or other mutually agreed strategies. 
e.  Administrative Charge. Public district shall pay city a fee to be set by contract as a one time administrative charge upon the execution of such contract. 
f.  Public district will be solely responsible for all costs associated with installing a pipeline ("collection facilities") to connect to Lodi's system. 
g.  City will bill for its services directly to public district and not to individual customers. Annual billing will begin with commencement of flow to the city's facility and will be billed in advance for a twelve-month period, based on estimated flow and strength. Subsequent annual billings will be based on actuals for the prior twelve months. Public district will pay all invoices within thirty days of the date of the invoice. 
h.  Neither public district will knowingly allow any person or entity to discharge to its collection facilities whose property is outside the public district service area, without prior city approval, which city may withhold in its absolute discretion. 
i.  Reimbursement. Public district shall reimburse the city for all costs incurred by the city in connection with the project. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.160 - Screening of industrial waste. 
No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged to the industrial system an industrial waste that is too large to pass through or, has not been pretreated by being passed through, a screening device with a maximum screen opening of 1.5 millimeters. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Article III. - Service Charges and Capacity Fees 
 
13.12.170 - Classification. 
All users shall be classified for wastewater collection, treatment and disposal purposes in accordance with the principal activity conducted by the person, or the quantity and quality of discharge, as determined by the public works director. The purpose of classification is to facilitate the regulation of wastewater discharge based on quantity and quality of flow, to provide an effective means of industrial waste source control, and to establish a system of sewage service charges and capacity fees which will ensure, but not be limited to, the recovery of city capital, operating and maintenance costs in an equitable manner. It is the responsibility of the user to provide the city a reasonable estimation of wastewater quantity and quality, or other applicable units of measure, and any increases thereof, for the purpose of classification and assessment of service charges and capacity fees. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.180 - Domestic sewer service charges (un-metered accounts). 
A.  Basis. Charges for use of the domestic system shall be determined by the volume, BOD, and SS of wastes discharged. In addition, charges for preparation and maintaining the sewer master plan, expansion of the public works administration building, and expansion of the public works storage facilities are allocated based upon volume, BOD, and SS. 
B.  Applicability. Those residential, commercial and industrial users whose discharge of wastes classify them as a moderate-strength user and those dischargers of industrial and commercial wastes that classify them as high-strength users shall pay charges as determined in this section. Determination of the category for each specific user shall be made by the public works director. 
C.  Moderate-Strength Users. All moderate-strength un-metered users shall be assigned sewage service units. The minimum sewage service units assigned to any commercial and industrial user shall be 0.67 unit. Service charges for moderate-strength users shall be determined by multiplying the cost of one sewage service unit by the number of sewage service units assigned to each user. 
1.  Residential user sewage service units shall be based upon the number of bedrooms per dwelling unit as follows: 
Number of 
Bedrooms 	Sewage Service 
Units 
1 	0.75 
2 	1.00 
3 	1.25 
4 	1.50 
5 	1.75 
6 	2.00 
7 	2.25 
 
2.  Commercial and industrial user sewage service charges shall be based on the number of sewage service units assigned to each user. The unit of measure for determining the number of sewage service units assigned to each user is as follows: 
User Descriptions 	Unit of Measure 
1. Meeting place, religious 	Each 200 seats 
2. Meeting place, public 	Each 100 seats 
3. Hotel, motel without kitchenettes 	Each 3 beds 
4. Hotel, motel with kitchenettes 	Each unit 
5. Veterinary clinic 	Each 4 employees 
6. Post office 	Each 15 employees 
7. Funeral parlor 	Each 3 employees 
8. Service station with service garages 	Each 2.5 pumps 
9. Service station without service garages 	Each 7 pumps 
10. Car wash, automatic bay 	20 SSU's per bay 
11. Car wash, self serve bays 	2 SSU's per bay 
12. School, 8th grade and below 	Each 20 students 
13. High school 	Each 15 students 
14. Eating place, seating only 	Each 10 seats 
15. Eating place, seating and take-out 	Each 7 seats 
16. Eating place, "pizza parlor" 	Each 35 seats 
17. Eating place, take-out only 	Each 5 employees 
18. Lunch truck business 	Each 5 employees 
19. Laundry, coin-op., reg. mach. 	Each 1.5 machines 
20. Laundry, coin-op., big mach. 	Each machine 
21. Comm. laundry and dry cleaning 	Each 3 employees 
22. Dentist's office 	Each 5 employees 
23. Office, store, warehouse manufacturer, doctor's chiropractor's and X-ray offices 	Each 8 employees 
24. Grocery store, supermarket (having vegetable/fruit or butcher/meat sections) 	Each 4 employees 
25. Bar 	Each 20 seats 
26. Barber, beauty shop 	Each 3 workstations 
27. Hospital, convalescent home 	Each 3 beds 
28. Rest and retirement home 	Each 3 beds 
29. Mobile home park 	Each 1.33 pads 
30. RV dump station 	Each station 
31. Industrial Warehousing 	Each 25 fixture units 
 
One sewage service unit shall be assigned to each unit of measure. Fees shall be based on a minimum of 0.67 sewage service unit and tenths of one sewage service units thereafter. At the discretion of the public works director, a commercial user's service charges and/or capacity fees may be based on actual sewer discharge flows estimated by use of a water meter or other appropriate means. 
D.  High-Strength Users. 
1.  All high-strength user sewage service charges shall be determined based upon the actual quantity of flow, BOD, and SS discharged annually. 
2.  The sewage service charge shall be determined by multiplying the quantity of discharged flow, BOD, and SS by the cost for each characteristic. 
E.  Significant Users. All significant users shall be assessed two additional sewage service units in service charges to cover the city's costs of meeting Federal Pretreatment Program requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1870, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
13.12.181 - Domestic sewer service charges (metered accounts). 
A.  Basis. Charges for use of the domestic system shall be determined by the volume, BOD, and SS of wastes discharged. In addition, charges for preparation and maintaining the sewer master plan, expansion of the public works administration building, and expansion of the public works storage facilities are allocated based upon volume, BOD, and SS. 
B.  Applicability. Those residential, commercial and industrial users whose discharge of wastes classify them as a moderate-strength user and those dischargers of industrial and commercial wastes that classify them as high-strength users shall pay charges as determined in this section. Determination of the category for each specific user shall be made by the public works director. 
C.  Moderate-Strength Users. All moderate-strength users shall be billed based upon their average winter water usage to approximate their sewer usage. The monthly sewer bill during the entire year will be based on the average amount of water consumed during the immediately preceding rainy season months of December, January and February. As meters are installed in existing buildings, monthly sewer fees will be converted from the SSU based fees to the average winter usage rate methodology. 
D.  High-Strength Users. 
1.  All high-strength user sewage service charges shall be determined based upon the actual quantity of flow, BOD, and SS discharged annually. 
2.  The sewage service charge shall be determined by multiplying the quantity of discharged flow, BOD, and SS by the cost for each characteristic. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 3, 2-20-2013)  
13.12.190 - Domestic system capacity or impact fees. 
The capacity fee shall cover the capital cost associated with the POTW capacity and the planning, financing, acquisition, and development of other services and facilities directly related to the utilization of capacity by the discharger. Any actual costs incurred by the city in making the physical connection (tap) shall be separate and in addition to the capacity fee described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1870, § 4, 2-20-2013)  
13.12.195 - Downtown business district capacity fees. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that the central area of Lodi as defined in this chapter, which is the traditional center of the city's business community, is presently in danger of losing economic viability. The purpose of this section is to protect a crucial part of Lodi's economy and preserve a portion of the city's heritage by offering incentives for businesses to locate, relocate or expand within this area. 
B.  For purposes of this section, the "central business district" shall mean an area whose boundaries are the same as those for the area subject to the city of Lodi bond issue, Series 1995-1, dated July 22, 1996, more particularly described in the bond documents and map on file with the city clerk's office. 
C.  Wastewater capacity fees for any permitted use which locates, relocates or expands within the central business district as defined shall be discounted as determined by the city council by resolution. 
D.  Notwithstanding any discount granted under this section, the monthly or annual sewage fees set by city council from time to time for any use locating, relocating or expanding within the central business district, shall be calculated on the full number of sewage service units which the use would have otherwise been responsible for under Section 13.12.180 of this code if such use was located outside the central business district. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.200 - Industrial system service charges. 
A.  Industrial system sewage service charges shall be determined based upon the actual quantity of flow and BOD discharged annually. The unit cost for each characteristic will be determined annually and multiplied by each user's measured effluent characteristics. The total of the two characteristic fees shall be the annual sewage service charge. 
B.  The unit cost for each characteristic shall be determined by distributing the total operation, maintenance and capital costs to each characteristic at a proportionate rate and dividing each proportionate cost by the total annual quantity of each characteristic discharged to the system. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.210 - Industrial system capacity fees. 
Fees shall be determined on an individual basis by the public works director and shall be, in part, based upon the value of existing capacity to be utilized and/or the cost of providing additional new capacity. The capacity fee shall be based on a unit rate for flow and BOD. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.215 - Adjustments and additions. 
A.  Service Charge Adjustments. When it is found that a reasonable estimation of wastewater quantity or quality, or other applicable units of measure, have not been used for the assessment of sewage service charges the city has the right to make adjustments as determined by the public works director. Undercharges for the period of incorrect billing up to three years, per California Code of Civil Procedures, Section 338, are due and payable on demand and overcharges will be credited. 
B.  Capacity Fee Adjustments. Any user, after one full year of operating data is available, may request the public works director to make an adjustment, or the public works director may institute an adjustment, if a significant variation exists between the estimated and actual wastewater quantity or quality, or other applicable units of measure. Increases in capacity fees shall be due and payable on demand at the time the public works director makes the fee adjustment and decreases will be credited. 
C.  Capacity Fee Additions. When a user has in the opinion of the public works director significantly increased either wastewater quantity or quality or units of measure over what was used for all previous capacity fee calculations, additional capacity fee charges shall be assessed for the additional wastewater treatment capacity utilized. Such additional capacity fees shall be due and payable on demand at the current rate at the time the public works director makes the determination. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.220 - Storm drain and cooling water service charges. 
A.  The rate for disposal of stormwaters, cooling water discharges or construction flush waters into the city's storm drain system will be established by resolution. 
B.  The city shall estimate and determine the amount of storm, cooling water or construction flush waters deposited into the city's storm drains unless the user of the service elects to provide, install and maintain in good working order an integrating meter satisfactory to the city for the purposes of measuring such storm, cooling water or construction flush waters. 
C.  In determining the amount of storm, cooling water or construction flush waters deposited into the city's storm drain system, no charge shall be made for the storm waters or minor irrigation waters or drainage from roofs, pavements or hard-surfaced areas within the city limits. Where such drainage is metered along with construction flush water, a credit of one thousand two hundred fifty gallons per year for each one hundred square feet, as projected and measured upon a horizontal plane, of such drainage area tributary to the meter shall be allowed. Where roofs or other areas are sprinkled or flushed, such flushing or sprinkling waters shall be included in the quantities for billing purposes. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.230 - Holding tank waste charges. 
The charge for a discharge of holding tank wastes shall be based on the method for determining charges for the high strength user in the domestic system as outlined in subsection 13.12.180 D. Characteristics of BOD and SS shall be determined by random sampling of holding tank waste discharges. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.240 - Charges and fees. 
The schedule of charges and fees for domestic system service charges and capacity fees, industrial system service charges and capacity fees, storm drain service charges, inspection sampling and analysis charges, and holding tank waste charges will be those established and adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.250 - Billing and collections. 
All billing and collections for service charges shall be per Section 13.04.030 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.260 - Appeals. 
The owner or occupants of any premises who finds that the charges and/or fees provided for in this article are unjust or inequitable may make application to the public works director to have the fees modified, in accordance with Section 13.12.590. A commercial or industrial discharger, after one full year of operating data is available, may request the public works director to make an adjustment, or the public works director may institute an adjustment, if a significant variation exists between the estimated and actual quantities for each characteristic. Increases in capacity fees shall be due and payable on demand at the time the public works director makes the fee adjustment and decreases will be credited. Increases or decreases in sewage service charges shall be implemented in the next billing following the determination by the public works director that adjustment is appropriate. Where water usage is metered, the estimated sewer flows may be compared to a two-bedroom residence (one SSU) to determine or adjust the capacity fee or sewage service charge. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Article IV. - Construction Generally 
 
13.12.270 - Permit. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any sewerage system or appurtenances, thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.280 - Design standards. 
All construction of public sewerage systems or appurtenances thereof shall conform to the design criteria, the standard plans and specifications and the inspection and testing procedures in accordance with current city public improvement design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.290 - Application for service. 
Whenever a property owner is desirous of obtaining sewer service where no adequate sewer system exists, an application shall be made to the public works director for sewer service in accordance with Article V of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Article V. - Extensions 
 
13.12.300 - Purpose. 
The city council is desirous of adopting a sewer service and extension policy that is fair and equitable to all developing properties and that provides that the cost of extension shall be distributed among subsequently developing properties connecting thereto. For purposes of this article, storm drains shall be considered as sewers except as specifically stated otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.310 - Application. 
Whenever a property owner is desirous of obtaining sewer service, an application shall be made to the public works director for sewer service. The public works director shall determine the closest adequate sewer and, if an extension is necessary, indicate the size of the main to be extended and the limits of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.320 - Applicant's obligation. 
Whenever the public works director determines that a sewer extension is necessary, the applicant will be required to install, at the applicant's own expense, the sewer extension in accordance with engineering plans furnished by applicant and approved by the public works director. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the city design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.330 - Extension for full frontage width. 
In every case where a sewer is to be tapped to serve a parcel, the same shall be extended the full frontage of the parcel unless the public works director determines that the sewer will not need to be extended to serve any other properties. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.340 - Minimum diameter. 
The minimum size sewer main shall have a nominal inside diameter of six inches. The minimum size storm drain shall have a nominal inside diameter of twelve inches. Larger size mains may be required as determined by the public works director in accordance with the city public improvement design standards or the city master sewer and storm drain plans. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.370 - Reimbursement—Oversize mains. 
Wherever the city requires that a sewer main larger than ten inches in diameter or a storm drain larger than eighteen inches in diameter be installed in order to serve additional property or to conform to the applicable master plan, the applicant may apply for reimbursement from the additional properties that are served by the oversized pipe. The reimbursement shall be based on the difference in cost between the actual pipe to be installed and a ten-inch sewer or eighteen-inch storm drain as applicable. The difference in cost shall be determined by the public works director. The reimbursement shall be made in accordance with Chapter 16.40 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1870, § 5, 2-20-2013)  
Article VI. - Administration 
 
13.12.420 - Discharge reports. 
In addition to the federally required reports described in Section 13.12.120, the city may require that any high-strength user discharging, or proposing to discharge, wastewater into a sewerage system, file a periodic discharge report. The discharge report may include, but not be limited to, nature of process, volume, rates of flow, mass emission rate, temperature, pH, production quantities, hours of operation, number and classification of employees, chemicals and materials stored or used, or other information which relates to the generation of waste including characteristics in the wastewater discharge. Such reports shall also include the chemical characteristic and quantity of liquid or gaseous materials used annually as well as those stored on site, even though the latter may not normally be discharged. All reports are due fourteen days after the conclusion of monitoring or receipt of the laboratory analysis report and must be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user. All such reports shall be retained for a period of three years (or period of litigation, whichever is longer), and shall be made available for inspection and copying by the city. In addition to discharge reports, the city may require information in the form of wastewater discharge permit applications and self-monitoring reports. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.430 - Discharge permit—Required. 
All significant users proposed to connect or to discharge into a sewerage system after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter must obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to, or discharging into, a sewerage system. All existing significant users connected to, or discharging into, a sewerage system must apply for a wastewater discharge permit within one hundred eighty days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.440 - Discharge permit—Optional. 
The public works director may issue a wastewater discharge permit to any user in accordance with the terms of this article in the following categories: 
A.  A user who requires the user charges and fees to be based on an estimation of wastewater flow; 
B.  Any user whose wastewater strength is less than the normal range for the user classification because of pretreatment, process changes or other reasons; 
C.  Any single dwelling, office, commercial business, lodge, apartment, church or multi-use building user who discharges only domestic waste. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.450 - Discharge permit—Application. 
A.  Users seeking a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the public works director an application in the form prescribed by the public works director, and accompanied by any applicable fees. The applicant may be required to submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information: 
1.  Name, address, and SIC number of applicant; 
2.  Volume of wastewater to be discharged; 
3.  Wastewater constituents and characteristics including, but not limited to, those mentioned in Article II of this chapter; 
4.  Time and duration of discharge; 
5.  Average and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any; 
6.  Any other information determined necessary by the public works director to evaluate the permit application. This may include, but is not limited to, the following: 
a.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical, and plumbing plans, water supply and discharge information and details to show all sewers and appurtenances by size, location and elevation, 
b.  Description of activities, facilities and plant process on the premises including all materials, processes and types of materials which are, or could be, discharged, 
c.  Each product produced by type, amount and rate of production, 
d.  Number of employees and hours of work. 
B.  All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
C.  The public works director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the public works director may issue a wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.460 - Discharge permit—Conditions. 
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions of this chapter and all other regulations, user charges and fees established by the city council. The conditions of wastewater discharge permits shall be uniformly enforced by the public works director or assigned agent in accordance with this chapter, and applicable state and federal regulations. Permits may contain the following: 
A.  The unit charge or schedule or user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the sewerage system; 
B.  The collection of capacity fee, inspection fee and prepayment for the prorated portion of annual user charges, if collected annually; 
C.  The average and maximum wastewater characteristics; 
D.  Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization; 
E.  Requirements for installation of inspection, monitoring and sampling facilities; 
F.  Pretreatment requirements; 
G.  Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency and method of sampling, number, types as specified in 40 CFR 403.12(g)(3) and (g)(4) and standards for tests as specified in 40 CFR 136 and reporting schedule; 
H.  Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports; 
I.  Requirements for maintaining plant records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording the city access thereto; 
J.  Mean and maximum mass emission rates, or other appropriate limits when incompatible pollutants (as defined in Article I of this chapter) are proposed or present in the user's wastewater discharge; 
K.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the public works director to ensure compliance with this chapter and federal and state regulations. 
L.  Requirements for "slug discharge" plans as required by 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(vi)(A)-(D). 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1850, § 1, 9-7-2011)  
13.12.470 - Discharge permit—Term—Changes—Renewal. 
Permits shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specific date. A user discharging after the expiration date of the permit shall be considered in violation of this chapter. It is the responsibility of the user to apply for a new discharge permit sixty days before the expiration date of their existing permit. The terms and conditions of the permit may be subject to modification and change by the city during the life of the permit, as limitations or requirements stipulated in this chapter are modified and changed. The user shall be informed of any proposed changes in user's permit at least thirty days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.480 - Discharge permit—Transfer. 
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not be assigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different premises or a new or changed operation without prior written approval of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.490 - Discharge permit—Suspension. 
A permit may be temporarily suspended at any time if it is the public works director's opinion that the continued discharge of the waste or water into the sewerage system would substantially jeopardize the ability of the treatment facilities or sewerage system to meet water quality requirements or would cause an unsafe condition to occur. In lieu of temporary suspension of permits, the public works director may impose such temporary restrictions, conditions or limitations upon the quantities, qualities and rates of discharge made thereunder as deemed necessary to assure that the receiving water quality requirements will not be violated or to alleviate the unsafe condition. Notice of the temporary suspension or the imposition of temporary restrictions, conditions or limitations shall be given in writing by the public works director to the permittee at least twenty-four hours prior to their effective date. Delivery of the notice to the permittee's place of business shall constitute delivery of notice to permittee. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.500 - Discharge permit—Revocation. 
Any user who violates the following conditions of the permit or of this chapter, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having this permit revoked: 
A.  Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of their discharge; 
B.  Failure of the user to report in advance significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; 
C.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises and/or records for the purpose of inspection or monitoring of all possible sources of pollution; 
D.  Failure to pay city utility bills; 
E.  Violation of conditions of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.510 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  The public works director may require the user to construct and maintain, at the user's expense, monitoring facilities which meet all government safety regulations (OSHA) to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building sewer or internal storm drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the public works director may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user or the city, require the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
B.  When the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for the public works director or designated representative, such as a gate secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The monitoring facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
C.  Whether constructed on public or private property, plans and specifications shall be approved by the public works director and be in accordance with all applicable city construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within sixty days following written notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.520 - Inspection, sampling, monitoring and analysis. 
The public works director or designated representative may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater is created or discharged shall allow the public works director or designated representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling or in the performance of any of their duties. The public works director or designated representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations and be allowed to copy any of the user's discharge records. All user discharge records shall be retained for a minimum of three years per 40 CFR 403.12(o). Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the public works director or designated representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. The user will be charged a fee to recover the costs for inspections (investigations), sampling, monitoring and analyses performed by the city for purposes of billing and ensuring compliance with all regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.530 - Accidental discharge prevention. 
A.  Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes regulated by this chapter. Such facilities shall be provided and maintained at a level of operation comparable to that of the original construction at the user's expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the public works director before construction of the facility. 
B.  The review of such plans and operating procedures by the public works director will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility to provide the protection necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
C.  If any wastewater is spilled onto any surface or area in such a manner where there is the possibility of contact with any person, that wastewater shall be cleaned up at the expense of the property owner or a designate within a reasonable time as determined by the city, or the city will clean up the spilled wastewater and bill the property owner or designate for the cleanup. If warranted, or as directed by the city, property management must adequately notify tenants and post area of spill with warning signs. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.540 - Confidential information. 
A.  All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods that would be detrimental to the user's competitive position. 
B.  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies per 40 CFR 403.14; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.550 - Special agreements. 
Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the city council, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. However, in no case may federal pretreatment standards be waived or modified. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Article VII. - Enforcement 
 
13.12.560 - Accidental discharge notice. 
A.  Notice to Authorities. 
1.  Upon accidentally discharging wastes in violation of this chapter, or in violation of a city-issued discharge permit, users shall notify the water services manager or the White Slough Water Pollution Control Facilities (WSWPCF) personnel immediately by telephone or in person, or by calling the public works department twenty-four-hour emergency number to enable countermeasures to be taken by the city to minimize damage to the sewerage system, treatment facility, treatment processes and/or the receiving water. 
2.  This notification shall be followed, within ten calendar days of the date of occurrence, by a detailed written statement to the public works director describing the cause, location, type, volume, concentration, date, time and duration of the accidental discharge, measures taken to correct the problem, and steps taken to prevent future occurrence. 
3.  Such notification will not relieve users of liability for any expense, loss or damage to the sewerage system, treatment plant or treatment process, or for any fines imposed on the city on account thereof under Section 13350 of the California Water Code or for violations of Section 5650 of the California Fish and Game Code. 
B.  If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the water/wastewater superintendent or the WSWPCF personnel within twenty-four hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the public works director within thirty days after becoming aware of the violation per 40 CFR 403.12(g)(2). 
C.  Employee Training. In order that employees of users be informed of the city's requirements, users shall make available to their employees copies of this chapter, together with such other wastewater information and notices which may be furnished by the city from time to time directed toward more effective water pollution control. A notice shall be furnished and permanently posted on the user's bulletin board advising employees whom to call in case of an accidental discharge in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.565 - Notice of potential problems, including slug loading, regardless of whether or not a discharge violates the terms of this chapter. 
All industrial users shall notify the water services manager or White Slough Water Pollution Control Facility personnel immediately of all discharges that could cause problems to the WSWPCF including slug discharge as defined by Lodi Municipal Code Section 13.12.020(54). 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1850, § 2, 9-7-2011)  
13.12.566 - Notice of facility changes affecting potential for slug discharges. 
All significant industrial users are required to notify the water services manager or White Slough Water Pollution Control Facilities personnel of all changes at their facility that affect the potential for a slug discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.567 - Notice of changed discharge. 
Users must notify the public works director of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least thirty days before the change. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.570 - Cease and desist order. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has taken place in violation of prohibitions or limitations of this chapter, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the public works director may issue an order to cease and desist, and direct those persons not complying with such prohibitions, limits, requirements or provisions, to: 
A.  Comply forthwith; 
B.  Comply in accordance with a time schedule set forth by the city; or 
C.  Take appropriate remedial or preventive action in the event of a threatened violation. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.580 - Compliance timetable. 
When the city finds that a discharge of wastewater has been taking place, or is threatening to take place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this chapter, or wastewater source control requirements, effluent limitations or pretreatment standards, or the provisions of a wastewater discharge permit, the city may require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary, a detailed time schedule of specific actions, which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.590 - Appeals. 
A.  Any user, permit applicant or permit holder affected by any decision, action or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the public works director, interpreting or implementing the provisions of this chapter or in any permit issued in this chapter, may file with the public works director a written request for reconsideration within twenty days of such decision, action or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the user's request for reconsideration. The public works director may accept the application, reject the application for sound reasons or direct the applicant, at applicant's sole expense, to maintain and operate in a manner satisfactory to the public works director such indicating or integrating meters as may be required to properly measure the flow, establish sampling equipment, tests and procedures satisfactory to the public works director to determine the characteristics of the wastes. 
B.  If the ruling made by the public works director is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, the person may, within twenty days after notification of the city's action, file a written appeal to the city council. The written appeal shall be heard by the council within twenty days from the date of filing. The city council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within twenty days of the hearing. 
The public works director's decision, action or determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.600 - Liability. 
Any person, firm or corporation, or any partner, officer, agent or employee thereof, who deposits or permits to be deposited into the city's sewerage system any wastes other than those permissible under the terms of this chapter and the terms of a valid permit granted under this chapter is liable for any and all damage caused to the city by virtue of such act, including compensation for damage to the city's facilities, and all costs of any legal fees, suits or judgments against the city which may be attributable to such wastes so discharged. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.610 - Injunction. 
Whenever a discharge of wastewater is in violation of the provisions of this chapter or otherwise causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance, the city may petition the superior court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or both, as may be appropriate in restraining the continuance of such discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.620 - Damage to sewerage system—Charge. 
When a discharge of wastewaters or any other substance causes an obstruction, damage or any other impairment to the city's sewerage system, the city shall assess a charge against the user for the work, materials and services required to clean or repair the affected portions of the sewerage system. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.630 - Civil penalties. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or permit condition or who discharges wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates a cease and desist order, prohibition, effluent limitation, national standard of performance, pretreatment or toxicity standard shall be liable civilly to a penalty not to exceed six thousand dollars for each day in which such violation occurs. The city attorney, upon order of the city council, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess and recover such sums. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.640 - Termination of service. 
The city may revoke any wastewater discharge permit, or terminate or restrict or cause to be terminated or restricted wastewater service to any premises, which may include termination or restriction of the water service if warranted, if a violation of any provisions of this chapter is found to exist or if a discharge of wastewater causes or threatens to cause a condition of contamination, pollution or nuisance as defined in this chapter. The city also reserves the right to immediately disconnect any user, upon informal notice only, in the event of an unlawful discharge which may cause imminent danger to human health, the environment, or which threatens to interfere with the treatment plants operation. This provision is in addition to other statutes, rules or regulations, authorizing termination of service for delinquency in payment. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
13.12.650 - Public notice of violation. 
A.  In accordance with Federal Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403, the city shall publish, at least annually in the largest daily newspaper circulated in the service area, a description of those industrial users which are found to be in significant noncompliance with any provisions of this chapter or in significant violation of any permit or order issued hereunder during the period since the previous publication. 
(Ord. No. 1819, 2-18-2009)  
Chapter 13.14 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT AND DISCHARGE CONTROL[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1905, § 1, adopted June 3, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 13.14, §§ 13.14.010—13.14.480, and enacted a new Chapter 13.14 as set out herein. The former Chapter 13.14 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1747, 2004. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
13.14.010 - Title. 
This chapter shall be known as the city "Stormwater Management and Discharge Control Code," and may be cited as such, and will be referred to herein as "this chapter." 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.020 - Purpose and intent. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect and promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city by controlling non-stormwater discharges to the stormwater conveyance system, by eliminating discharges to the stormwater conveyance system from spills, dumping or disposal of materials other than stormwater, and by reducing pollutants in urban stormwater discharges to the maximum extent practicable. This chapter is intended to assist in the protection and enhancement of the water quality of watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner pursuant to and consistent with the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq.), Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (Water Code Sections 13000 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto and to assure compliance with the conditions set forth by the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) as requirements of stormwater discharge permits. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.030 - Definitions. 
The following words, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning: 
1.  "Basin plan" means the water quality control plan for San Joaquin River Basin adopted by the Central Valley Regional Quality Control Board, Central Valley Region. 
2.  "Best management practices (BMP)" means schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and education practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices found in the stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP) to prevent or reduce to the maximum extent practicable the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly to waters of the United States (33 CFR Section 328.3). "Best management practices" also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, and drainage from raw materials storage. BMPs are required to be implemented and maintained in a manner that is consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent guidelines. 
3.  "City" means the city of Lodi. 
[3.5]  "Construction activity" includes any public or private projects involving roadwork, paving, utility installation, structural construction (new or redevelopment), demolition, grading, excavation, or landscaping that has soil disturbance or has pollutants exposed to stormwater. It does not include routine maintenance to maintain original line and grade, hydraulic capacity, or original purposes of a facility, nor does it include emergency construction activities required to immediately protect public health and safety. 
4.  "Development" means any new construction, rehabilitation, redevelopment or reconstruction of any public or private residential project (whether single- or multi-family planned unit development or the building or placement of any structure or portion thereof); industrial, commercial, retail and other nonresidential projects, including public agency projects; or grading for future construction. "Development" includes excavation and grading. 
5.  "Employee training program" means a documented employee training program which may be required to be implemented by a business pursuant to a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the purpose of educating its employees on methods of reducing discharge of pollutants to the stormwater conveyance system. 
6.  "Enforcement agency" means the city through its public works department. 
7.  "Enforcement official" means the public works director or his or her designee or any agent of the city authorized to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
8.  "Hazardous waste" means any material, including any substance, waste or combination thereof, that because of its quality, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property or the environment, when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed (California Health and Safety Code Section 25117). 
9.  "Illegal discharge" means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that violates this chapter, or is prohibited by federal, state, or local laws, or which degrades the quality of receiving waters in violation of any plan standard. 
10.  "Illicit connection" means any physical connection to the stormwater conveyance system which is not authorized by the city or the Regional Water Quality Control Board Central Valley Region. 
11.  "Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4)" means a conveyance or system of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm drains) that are owned or operated by a state, city, town, or special districts that discharges into waters of the United States. 
12.  "National pollution discharge elimination system (NPDES) permit" means a permit issued by the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the State Water Resources Control Board pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code (commencing with Section 13370) to control discharges from point sources to waters of the United States. 
13.  "Noncommercial vehicle washing" means the washing and rinsing of passenger vehicles on private property in which no commercial enterprise or non-profit fundraising is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles. 
14.  "Non-stormwater discharge" means any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system that is not entirely composed of stormwater. 
15.  "Order" means current Regional Water Quality Control Board Order or general permit which applies to the city together with all amendments. 
16.  "Person" means any person, firm, corporation, business entity, or public agency, whether principal, agent, employee, or otherwise. 
17.  "Plan standard" means any or all applicable requirements of the basin plan or any other approved plan. 
18.  "Pollutant" means any contaminant which can degrade the quality of the receiving water in violation of any plan standard or National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit. 
19.  "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel, land or portion of land whether improved or unimproved. 
20.  "Public works director" means the director of the city, public works department or his or her designee. 
21.  "Receiving waters" means surface bodies of water, including creeks, canals, and rivers, which serve as discharge points for the stormwater conveyance system. 
22.  "Stormwater" means surface runoff and drainage associated with storm events which is free of pollutants to the maximum extent practicable. 
23.  "Stormwater conveyance system" means those artificial and natural facilities within the city, whether publicly or privately owned, by which stormwater may be conveyed to a watercourse or waters of the United States, including without limitation, any roads with drainage systems, streets, alleys, catch basins, pumps, natural and artificial channels, aqueducts, stream beds, gullies, curbs, gutters, ditches, sand and oil separators, open fields, parking lots, impervious surfaces used for parking, and natural and artificial channels or storm drains. 
24.  "Stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPPP)" means a document which describes the best management practices to be implemented by the owner or operator of a business, commercial development, residential development, construction project, or city to eliminate non-stormwater discharges and/or to reduce, to the maximum extent practicable (as defined by the State of California Regional Water Quality Control Board), pollutant discharges to the stormwater conveyance system. 
25.  "Surface water" means all water naturally open to the atmosphere (rivers, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, streams, impoundments, seas, estuaries, etc.) and all springs, wells, or other collectors directly influenced by surface water. 
26.  "User" means any person that discharges, causes or permits the discharge of stormwater into the conveyance system. 
27.  "Watercourse" means any natural stream, whether flowing continuously or not, that is fed from permanent or natural sources, and includes, without limitation rivers, creeks, canals, runs, and rivulets. 
Any term(s) defined in the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended, and/or defined in the regulations for the stormwater discharge permitting program issued by the Environmental Protection Agency, as amended, and which are not specifically defined in the definitions of this section shall, when used in this chapter, have the same meaning as set forth in said act or regulation. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.040 - Conflicts with other laws. 
In the event of any conflict between this chapter and any federal or state law, regulation, order, or permit, that requirement which establishes the higher standard for public health or safety shall govern. To the extent permitted by law, nothing in this chapter shall preclude enforcement of any other applicable law, regulation, order or permit. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article II. - Discharge Restrictions 
 
13.14.050 - Discharge of non-stormwater prohibited. 
Except as provided in Section 13.14.060 of this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to make or cause to be made any non-stormwater discharge. Notwithstanding the exemptions provided in this chapter, if the Regional Water Quality Control Board or the enforcement official determines that any otherwise exempt discharge causes or significantly contributes to violations of any plan standard or NPDES permit, or conveys significant quantities of pollutants to surface water(s) or watercourse(s), or is a danger to public health or safety, such discharge shall be prohibited from entering the stormwater conveyance system. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.060 - Exceptions to discharge prohibition. 
Subject to the authority granted by the Regional Water Quality Control Board and the enforcement official in Section 13.14.420 of this chapter, the following discharges to the stormwater conveyance system are exempt from the prohibition set forth in Section 13.14.050 of this chapter. 
A.  Any discharge or connection regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the State of California pursuant to Division 7, Chapter 5.5 of the California Water Code, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and all other applicable laws and regulations; 
B.  Discharges from the following activities which do not cause or contribute to the violation of any NPDES permit or plan standard: 
1.  Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources, 
2.  Incidental runoff from landscaped areas defined as unintended amounts (volume) of runoff, such as unintended, minimal over-spray from sprinklers that escapes the area of intended use, 
3.  Rising ground waters or springs, 
4.  Passive foundation and footing drains, 
5.  Water from crawl space pumps and basement pumps, 
6.  Air conditioning condensate, 
7.  Individual residential car washing on private property in which no commercial enterprise or non-profit fundraising is being conducted in the washing of those vehicles, 
8.  Natural flows from riparian habitats and wetlands, 
9.  Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges, 
10.  Flows from fire suppression activities, including fire hydrant flows and fire hydrant flow testing, 
11.  Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d) and California Health and Safety Code Section 25117, 
12.  Uncontaminated ground water infiltration or uncontaminated pumped ground water to separate storm sewers; 
C.  Any discharge which the enforcement official, the local health officer, or the Regional Water Quality Control Board determines in writing is necessary for the protection of the public health and safety; 
D.  Any discharge caused by flooding or other natural disaster which could not have been reasonably foreseen or mitigated for in advance by the discharger, as determined by the enforcement official. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.070 - Groundwater discharges. 
Discharges of pumped groundwater not subject to a NPDES permit may be permitted to discharge to the stormwater conveyance system upon written approval from the city and in compliance with conditions of approval set forth by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.080 - Discharge in violation of permit. 
It is unlawful for any person to cause either individually or jointly any discharge to the stormwater conveyance system which results in or contributes to a violation of this chapter and the city's MS4 NPDES permit. The prohibited discharges shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  The deposit or blowing of grass, leaves, yard clippings and/or other landscape debris into the public right-of-way except when specifically permitted by the city. 
B.  The deposit of any garbage, litter, refuse, pet waste and/or junk into the public right-of-way. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.090 - Illicit connections prohibited. 
A.  The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the stormwater conveyance system is prohibited. 
B.  This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. 
C.  A person is considered to be in violation of this chapter if the person connects a line conveying sewage to a stormwater conveyance system, or allows such a connection to continue. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.100 - Concealment and abetting. 
Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.110 - Acts potentially resulting in violation of Federal Clean Water Act and/or Porter-Cologne Act. 
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any provision of any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, or who discharges waste or wastewater which causes pollution, or who violates any cease and desist order, prohibition, or effluent limitation, may also be in violation of the Federal Clean Water Act (33 U.S.C. Sections 1251 et seq.) and/or Porter-Cologne Water Quality Control Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and may be subject to the sanctions of those acts including civil and criminal penalties. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.120 - Reduction of pollutants in stormwater. 
Any person engaged in activities which may result in pollutants entering the stormwater conveyance system shall, to the maximum extent practicable, undertake the measures set forth below to reduce the risk of non-stormwater discharge and/or pollutant discharge. 
A.  Business Related Activities. 
1.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official may require any business in the city that is engaged in activities which may result in pollutant discharges to develop and implement a stormwater pollution prevention plan, which must include an employee training program. Business activities which may require a stormwater pollution prevention plan include, but are not limited to, maintenance, storage, manufacturing, assembly, equipment operations, vehicle loading or fueling, or cleanup procedures which are carried out partially or wholly out of doors. 
2.  Coordination with Hazardous Materials Release Response Plans and Inventory. Any business requiring a hazardous materials release response and inventory plan under Chapter 6.95 (commencing with Section 25500) of Division 20 of the California Health and Safety Code, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-stormwater discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
3.  Coordination with Hazardous Waste Generator Contingency Plan and Emergency Procedures. Any business requiring a hazardous waste generator contingency plan and emergency procedures pursuant to California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Sections 66265.51 to 66265.56, shall include in that plan provisions for compliance with this chapter, including the provisions prohibiting non-stormwater discharges and illegal discharges, and requiring the release of pollutants to be reduced to the maximum extent practicable. 
B.  Construction. 
1.  Any person performing construction activities in the city shall prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations, including but not limited to, the current California NPDES General Permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity (construction general permit) and this chapter. All construction projects, regardless of size, having soil disturbance or activities exposed to stormwater must, at a minimum, implement BMPs for erosion and sediment controls, soil stabilization, dewatering, source controls, pollution prevention measures, and prohibited discharges. 
2.  Any person subject to a construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to, or as a condition of, a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, grading permit, or development or improvement plan, upon inspection of the facility, during any enforcement proceeding or action, or for any other reasonable cause. Prior to issuance of a construction permit or approval of the proposed improvement plans, for projects subject to the state's current construction NPDES general permit, the WDID number and the SWPPP shall be submitted to the city. For projects with less than an acre of soil disturbance or not subject to the construction general permit, an erosion and sediment control plan (ESCP) and the ESCP worksheet must be submitted to the city. 
3.  As required by its Phase II MS4 NPDES Permit, the city will conduct stormwater compliance inspections at applicable construction sites that have areas of soil disturbance exposed to stormwater. The inspection will be conducted by a city inspector or agent working for the city who is a qualified SWPPP practitioner (QSP) or is supervised by a QSP. The inspection will evaluate the construction site's compliance to the city's stormwater ordinances. Inspections will be billed by the city to the project owner. The following is the risk rating system and inspection frequency the city will use, which is analogous to the risk rating used by the California Construction General Permit. 
a.  Projects not subject to the construction general permit (CGP) or that have an erosivity waiver will have a pre-soil disturbance inspection and a project completion inspection. 
b.  Projects that are Risk 1/Linear Underground/Overhead Projects (LUP) Type 1 or Risk 2/LUP Type 2 will have a pre-soil disturbance inspection, monthly inspections, and a project completion inspection. 
c.  Projects that are Risk 3/LUP Type 3 will have a pre-soil disturbance inspection, bi-monthly (twice per month) inspections, and a project completion inspection. 
C.  Development. 
1.  The enforcement official may require controls as appropriate to minimize the long-term, post-construction activity discharge of stormwater pollutants from new development(s) or modifications to existing development(s). Controls may include source control measures to prevent pollution of stormwater, treatment controls designed to remove pollutants from stormwater, low impact development measures, and/or hydromodification measures to offset the difference between the pre- and post-construction peak flow runoff rates and volumes. Proponents of all applicable development and redevelopment projects will be required to meet the requirements and design standards specified in the current State of California Phase II MS4 NPDES Permit and as described in further detail in the city's Stormwater Design Standards Manual for New Development and Redevelopment. 
2.  At the earliest planning stages, project proponents shall assess and evaluate how site conditions, such as soils, vegetation, and flow paths will influence the placement of buildings and paved surfaces. The evaluation will be used to optimize the site layout to meet the goals of capturing and treating runoff. Each project proponent will submit a map of the project dividing the site into discrete drainage management areas to show in each how runoff will be managed using site design measures, source controls, treatment controls, and hydromodification measures as defined by the current MS4 permit. All site design measures, source controls, treatment controls, and hydromodification measures must be selected, sized, and situated in accordance with the guidance provided in the current MS4 permit and the city's Stormwater Design Standards Manual for New Development and Redevelopment. Documentation of the site's post-construction stormwater design measures must be submitted to the city's public works department for review and approval prior to the commencement of the project. 
3.  Project proponents must sign an operation and maintenance agreement in which they legally bind themselves to maintain the installed post-construction design measures in an effective and good operational condition until the property ownership is transferred. A written operation and maintenance plan for the proposed stormwater design measures is required to be submitted to and approved by the city with the signed agreement. The agreement will be recorded with the deed by the county clerk making it transferrable to the new owner; or, when there are multiple property owners responsible for the maintenance of the control measures, the agreement will consist of a legally binding covenant between the city and the homeowners association or maintenance district. The owner or association responsible for the maintenance of the control measures may be required by the city to submit an annual self-certification that the stormwater control measures are effective and are being maintained in accordance with the submitted and approved operation and maintenance plan. 
4.  Any person subject to the state's current construction NPDES general permit for stormwater discharge shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the enforcement official prior to or as a condition of a subdivision map, site plan, building permit, and development or improvement plan; upon inspection of the facility; during any enforcement proceeding or action; or for any other reasonable cause and shall provide copies of permits and applicable reports to the enforcement official upon request. 
5.  Any person performing construction in the city shall prevent pollutants from entering the stormwater conveyance system and comply with all applicable federal, state and local laws, ordinances or regulations including but not limited to the state general permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction activity and the city grading, erosion and sediment control policies. 
D.  Compliance with General Permits. Each industrial discharger, discharger associated with construction activity, or other discharger subject to any general stormwater permit issued by the United States Environmental Protection Agency, the State Water Resources Control Board, the Regional Water Quality Control Board Central Valley Region or the city shall comply with the requirements of such permit, and shall provide copies of permits and applicable reports to the enforcement official upon request. 
E  Compliance with Best Management Practices. Every person undertaking any activity or use of a premises which may cause or contribute to stormwater pollution or contamination, illegal discharges, or non-stormwater discharges shall comply with best management practice (BMPs) consistent with the California Stormwater Quality Association (CASQA) Best Management Practice Handbooks or equivalent guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.130 - Containment and notification of spills. 
Any person owning or occupying a premises who has knowledge of any release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharge from or across that premises which might enter the stormwater conveyance system, other than a release or discharge that is permitted by this chapter, shall immediately take all reasonable action to contain and abate the release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharge, and shall notify the enforcement agency within twenty-four hours of the release of pollutants or non-stormwater discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article III. - Service Charges and Fees 
 
13.14.140 - Storm drain service charges. 
A.  The schedule of charges for the inspection, sampling and analysis of questionable stormwater flowing into the city's stormwater conveyance system will be those established and adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.150 - Billing and collections. 
All billing and collections for service charges shall be per Section 13.04.030 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article IV. - Construction Generally 
 
13.14.160 - Permit. 
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any stormwater conveyance system or appurtenances, thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.170 - Design standards. 
All construction of public stormwater conveyance systems or appurtenances shall conform to the design criteria, the standard plans and specifications and the inspection and testing procedures in accordance with current city public improvement design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article V. - Extensions 
 
13.14.210 - Purpose. 
The city council has adopted a stormwater conveyance extension policy that is fair and equitable to all developing properties and that provides that the cost of extension shall be distributed among subsequently developing properties connecting thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.220 - Application. 
Whenever a property owner requires storm drainage, an application shall be made to the public works department. The public works director shall determine the closest stormwater conveyance and, if an extension is necessary, indicate the size of the main to be extended and the limits of the extension. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.230 - Applicant's obligation. 
Whenever the public works director determines that a stormwater conveyance extension is necessary, the applicant will be required to install, at the applicant's own expense, the stormwater conveyance extension in accordance with the engineering plans furnished by applicant and approved by the public works director. The plans shall be prepared in accordance with the city design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.240 - Extension for full frontage width. 
In every case where a storm drain is to be tapped to serve a parcel, the same shall be extended the full frontage of the parcel unless the public works director determines that the storm drain will not need to be extended to serve any other properties. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.250 - Minimum diameter. 
The minimum size storm drain shall have a nominal inside diameter of twelve inches. Larger size mains may be required as determined by the public works director in accordance with the city public improvement design standards to the city master storm drain plans. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.260 - Reimbursement—Oversize mains. 
Whenever the city requires that a storm drain larger than eighteen inches in diameter be installed in order to serve additional property or to conform to the applicable master plan, the applicant may apply for a reimbursement agreement to the city in order to be reimbursed for the oversized pipe by the benefitting property(s). The reimbursement shall be based on the difference in cost between the actual pipe to be installed and an eighteen-inch storm drain as applicable. The difference in cost shall be determined by the public works director. The reimbursement shall be made in accordance with Chapter 17.62. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article VI. - Administration 
 
13.14.310 - Monitoring facilities. 
A.  The public works director may require a commercial/industrial user to construct and maintain, at the user's expense, monitoring facilities which meet all government safety regulations (OSHA) to allow inspection, sampling and flow measurement of the building internal storm drainage systems and may also require sampling or metering equipment to be provided, installed, operated and maintained at the user's expense. The monitoring facility should normally be situated on the user's premises, but the public works director may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user or the city, require the facility to be constructed in the public right-of-way and located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles. 
B.  When the monitoring facility is inside the user's fence, there shall be accommodations to allow access for the enforcement official, such as a gate secured with a city lock. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling and compositing of samples for analysis. The monitoring facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user. 
C.  Whether constructed on public or private property, plans and specifications shall be approved by the public works director and be in accordance with all applicable city construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within sixty days following written notification by the city, unless a time extension is otherwise granted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.320 - Inspection, sampling, monitoring and analysis. 
The enforcement official may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the purpose of this chapter is being met and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where stormwater is discharged shall allow the public works director or designated representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection or sampling or in performance of any of their duties. The enforcement official shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into their premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, the enforcement official will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. The user may be charged a fee to recover the costs for inspection (investigations), sampling, monitoring and analyses performed by the city to establish billing rates and to ensure compliance with all regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.340 - Confidential information. 
A.  All information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit application, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless (1) the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the public works director that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods that would be detrimental to the user's competitive position; and (2) disclosure is not required by the California Public Records Act. 
B.  When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available to governmental agencies for use in making studies per 40 CFR 403.14; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Stormwater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized as confidential information. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.350 - Special agreements. 
Special agreements and arrangements between the city and any persons or agencies may be established when, in the opinion of the city council, unusual or extraordinary circumstances compel special terms and conditions. However, in no case may federal standards be waived or modified. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Article VII. - Enforcement 
 
13.14.410 - Inspection authority. 
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever an authorized enforcement official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter, the enforcement official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or perform any duty imposed upon the officer by this chapter. Any request for entry shall state that the property owner or occupant has the right to refuse entry and that in the event that such entry is refused, inspection may be made upon issuance of a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after such request has been made, the enforcement official is empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. Inspections shall be based upon such reasonable selection processes as may be deemed necessary to carry out the objectives of this chapter, including but not limited to, random sampling and/or sampling in areas with evidence of stormwater contamination, illegal discharge, non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, or similar factors. 
A.  Sampling Authority. During any inspection, the enforcement official may take samples as necessary in order to implement and enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority may include the installation of sampling and metering devices on private property, or requiring the person owning or occupying the premises to supply samples. 
B.  Monitoring, Analysis and Reporting Authority. The enforcement official may require monitoring, analysis and reporting of discharges from any premises to the stormwater conveyance system. Upon service of written notice by the enforcement official, the burden, including cost, of these activities, analyses and reports, incurred in complying with the requirement shall, to the extent permitted by law, be borne by the property owner or occupant of the facility or activity for which testing and monitoring has been requested. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.420 - Enforcement authority. 
The enforcement official may exercise any enforcement powers authorized or provided in this code, including without limitation, administrative penalties pursuant to this code, as may be necessary to effectively implement and enforce this chapter. 
A.  Administrative Enforcement Powers. The enforcement official may also exercise any of the following supplemental enforcement powers as may be necessary or advisable in the enforcement official's judgment under the circumstances: 
1.  Notice of Violation (NOV). Whenever the enforcement official finds that any person owning or occupying a premises has violated or is violating this chapter or an order issued hereunder, the enforcement official may serve, by personal service, or by registered or certified mail, upon said person a written NOV. Within thirty days of the receipt of this notice, or sooner as may be prescribed in the NOV, the person so noticed shall submit to the enforcement official an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, which shall include specific required actions. Submission of this plan shall in no way relieve the person of liabilities for violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Failure to comply with the terms and conditions of a NOV shall constitute a violation of this chapter. If a person fails to comply with the NOV, the enforcement official may perform, or cause to be performed, such work as shall be necessary to correct the violation. The costs of any such work shall be borne by the property owner, and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of subsection (A)(9). 
2.  Cease and Desist Orders. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying premises to cease and desist all activities that may cause or contribute to discharge in violation of this chapter. This order may also require such person to: (i) comply with the applicable provisions of this chapter within a designated period of time; or (ii) take appropriate remedial or preventative action to keep the violation from recurring. 
3.  Notice to Clean and Abate. The enforcement official may require any person owning or occupying premises to clean up and abate any release of pollutants on those premises which may result in a violation of this chapter. The enforcement official may also order abatement of activities or practices which may reasonably be expected to result in such a violation. 
4.  Mitigation. The enforcement official shall have authority to order the mitigation of circumstances which may result in or contribute to illegal discharges. 
5.  Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan. The enforcement official shall have the authority to establish elements of a stormwater pollution prevention plan, and to require any business to adopt and implement such a plan, as may be reasonable and necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
6.  Best Management Practices. The enforcement official may establish the requirements of best management practices for any premises. 
7.  Violations Constituting Misdemeanors. In addition to civil penalties provided for in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be punishable as a misdemeanor as provided by Section 1.08.010 of this code. 
8.  Violations Deemed a Public Nuisance. In addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety or welfare and is thus deemed a nuisance. Any such nuisance may be summarily abated and/or restored by any authorized enforcement official. The city attorney is authorized to pursue civil action(s) pursuant to subsection B of this section to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of the nuisance. 
9.  Cost Recovery. The cost of the abatement and restoration shall be borne by the owner of the property and the cost therefore shall be invoiced to the owner of the property. If the invoice is not paid within sixty days, the enforcement official shall have the authority to place a lien upon and against the property. If the lien is not satisfied within three months, the enforcement official is authorized to take all legal measures as are available to enforce the lien as a judgment, including, without limitation, enforcing the lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor or a special assessment against the property in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.5. 
10.  Seasonal and Recurrent Nuisance. If any violation of this chapter constitutes a seasonal and recurrent nuisance, the enforcement official shall so declare. Thereafter such seasonal and recurrent nuisance shall be abated every year. 
11.  Costs of Enforcement. If the city prevails in any administrative, civil or criminal proceeding initiated under this chapter, the city shall be entitled to seek reimbursement for all costs incurred in connection with said proceeding. Such reimbursable expenses may include, but are not limited to, costs of investigation, administrative overhead, out-of-pocket expenses, costs of administrative hearings, and costs of suit. If any such costs are granted to the city, said costs shall be recoverable pursuant to subsection (A)(9) of this section. 
12.  Administrative Citation. 
a.  If the owner, or person responsible for the violation, fails to correct the violation within the time specified in the NOV, cease and desist orders, or notice to clean and abate, the enforcement official may cause a violation citation imposing an administrative fine or penalty to be issued to the owner of the property (California Government Code Section 53069.4). 
b.  Any citation issued shall: 
i.  Identify the date, time and circumstances of the violation; 
ii.  State the amount of the penalty to be assessed; 
iii.  Advise the person of their appeal rights as provided herein. 
c.  The citation shall be served in the same manner as the NOV. In determining the amount of penalty to be assessed, consideration will be given to the following: 
i.  The extent to which the owner or person responsible for the violation had knowledge or reasonably should have known that the action taken was a violation of this chapter; 
ii.  The magnitude of the violation; 
iii.  The extent to which the owner or person responsible for the violation derived a financial benefit from the violation; 
iv.  Any prior history of related violations by the same person on the subject property or on other parcels within the city; and 
v.  Any corrective action, or lack thereof, taken by the owner or person responsible to eliminate the violations, and any other mitigating circumstances justifying a reduction of the amount of the penalties; and 
vi.  The amount of the penalty shall be derived as outlined in the city's stormwater enforcement response plan or as established and approved by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
d.  Any person receiving a citation may request an appeal as provided in Section 1.10.250 of the Lodi Municipal Code. 
e.  If the owner of the property fails to pay the penalty assessed under this section upon demand by the city, the penalty shall be specially assessed against the parcel. The special assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary county taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as are provided for ordinary County taxes. A notice of abatement lien shall be recorded and shall become a lien on the property pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Section 38773.5. The director of public works is authorized to prepare and record a notice of release of lien against the legal title of the subject property(s), if the penalty is paid in full. 
B.  Civil Actions. In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city attorney. Monies recovered under this subsection shall be paid to the city to be used exclusively for costs associated with monitoring and establishing stormwater discharge pollution control systems and/or implementing or enforcing the provisions of this chapter. In any such action, the city may seek, as appropriate, any or all of the following remedies: 
1.  A temporary and/or permanent injunction; 
2.  Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, or monitoring survey which led to the establishment of the violation, and for the reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this subsection; 
3.  Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from the violation; 
4.  Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life not to exceed six thousand dollars per day, per occurrence in which such violations occur. The city attorney, upon order of the city council, shall petition the superior court to impose, assess and recover such sums. This penalty is in addition to any penalties which may be imposed by the State Regional Water Quality Control Board and the Environmental Protection Agency. Should the damage also cause the city to be cited for a violation of state or federal requirements, the cost of said citation will be passed onto the offending party. 
C.  Authority to Arrest or Issue Citations. Any authorized enforcement official shall have and is vested with the authority to arrest or cite and release any person who violates any section of this chapter in the manner provided by the California Penal Code for the arrest or release on citation of misdemeanors or infractions as described by Chapters 5, 5(c) and 5(d) of Title 3, Part 2 of the California Penal Code (or as the same may hereafter be amended). Such authorized enforcement official may issue citations and notice to appear in the manner prescribed by Chapter 5(c) of Title 3, Part 2 of the California Penal Code, including Section 853.6 (or as the same may hereafter be amended). It is the intent of the city council that the immunities prescribed in Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code be applicable to public officers or employees acting in the course and scope of employment pursuant to this chapter. 
D.  Emergency Orders and Abatements. The enforcement official may order the immediate abatement of any discharge from any source to the stormwater conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the discharge causes or threatens to cause a condition which presents an imminent danger to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit. 
1.  Abatement and cleanup of spills, illicit discharges, or dumping to the storm drainage system must occur within seventy-two hours of notification; or sooner for high risk spills or discharges. For areas of uncontrolled pollutant sources, abatement must be performed within thirty days of notification. 
2.  In emergency situations where the property owner or other responsible party is unavailable and time constraints are such that service of a notice and order to abate cannot be effected without presenting an immediate danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or the environment or a violation of a NPDES permit, the city may perform or cause to be performed such work as shall be necessary to abate said threat or danger. 
3.  The costs of any such abatement shall be borne by the owner and shall be collectable in accordance with the provisions of subsection (A)(9) of this section. 
4.  The enforcement official may order the immediate cessation of any activities that cause an illicit discharge or cause or potentially cause uncontrolled pollutants to enter the stormwater conveyance system when, in the opinion of the enforcement official, the activities present an imminent danger to the public health, safety, welfare or environment, or a violation of a NPDES permit. Activities may not resume until the enforcement official has verified that the threat to the environment and the city's MS4 has been abated. 
E.  Contents of Notice of Violation. Any NOV, cease and desist order, or other civil notice or civil order issued by the enforcement official pursuant to this chapter shall include the following: 
1.  The street address, parcel number, and/or a legal description sufficient for identification of the property where the violation exists and the address of the person responsible for or committing the act that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
2.  A brief and concise description of the violation or use of the property or act that constitutes a violation of this chapter. 
3.  The date by which the violation must be corrected, which shall be a reasonable period of time. 
4.  A copy of Section 13.14.450 of this chapter outlining appeal rights. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.430 - Remedies not exclusive. 
Remedies under this chapter are in addition to, and do not supersede or limit, any and all other remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.440 - Compliance timetable. 
When the city finds that discharge of unacceptable stormwater has been taking place, or is threatening to take place, in violation of prohibitions or limitations prescribed in this chapter, the city may require the user to submit for approval, with such modifications as it deems necessary a detailed time schedule of specific actions, which the user shall take in order to prevent or correct a violation of requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.450 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person served with a NOV, who is subject to a cease and desist order, who is subject to an abatement order, who is required to perform monitoring, analyses, reporting and/or corrective activities by an authorized enforcement official, or who is otherwise grieved by the decision of the authorized enforcement official, may appeal the decision to the public works director within ten days following the effective date of the decision by filing a written appeal with the public works director. Upon receipt of such request, the public works director shall request a report and recommendation from the authorized enforcement official and shall set the matter for hearing at the earliest practical date. Due notice of the hearing shall be provided to the person appealing the decision of the authorized enforcement official. At the hearing, the public works director may hear additional evidence, and may reject, affirm or modify the authorized enforcement official's decision. 
B.  If the ruling made by the public works director is unsatisfactory to the person requesting reconsideration, the person, may, within twenty days after notification of the city's action, file a written appeal to the city council. The written appeal shall be heard by the council within twenty days from the date of filing. The city council shall make a final ruling on the appeal within twenty days of the hearing. The determination shall remain in effect during such period of reconsideration. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.460 - Disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering, and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof for any damages that result from reliance on the code or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.470 - City authority. 
The enforcement official is authorized to make any decision on behalf of the city required or called for by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
13.14.480 - Judicial review. 
The provisions of California Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 are applicable to judicial review of city decisions pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1905, § 1, 6-3-2015)  
Chapter 13.16 - SOLID WASTE 
Sections: 
 
13.16.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context, the following definitions apply: 
A.  "Collection" means the act of collecting refuse at the place of waste generation by an approved collection agent (public or private) and is distinguished from "removal." 
B.  "Collection vehicle or equipment" means and includes any vehicle or equipment used in the collection of residential refuse or commercial or industrial solid wastes. 
C.  "Commercial customers" means all commercial (non-manufacturing) enterprises within the city limits except industrial customers. 
D.  "Construction/demolition waste" means used or discarded materials generated within the city limits during the construction, remodeling, renovation, or demolition on residential and commercial buildings and any other structure or pavement. 
E.  "Container service" means the type of refuse removal consisting of containers ranging from one cubic yard to fifty cubic yards, typically for large volume refuse generators. 
F.  "Contract" means the written agreement covering the performance of the work, including, but not limited to, the formal agreement, and special provisions, affidavits and certificates of equal opportunity employment, certificate of worker's compensation insurance, the proposal, contract specifications, and performance bond. 
G.  "Contractor" means the individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture or other legal entity entering into a contract with the city to perform the work. When modified by the phrase "as constituted," it means the partnership, corporation, or other legal entity as organized and existing, with the same majority shareholders, as determined at the time of the execution of a contract between the contractor and the city. 
H.  "Disposal site" means and includes the place, location, tract of land, area, or premises in use, intended to be used, or which has been used for the landfill disposal of solid wastes. 
I.  "Garden (green) waste" means refuse consisting of grass, leaves, wood chips, green plants, weeds, tree branches, and garden trimmings. 
J.  "Industrial customer" means all manufacturing enterprises who generate industrial waste within the city limits except commercial customers. The city manager or other designee shall determine whether a customer is "industrial" or "commercial." 
K.  "Industrial waste" means solid waste originating from manufacturing facilities and factories within the city limits including construction and demolition projects. Industrial waste also means solid waste produced by any person, firm, or corporation primarily engaged in the business of processing and manufacturing for the purpose of wholesale. 
L.  "Multi-cart service" means the type of refuse removal designed for source separating into three carts. One cart for non-recyclable materials and non-green waste, one cart for recyclable materials, and one cart for green waste. This type of service is generally for lower volume refuse generators with carts of less than one hundred gallons. 
M.  "Recycling" means the process by which salvaged materials become usable products. 
N.  "Refuse" means any and all discarded items and substances of every kind, including salvageable or recyclable materials, and garden (green) wastes, but not including sewage, septic tank contents, infectious wastes, or hazardous wastes as defined by state and/or federal law. 
O.  "Removal" means the act of taking solid wastes from the place of waste generation either by an approved collection agent or by a person in control of the premises. 
P.  "Residential customer" means all residences within the city limits, including single-family and multi-family dwellings. 
Q.  "Subcontractor" means the individual, partnership, or corporation or other legal entity entering into a contract with the contractor to perform a portion of the work. 
R.  "Transfer station/resource recovery facility" means and includes those facilities utilized to receive solid wastes, temporarily store, separate, convert or otherwise process the materials in the solid wastes, or to transfer the solid wastes directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport to their final place of disposition. 
(Ord. 1815 § 1, 2008)  
13.16.020 - Required services—Exceptions. 
A.  Every person owning or occupying residential or commercial premises within the city limits shall utilize the refuse collection and transportation services of the contractor for which the city has contracted, and shall pay the fees for those services as set by the city. Each owner or occupier of residential or commercial property shall directly arrange with the city or its designee for the provision of services. The city may cause to be removed, at the expense of the owner or occupier of any premises, any refuse not collected due to the failure or refusal of the owner or occupier of the premises to arrange or pay for the contractor's services. 
B.  Exceptions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any person or firm may apply to the city for a permit, for which a fee may be charged, to transport and dispose of refuse accumulated or generated on the premises, utilizing his or its own vehicles and equipment. Any such permit shall require that all vehicles used to transport refuse shall be constructed, maintained and operated so that liquids or refuse will not blow, fall, sift or leak, and shall be maintained to prevent unnecessary noise. The permittee shall pick up any refuse dropped or deposited in the process of transporting it to the disposal site. Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to mean any customer may undertake refuse collection, transportation or disposal services for any other person or firm under any circumstances. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.030 - Contract for refuse collection and transportation. 
The city has the exclusive right and duty to collect and transport refuse within the city limits, under such terms and conditions as it deems necessary for the public health, safety and well-being; and it may contract with a contractor for the provision of those services. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.040 - All requests for service to be met. 
The contractor shall provide refuse collection and transportation services to all customers within the area specified in its contract except for industrial waste. The contractor shall not be required to service oversized, overweight or unsafe containers, or to remove hazardous waste, or to remove waste where it is unsafe to do so. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.050 - Placement of containers. 
A.  Residential. Residential customers utilizing refuse carts shall place containers in the gutter immediately adjacent to the curb or other areas as approved by the public works director. All containers must be placed in a location readily accessible to the contractor, free of obstacles. The placement shall also not impede pedestrian (including wheelchair) sidewalk access. Containers shall be maintained in accordance with Lodi Municipal Code Title 17 — Development Code — Chapter 17.14, "General Property Development and Use Standards," Section 17.14.090, "Solid Waste Collection and Storage Areas." Failure to meet any of these conditions shall constitute cause for the contractor's refusal to perform collection services. The contractor shall, after collection, return containers/carts to the location from which they were collected. 
B.  Commercial. Commercial customers shall place refuse in a location on their premises in an approved location that is readily accessible to the contractor's collection vehicles, and that has received the contractor's prior approval as conforming to its specifications and requirements for refuse container facilities. The contractor shall make such specifications and requirements available upon request by a customer. Failure to place containers in an approved location shall constitute cause for the contractor's refusal to perform refuse services. 
C.  Any gate to the container storage area must be maintained by the property owner in good working condition, and shall be left unlocked on the regularly scheduled collection day. Any animals shall be restrained. Ashes must be cold and bagged, and animal droppings must be bagged in a nonpermeable material. 
(Ord. 1774 § 1, 2006; Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002) 
(Ord. No. 1878, § 1, 6-19-2013)  
13.16.060 - Refuse collection and transportation restricted. 
Except as provided in this chapter, at any time when there is a contract in force between the city and any contractor, it shall be unlawful for any person other than the contractor to collect or transport refuse within the city limits. 
This section shall not be construed to prevent customers from hauling occasional loads of refuse from their own premises to a legal point of disposal. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.070 - Limitation on transfer of contract. 
No contract entered into pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be assigned without prior consent of the city. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.080 - Container maintenance. 
It shall be the responsibility of the customer to maintain contractor furnished carts/containers in a safe and sanitary condition. The contractor shall be responsible for keeping them in good repair, free from sharp or rough edges, jagged surfaces or other hazards likely to cause injury. All refuse containers shall be tightly covered. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.090 - Hazardous materials. 
No person shall deposit in any container used for refuse any explosive or highly flammable, radioactive, toxic or other hazardous material or substance as defined by state and/or federal law. However, special arrangements may be made with the contractor for removal of such hazardous material if the contractor provides such service. The contractor is under no obligation to remove hazardous waste. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.100 - Billing and collection of fees. 
The director of finance is designated as the collector of all refuse fees or charges. Each month, he/she shall bill every person producing refuse removed by the city or its contractor and adding the amount of such refuse collection fee or charge to such person's water or electric bill, or, if such person has not incurred bills for water or electricity, by billing them for refuse collection alone. If the bill is not timely paid as required within this chapter, the water service and/or the electric service and/or the refuse service to such delinquent customer may be discontinued. Penalties and rules pertaining to payment of water and electric bills and to discontinuance and renewal of water and electric service shall apply to refuse service. It shall be the contractor's responsibility to notify the city of billing for services to and collecting fees from customers for whom it performs services on other than a regularly scheduled service. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.110 - Monthly rates. 
The city shall establish by resolution of the city council a schedule of rates to be charged for the collection and transportation of refuse within the city limits. Upon adoption, such schedule shall be published once in the Lodi News Sentinel or a newspaper of general circulation within the city. Such schedule shall set the rates for refuse collection and refuse permits. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.120 - Burning or burial. 
It is unlawful for any person to burn or bury within the city any refuse, or to place or deposit upon any street, alley, place or vacant lot, any of the materials included in the definition of the word "refuse" in Section 13.16.010. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.130 - Unlawful deposit. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to throw into or deposit upon any public street, highway or grounds, or in any gutter or ditch, or upon any private premises, or anywhere except in such places as may be designated for such purposes by the city, any glass, broken ware, dirt, rubbish, refuse or filth; nor shall any rubbish, refuse or filth be allowed to remain upon any private premises. 
B.  Any refuse, dirt, rubbish, soot, ashes, cinders or filth of every kind in any house, cellar, yard or any other place, which the city or other legally authorized health officer, for the health of the city, deems necessary to be removed, shall be carried away therefrom by and at the expense of the owner or occupant of such house or any place where the same may be found, and removed beyond the corporate limits or to such place as may be designated by the city or other legally authorized health officer. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.140 - Removal of recyclable material prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person, other than the city's designated contractor, to remove or collect recyclable or salvageable materials placed by any person in a bag or container labeled for use in connection with a recycling program operated by the contractor. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.150 - Industrial waste collection and transportation restricted. 
Except as provided in this chapter and on the conditions contained herein, it shall be unlawful for any person or firm to collect or transport industrial waste within the city limits of Lodi. The term "industrial waste" shall not include recyclable materials when such materials are segregated from other types of waste, as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.160 - Permit required. 
A.  No person or firm shall engage in the collection or transportation of industrial waste within the city without first obtaining from the finance department a nonexclusive permit for such activities and paying an annual permit fee in an amount to be set from time to time by resolution of the city council, adopted pursuant to this article. Such permit fee shall be in addition to any other annual business license fees or franchise fees. The city council finds and declares that such fee is necessary and proper to defray the costs of required monitoring, accounting and recordkeeping in order to comply with state solid waste management statutes including, but not limited to, Public Resources Code Section 40000 et seq. 
B.  Permittees under this article shall be required to furnish to the city the following: 
1.  A certificate of insurance for vehicle and general liability in an amount not less than one million dollars, plus proof of Workers Compensation coverage; 
2.  Proof of inspection by the California Highway Patrol and/or the San Joaquin County health department of all vehicles used for the hauling of industrial waste; 
3.  A bond or suitable guarantee for potential defaults or failures to pay franchise fee in an amount to be determined by the finance director. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.170 - Franchise fee. 
All persons or firms engaged in the collection or transportation of industrial waste shall pay to the city an annual franchise fee equivalent to 4.8 percent of the gross revenues for such collection and/or transportation. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.180 - Industrial waste—Processing through materials recovery facility (MRF). 
All persons and firms engaged in the collection and transportation of industrial waste shall channel all such waste through a materials recovery facility (MRF) licensed by the state of California. Such MRF may be located inside or outside the city. It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to provide to the city on a quarterly basis all data and information on the waste stream volume required under state solid waste reduction statutes. Failure to provide such information may result in revocation of any permit issued under this division. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
13.16.190 - Transport by generator of industrial waste—Exemption. 
Any person or firm generating industrial waste as defined in this chapter may choose to transport its own waste for disposal on the following conditions: 
A.  Self-hauler shall obtain a permit from the city, for which no fee will be charged; 
B.  All self-hauled industrial waste shall be channeled through a state-licensed materials recovery facility (MRF); 
C.  No waste of any nature from any source other than industrial waste generated by the self-hauler may be transported under this section. 
(Ord. 1709 § 1 (part), 2002)  
Chapter 13.20 - ELECTRICAL SERVICE  
Article I. - Generally 
 
13.20.010 - Rules and regulations. 
The furnishing of electric utility services to all users in the city shall be subject to official rules and regulations, as established by the electric utility director, and approved by resolution of the city council. A current copy of such rules and regulations shall be retained at City Hall by the electric utility department, and shall be available for public inspection upon request. Such rules and regulations may be modified from time to time, as necessary, in the manner prescribed herein. 
(Ord. 1447 § 1, 1989)  
13.20.020 - Energy theft diversion/field services fee recovery schedule. 
A.  Purpose. The city council finds and determines that there is and has been a rise in utility theft in the city of Lodi whereby electricity services are being obtained without payment, including but not limited to, shutoff costs, meter tampering, damage to or removal of meter locking devices, energy diversion or theft of electric service, resulting in substantial monetary losses to the city's ratepayers in the form of, including but not limited to, loss of revenue, replacement of damaged meters, meter testing fee and other related equipment replacement or repair costs, personnel time in investigating and remedying theft matters, investigative costs, and attorney's fees. The purpose of this section is to establish clear guidelines for the processing and recovery of revenues related to theft as well as costs, fees, and expenditures incurred by the city as a result of utilities theft as described herein. 
B.  Adoption of Fees. The city council shall from time to time establish by resolution fees to be charged to utility account holders where the city incurs costs as a result of nonpayment, meter tampering, or actual or attempted theft of energy. Costs shall not exceed actual cost. Fees shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Theft Inspection Fee. Shall be charged upon an inspection that shows that the meter has been tampered with or that the meter has been bypassed. 
2.  Field Services Field Trip Fee. Shall be charged on accounts that are sealed for nonpayment. 
3.  Service Cut-At-Pole Fee. Shall be charged on accounts that cannot be turned off at meter box when sealed for nonpayment or on accounts that the meter has been bypassed or tampered with. 
4.  Meter Set Fee. Shall be charged when a meter must be replaced when the meter has been tampered with or bypassed. 
5.  Damaged Meter Test Fee. Shall be charged when a meter must be tested after the meter was tampered with or bypassed. 
6.  Meter Ring Fee. Shall be charged when meter ring must be replaced after the meter was tampered with or bypassed. 
7.  Padlock Fee. Shall be charged when padlock must be installed or replaced after the meter was tampered with or bypassed. 
8.  Meter Cover Fee. Shall be charged when meter cover must be replaced after the meter was tampered with or bypassed. 
9.  Damaged Meter Replacement Fee. Shall be charged when meter is unrepairable and must be replaced after meter was tampered with or bypassed (separate fees for single-phase and/or poly-phase). 
10.  Nighthawk Collar/Nighthawk Meter Replacement Fee. Shall be charged when Nighthawk Collar and/or Nighthawk meter must be replaced after the meter was tampered with or bypassed. 
(Ord. No. 1855, § 1, 12-21-2011)  
Article II. - Meter Installations 
 
13.20.040 - Compliance. 
All meter installations shall comply with the minimum requirements of the electric utility service equipment requirements committee (EUSERC), as accepted by the city, and with rules and regulations of the inspecting authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part): prior code § 9-30 (part))  
13.20.050 - Required. 
Metering equipment complying with these service rules and regulations shall be required whenever any electrical wiring of the Class I type (defined in the city electrical code) is installed, except when there is existing metering equipment which, in the opinion of the building official, is satisfactory and adequate to register all electric current to be supplied. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-30 (part))  
13.20.060 - Owner as contractor. 
When a property owner is permitted to do his own wiring, he will be considered the electrical contractor for the purpose of this article. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-30 (part))  
13.20.070 - Service entrance. 
A.  The service entrance head or outlet shall be located in accordance with Article 230 of the National Electrical Code as interpreted by the city. The service head should be placed higher than the point of service attachment, if possible, to preclude the possibility of water entering the service conduit or cable and ultimately the meter. The customer's service entrance wires shall extend two feet beyond the service head or outlet and thus be long enough to provide for drip loops and attachment to the service drop. 
B.  In this article the capacity of the service switch has been used as the basis for determining the size of other related equipment. In those cases where a main service switch is not used, the current-carrying capacity of the service entrance conductors shall be considered as the service switch capacity. 
C.  Any new service entrance installed in the area described in the downtown underground utility master plan adopted by the city council shall be installed underground. Location and requirements shall meet the approval of the city utility director. 
(Prior code § 9-31)  
13.20.080 - Placement between switch and overload devices. 
The metering arrangements required by the utilities department of the city provide for the line current to enter first the meter and then the disconnect and overload protective devices. There shall be one main service disconnecting switch or breaker located at a point adjacent to and outside of the building with the electrical metering device. 
(Prior code § 9-32)  
13.20.090 - Type. 
A.  Provision shall be made for the installation of a self-contained meter (no instrument transformers) for services with capacity less than two hundred amps. 
B.  In all other cases, provision shall be made for the installation of instrument transformers and a transformer-type meter. For large installations, the utility department should be consulted to determine if provision is necessary for installation of a varhour meter to measure power factor. 
Exception: the four hundred amp, single-phase bolt-in type meter is acceptable only for single-family residential use. 
C.  Socket-type meters shall be used on all installations. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part): prior code § 9-33)  
13.20.100 - Sockets. 
A.  The contractor shall provide meter sockets in accordance with EUSERC requirements for the type of service being installed. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-34)  
13.20.110 - Instrument transformer. 
A.  An instrument transformer installation consists of metering current or potential transformers, or both, mounted in a metal cabinet and a watt-hour meter with its accompanying test facilities. For large loads a varhour meter is required in addition to the watt-hour meter. 
B.  The utility department will furnish and install the secondary wiring from the instrument transformers to the meter in conduit or raceways furnished and installed by the contractor. Provision shall be made for the installation of meter test blocks or test switches, which will also be furnished by the utility department. 
C.  The contractor shall furnish and install a metal cabinet for housing the metering instrument transformers in accordance with EUSERC specifications for the type of service being installed. 
D.  All covers which must be lifted into place should be equipped with two handles or similar lifting devices. All covers shall have a small caution sign on the front reading, "Do not break seals. No fuses inside." 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-35)  
13.20.120 - Multiple meter installations. 
A.  When a building has more than one customer or more than one type of service, it is necessary to use a multiple meter installation. Nonswitchboard multiple-occupancy installations can usually best be arranged by utilizing a meter trough. Standardized meter troughs using ring-type sockets or individual sockets in combination with standardized wire gutters or their equivalent are recommended. Troughs and wire gutters containing unmetered wiring shall always be provided with two studs having one-sixteenth-inch holes for sealing, in addition to the screws normally used to hold the cover in place. Unmetered service wires and metered load wires shall not be run in the same conduit, raceway or wiring gutter. 
B.  The rules for spacing of multiple meter installations using socket-type meters shall be in accordance with EUSERC requirements. 
C.  In multiple-occupancy buildings, meters shall be mounted at a common location. Where one or more meters are added to an existing installation, they shall either conform to the existing plan, or the existing meters shall be rearranged to conform to a new plan. 
D.  Each meter position in multiple meter installations shall be clearly and prominently marked in a permanent manner by the contractor to indicate the particular location supplied by it. Meters will not be installed until the marking is complete. In case of multiple dwellings, each meter switch shall be marked by letter or number to correspond to the apartment it serves. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-36)  
13.20.130 - Location. 
A.  Electric meter installations shall be located so as to be accessible to any authorized representative of the utility department at all reasonable times for reading, testing and inspection. Outdoor meter locations are preferred. 
B.  Electric meter installations shall not be located in any of the following places: 
1.  On any floor higher than the ground floor; 
2.  In any place where moisture, fumes or dust may interfere with its operation or materially damage the meter; 
3.  In any elevator or hatchway; 
4.  In any hazardous location; 
5.  In any place not in general use; 
6.  Directly over any stairway, ramp or steps; 
7.  On any surface subject to excessive vibration, as determined by the utility department; 
8.  In any doorway; 
9.  On or recessed in the external surface of any wall or any building that is built within three feet of any property line or on the line of any walk, alley or driveway giving access to commercial or industrial property, except when permitted by the utility department; 
10.  On any portion of a building which might at a later date be enclosed and thus make the meter inaccessible, such as carports, breezeways, covered porches and similar places; 
C.  Residential meter installations, when electric utilities are installed in the street, shall be located outdoors and shall be located within six feet of the front corner of the building or structure. No electric meter shall be enclosed by any fence, gate, shrub or any other type of structure or enclosure, and shall be accessible from the front of the building or structure. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985: prior code § 9-37)  
13.20.140 - Height. 
A.  Meters shall be located not more than seventy-five inches and not less than sixty-six inches above the ground or standing surface when installed outdoors. When installed outdoors in a cabinet or indoors in a meter room, the minimum height may be reduced to thirty-six inches. 
B.  In the event special permission is granted to locate a meter adjacent to a walk or driveway, it should be mounted eighty-four inches above such walk or driveway. However, in no event shall a demand meter be mounted higher than seventy-five inches. 
(Prior code § 9-38)  
13.20.150 - Working space. 
A level standing and working surface shall be provided in front of each metering installation. A clear and unobstructed working space shall be above this surface. The width of the working space shall be sufficient to permit ready access to the metering equipment and in no case less than three feet. The height of the working space shall be equal to the overall height of the metering installation and in no case less than six feet. The working space shall extend at least three feet from the surface on which the metering equipment is mounted. 
(Prior code § 9-39)  
13.20.160 - Breaking seal—Connection or disconnection. 
Under no circumstances shall an electrical contractor, or anyone other than a employee of the utilities department, be allowed to break a seal on the utility's meter or connect or disconnect a meter. 
(Prior code § 9-40)  
13.20.165 - Remote 
In the event of injury to a city employee, by attack from an animal on the premises of a customer/resident, it shall be mandatory for the customer/resident to pay for the cost of a remote meter installation which cost may be paid outright or added to the monthly utility bill. 
(Ord. 1351 § 1 (part), 1985)  
13.20.170 - Violation—Unlawful. 
It is unlawful for any person, either as owner, architect, contractor, artisan or otherwise, to do or knowingly to cause or permit to be done any electrical wiring as defined in this article in such manner that the same does not conform to all of the provisions of this article. 
(Prior code § 9-41)  
ARTICLE III. - RATES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1941, § 1, adopted May 3, 2017, effective July 1, 2017, repealed the former Art. III, §§ 13.20.175—13.20.330, and enacted a new Art. III as set out herein. The former Art. III pertained to similar subject matter. See the Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 
 
13.20.175 - Applicability. 
The sale of electric energy by the city shall be at the rates set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.180 - Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to all electric customers served by the city of Lodi. Each customer shall pay the applicable rate plus an energy cost adjustment (ECA) for each kilowatt-hour (kWh) delivered to the customer. The adjustment shall be the product of the total kilowatt-hours (kWh) for which the bill is rendered times the ECA amount per kWh. 
The purpose of the ECA is to adjust for increases/decreases to the city of Lodi's wholesale energy costs. This adjustment provides a mechanism to recover increased costs for wholesale energy or to lower collections when costs decrease below the base charge level. 
B.  Rates: 
Effective July 6, 2007, the ECA billing factor for any given month shall be calculated as follows: 
  
Where: 
a.  Equals the amount the city of Lodi is actually charged by the Northern California Power Agency for the billing month, including adjustments for prior billing periods, less any third party revenue credits. 
b.  Equals the city of Lodi's estimated costs related to the acquisition of wholesale power, both financial and physical, procured directly by the city for the billing month, including adjustments for prior billing periods. 
c.  Equals the difference between actual retail energy sales and projected sales levels for the month which is two months prior to the billing month. 
d.  Equals the ECA billing factor for the month which is two months prior to the billing month. 
e.  Equals the forecast of projected retail energy sales for the billing month. 
f.  Equals the baseline energy cost for the city of $0.0831. 
The city of Lodi will recalculate the ECA each month, and resulting amount shall be automatically implemented for bills rendered during the following billing month. The ECA shall not be discounted. 
  
SCHEDULE I-1 FIXED ECA OPTION: 
Customers must elect this option prior to the start of the twelve-month cycle (July—June) and must be billed for the entire twelve months under this option. Customers may opt out in the May prior to the next twelve-month billing period. 
The city of Lodi will calculate a fixed ECA based on projected sales divided by the budgeted NCPA all resource bill for the upcoming twelve-month period (July—June) minus 8.31 cents. The resulting amount shall be automatically implemented for bills rendered during the eleven billing months beginning in July and ending in May. The June billing shall include a true-up for the actual ECA billed in the same eleven-month period and the actual ECA for the month of June. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.185 - Schedule CSS—California Solar Initiative Surcharge. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to all electric customers served by the city of Lodi. Each customer shall pay the applicable rate(s) plus the California Solar Initiative Surcharge (CSS) for each kilowatt-hour (kWh) delivered to the customer. 
The CSS shall fund incentives for customers participating in the Lodi Solar Rebate Pilot Program. California Senate Bill 1 (SB 1) mandates that all electric utilities offer a solar photovoltaic program that provides incentives to support the development and installation of solar systems throughout their given service territory. Based upon SB 1 funding requirements, Lodi Electric Utility shall make available approximately six hundred thousand dollars annually between the years 2008—2017. 
B.  Rates. Effective on all bills rendered on or after January 1, 2008 until December 31, 2017, a surcharge per kilowatt-hour (kWh) will be applied to all kWh sold. The CSS shall be applied to all kWh sold and will be non-discounted. 
The surcharge amount of $0.00125 will be applied to all kWh consumed by each customer in all rate classes. 
All funds collected under this surcharge will be placed in an account solely for the purpose of implementing the Lodi Solar Rebate Pilot Program. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.190 - Schedule EA—Residential service. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to single-phase domestic power service in single-family and multi-family dwellings separately metered by the city including those on discontinued all electric rate schedule, EE. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer charge ..... $10.20 
Energy charge is by tier of kWh usage: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
$/kWh 	$0.1428 	$0.1581 	$0.3366 
 
Summer (May through October) energy tiers: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
Beginning Tier kWh/month 	0 	482 	>962 
Ending Tier kWh/month 	481 	962 	
 
Winter (November through April) energy tiers: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
Beginning Tier kWh/month 	0 	392 	>782 
Ending Tier kWh/month 	391 	782 	
 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the energy charge and the ECA. 
E.  Special Conditions: 
a.  When a business or commercial establishment is conducted in conjunction with a residence and both are measured through one meter, this rate does not apply. 
b.  This rate does not apply to service used for common area and facilities in multi-family dwellings. 
c.  Additional discounts are available as described in schedule MR, residential medical discount and schedule ED, residential SHARE program service. 
F.  Fixed Income Discount. For those customers who are on fixed incomes below forty-five thousand dollars annually and who are over sixty-two years of age, and do not qualify for any other discount, a discount of five percent shall apply to the electric bill. Procedures as to qualification will be established by the electric utility department. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.200 - Schedule ED—Residential share program service. 
A.  Applicability. Applicable to domestic service in single-family and multi-family dwellings separately metered by the city of Lodi where the customer meets all the special conditions of this rate schedule including those on discontinued all electric SHARE rate schedule, EF. 
B.  Rates. Customers under this schedule will have bills computed using the EA rate schedule less a thirty percent discount. 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the energy charge and the ECA. 
E.  Special Conditions. 
1.  When a business or commercial establishment is conducted in conjunction with a residence and both are measured through one meter, this rate does not apply. 
2.  This rate does not apply to service used for common area and facilities in multi-family dwellings. 
3.  Single Household Alternative Rate for Energy (SHARE) Eligibility. To be eligible to receive SHARE an applicant must complete an application and qualify based on the income eligibility criteria for state of California Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program. 
4.  Completed applications must be submitted to the city of Lodi finance department. The city of Lodi finance department shall certify the eligibility of all applicants. 
5.  All applicants will be required to certify income eligibility for the SHARE program. Customers must sign a statement upon application indicating that the city of Lodi may verify the customer's eligibility at any time. If verification established that the customer is ineligible, the customer will be removed from the program and the city of Lodi may render corrective billings. 
6.  An additional discount is available as described in Schedule MR, residential medical discount. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.210 - Schedule EM—Mobilehome park service. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to service supplied to mobile home parks through one meter and sub-metered to all individual mobile home units. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer Charge (Master 
Meter Customer) ..... $1.02 per individual mobile home park unit. 
Energy charge is by tier of kWh usage: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
$/kWh 	$0.1428 	$0.1581 	$0.3366 
 
Summer (May through October) energy tiers: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
Beginning Tier kWh/month 	0 	482 	>962 
Ending Tier kWh/month 	481 	962 	
 
Winter (November through April) energy tiers: 
	Tier 1 	Tier 2 	Tier 3 
Beginning Tier kWh/month 	0 	392 	>782 
Ending Tier kWh/month 	391 	782 	
 
C.  Master Meter/Sub-Meter Discount: For each occupied mobile home park unit, the park owner will receive a monthly discount in the amount of three dollars. 
D.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
E.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge (master meter customer), the energy charge, the master meter/sub-meter discount and the ECA. 
F.  Special Conditions: 
1.  This rate is available only for mobile home park master metering in service prior to March 31, 1989. 
2.  It is the responsibility of the master-metered customer to notify the city finance department by the fifth day of each month of any change in the number of occupied mobile home park units wired for service on the first day of that month. 
3.  Miscellaneous electric loads such as general lighting, laundry rooms, general maintenance, and other similar use incidental to the operation of the premises as a multi-family accommodation will be considered domestic use. 
4.  For the master-metered customer to qualify for single household alternative rate for energy (SHARE) and/or the residential medical discount, the qualified sub-metered tenants of the master-metered customer must submit the applicable application(s), including the tenant's unit number, to the City of Lodi Finance Department. The City of Lodi Finance Department will notify the master-metered customer in writing of the tenant's certification for these programs. 
5.  For tenants who are on fixed incomes below forty-five thousand dollars annually and who are over sixty-two years of age, and do not qualify for any other discount, a discount of five percent of the qualifying tenant's electric bill (fixed income discount) shall be provided to the master-metered customer. Procedures as to qualification will be established by the electric utility department. 
6.  The master-metered customer, not the city of Lodi, is responsible for extending the SHARE, residential medical discount, and fixed income discount to tenants certified to receive them. If verification establishes that the SHARE, residential medical discount, or fixed income discount tenant is ineligible, the tenant will be removed from the master-metered customer's qualified tenants and the city of Lodi may render corrective billings. 
7.  The master-metered customer shall not bill any sub-metered tenant more than that tenant would be billed if that tenant were an individual customer of the city of Lodi. For a qualifying SHARE tenant, the master-metered customer shall bill the qualifying tenant at the applicable rates equivalent to Schedule ED, residential SHARE program service. For a tenant qualifying for a residential medical discount, the master-metered customer shall the bill the qualifying tenant in accordance with the provisions of Schedule MR, residential medical discount. For tenants qualifying for a fixed income discount, the master-metered customer shall bill the qualifying tenant in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (e) herein. 
A tenant not qualified for any of the above discounts shall be billed using the rates and charges provided for in Schedule EM, mobile home park service, except the master meter/sub-meter discount shall not be provided to tenants and the master-metered customer shall not bill the tenant the Schedule EM, mobile home park service customer charge (master meter customer). 
8.  With the exception of the customer charge provided for in Schedule EA, residential service, the master-meter/sub-meter rate discount provided herein prohibits further recovery by mobile home park owners for the costs of owning, operating and maintaining their electric sub-metered system. 
9.  Upon request, mobile home park owners must submit copies of their tenant billings to the city of Lodi for auditing to ensure compliance with this rate tariff, provided however that such requests shall not be made more often than semi-annually. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.220 - Schedule MR—Residential medical rider. 
A.  Applicability. Qualifying residential customers on Schedule EA are entitled to a discount of twenty-five percent from the total bill. Qualifying residential customers on Schedule ED are entitled to a discount of five percent from the total bill. Master-metered customers with qualifying tenant(s) on Schedule EA are entitled to a discount of twenty-five percent per billing cycle (monthly bill) for each qualifying household or mobile home unit. Master-metered customers with qualifying tenant's' on Schedule ED are entitled to a discount of five percent per billing cycle (monthly bill) for each qualifying household or mobile home unit. If a customer or full-time resident in the home or mobile home unit has one or more of the medical conditions listed below, contact the electric utility department to request a city application, "Declaration of Eligibility for Medical Discount." Only one medical discount adjustment per household or mobile home unit is available. 
B.  Qualifying Conditions. To qualify for the medical discount, the customer will be required to submit a completed city application, including the certification of a doctor of medicine or osteopathy licensed to practice in the state of California that a customer or other full time resident in the home is: 
a.  Dependent on a life-support device used in the home. 
b.  Paraplegic, hemiplegic, or quadriplegic person having special air-conditioning needs. 
c.  A multiple-sclerosis patient with special heating or air-conditioning needs. 
d.  Medical conditions other than multiple sclerosis, paraplegia, hemiplegia, or quadriplegia may qualify customers for medical quantities for electric heating or air conditioning. Any such conditions will be reviewed on an individual basis. 
C.  Life Support Devices: 
A life support device is any medical device necessary to sustain life or relied upon for mobility. To qualify under this schedule, the device must be used in the home and must run on electricity supplied by the city of Lodi. 
The term "life support device" includes, but is not limited to respirators, iron lungs, hemodialysis machines, suction machines, electric nerve stimulators, pressure pads and pumps, aerosol tents, electrostatic and ultrasonic nebulizers, compressors, IPPB machines and motorized wheelchairs. 
D.  Heating and Air Conditioning. Special heating and/or air-conditioning needs will qualify for a medical discount only if the main source of energy for heating or air conditioning is electricity supplied by the city of Lodi. 
E.  Medical Discount for Mobile Home Park Service Customers: 
Residential tenants of mobile home park service customers can also qualify for medical discount. If one or more of the customer's tenant(s) have a medical condition that qualifies under the conditions listed above, contact the electric utility department to apply. 
Any medical discount must be passed on to the qualifying tenant(s) when tenants are billed for the electricity they use. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.225 - Schedule NEM—Net energy metering rider. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this rider is to establish rates, terms, and conditions for providing net metering services to customers generating electricity using solar and wind facilities of one MW or less in size. This rider complies with California State legislation requiring every electric utility in the state, including municipally-owned utilities, to develop a standard contract or tariff providing for net energy metering, as defined below. 
B.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to service for customers where a part or all of the electrical requirements of the customer can be supplied from a solar or wind power production source owned and operated by the customer (customer-generated). Availability of this schedule to eligible customer-generators will be on a first-come, first-served basis and will be available until such time the total rated generating capacity used by eligible customer-generators equals five percent of the city of Lodi aggregate customer annual peak demand. 
The solar or wind generation source must: 1) have a capacity of one MW or less, 2) be located on the customer-generator's premises, 3) be connected for parallel operation with Lodi's distribution facilities, and 4) be intended for the sole purpose of offsetting a part or all of the customer-generator's own electrical requirements. In no case shall the power or energy generated by the customer-owned solar or wind source be available for resale, except as specified under this rider. 
Additional terms and conditions for service, including terms of interconnection and parallel operation, are specified in a customer-specific Electrical Interconnection and Net Energy Metering Payment Agreement. 
C.  Rates. Charges for electricity supplied by the city will be based on metered usage in accordance with special conditions (D)(3) and (5) below. Rates charged under this schedule will be in accordance with the eligible customer-generator's otherwise applicable rate schedule. Public benefit charges and monthly customer charges shall not be by-passable. 
D.  Special Conditions. 
1.  Other Agreements. A signed electrical interconnection and net metering payment agreement between the customer-generator and the city is required for service under this schedule. 
2.  Metering Equipment. Net energy metering shall be accomplished using a single meter capable of registering the flow of electricity in two directions. If customer's existing electrical meter is not capable of measuring the flow of electricity in two directions, the customer-generator shall be responsible for all expenses involved in purchasing and installing a meter that is capable of measuring electricity in both directions. 
Co-energy metering customers transferred to net metering pursuant to Section 13.20.227 of this Code, may remain on the dual meter system. Net energy metering customers, at their election may opt for the dual meter system. 
3.  Net Energy Metering and Billing. Net energy is defined as measuring the difference between the electricity supplied by the city through the electric grid to the eligible customer-generator and electricity generated by an eligible customer-generator and fed back into the electric grid over a twelve-month period. 
In the event that the electricity supplied by the city during the twelve-month period exceeds the electricity generated by the eligible customer-generator during the same period, the eligible customer is a net electricity consumer and the city shall bill the customer for the net consumption during the twelve-month period based on the retail price per kilowatt-hour for eligible customer-generator's rate class over the same period. 
The city shall provide the customer-generator with net electricity consumption information on each regular bill. That information shall include the current amount owed to the city for the net electricity consumed. Customer-generator may exercise the option to pay monthly for the net energy consumed, but in any event shall be responsible for any payments due at the end of each twelve-month period. 
4.  Attributes. Any capacity attributes or environmental attributes associated with the renewable energy produced by the customer-generator at sites subject to this schedule shall belong to the city with the sole exception of renewable energy credits for solar and wind generation up to the amount of on-site consumption. Capacity attributes include, but are not limited to, system resource adequacy capacity and local resource adequacy capacity, if any. Environmental attributes include, but are not limited to, renewable portfolio standard recognition, renewable energy credits, greenhouse gas credits, and emission reduction credits, if any. 
5.  Excess Energy. Net energy metering will be administered on an annualized basis, beginning with the month of interconnection of the customer's generating system with the city's electrical system. Electric solar and wind generation production may result in a dollar credit carrying forward to the next billing period. If a credit accumulation results in a net customer-owned generation credit at the end of the annualized year, unused dollar credits will be set to zero and not be carried into the new annualized year unless the customer-generator affirmatively elects to be paid for such excess. If the customer-generator so elects, the city shall either pay the customer-generator or credit the customer generator's account for such excess at the baseline energy cost rate specified in Schedule ECA plus the energy cost adjustment rate averaged for the billing periods with excess generation. 
6.  Rules and Regulations. Other conditions specified in the city of Lodi electric utility department's rules, regulations and engineering standards shall apply to this electric rate schedule. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.227 - Conversion of prior schedule CEM—Co-energy metering rider. 
A.  On the effective date of this [Ordinance No. 1941], customer generators on the city's prior schedule CEM co-metering rider will be converted to the city's schedule NEM-net energy metering rider. In calendar year 2011, the annual net energy bill as provided in Subsection 13.20.225(D)(3) of this Code, shall be calculated retroactive to January 1, 2011, and the annual excess energy credit or payment (if any) shall be calculated retroactive to January 1, 2011. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.230 - Schedule EL—Outdoor dusk-to-dawn lighting. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to city-owned and maintained outdoor overhead area lighting service. Dusk-to-dawn lighting may not be used for street lighting purposes. 
B.  Rates: 
For each 6,000 lumen gas 
discharge lamp ..... $13.02 per billing cycle 
For each 18,000 lumen gas 
discharge lamp ..... 24.16 per billing cycle 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill): 
a.  Lamps shall be approximately six thousand or eighteen thousand lumen gas discharge with luminaire and bracket, as specified by the City of Lodi Electric Utility Department, and shall be supported on city-owned poles which are used to carry distribution system circuits for other city purposes and shall be at locations approved by the city of Lodi. Lamps will be controlled from dusk to dawn each night so as to give approximately four thousand three hundred eighty hours of service annually. 
b.  Upon receipt of notice from a customer of failure of light to operate as scheduled, the City of Lodi Electric Utility Department will, within a reasonable period of time, make the necessary repairs. 
c.  Relocation of existing outdoor lighting service equipment or the installation of additional facilities required other than mentioned in (a) above shall be at customer's expense prior to starting work. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.235 - Schedule ES—City facilities service. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable only to those city facilities currently on schedule ES. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer charge ..... $10.20 
Energy charge per kWh ..... $0.10890 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the energy charge, and the ECA. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.240 - Schedule G1—General service—Group 1 commercial/industrial. 
A.  Applicability: This schedule is applicable to customers with single-phase or three-phase service, or to a combination thereof, whose energy consumption does not exceed eight thousand kilowatt-hours (kWh) per billing cycle for three consecutive billing cycles. This schedule is not available for service when another commercial/industrial schedule is applicable. 
Assignment to Schedule. If, in the judgment of the city, an account is expected to have usage below eight thousand kWh per billing cycle, the city has the option of placing the account immediately on this schedule. 
When an account billed on this schedule permanently changes the nature of electrical operations to such an extent that the account would in time qualify for another rate schedule, such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes. 
If energy consumption equals or exceeds eight thousand kWh for three consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate rate schedule. If the demand reaches or exceeds four hundred kW for three consecutive billing cycles, the account will be transferred to the appropriate rate schedule. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer charge (per meter per billing cycle): 
Single-phase service ..... $ 7.50 
Three-phase or combination service ..... 11.09 
Energy charge ($ per kWh): 
Summer (May through October) ..... $0.19261 
Winter (November through April) ..... $0.14244 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Community Benefits Incentive Discount. G1-Non-profit (as defined in Federal Internal Revenue 501(c)(3)) industrial/commercial customers who are currently receiving Federal Community Development Block Grant funds or have received such funds not more than two years before preparation of the current billing cycle charge are eligible for the following discount on energy and demand charges: 
July 1, 1996 
and after ..... 30 percent 
It is the customer's responsibility to notify the finance department of this eligibility. 
This discount may not be used in conjunction with any other incentive discount. 
E.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the energy charge and the ECA. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.250 - Schedule G2—General service—Group 2 commercial/industrial. 
A.  Applicability: This schedule will be applied to accounts with energy consumption in excess of eight thousand kilowatt-hours (kWh) for three consecutive billing cycles. This schedule is not available for service when another commercial/industrial schedule is applicable. 
Billing Demand. The billing demand in any billing cycle will be the maximum average power taken during any metering interval in the period, but not less than the diversified resistance welder load. (The customary metering interval is fifteen minutes; in cases where the use of energy is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuations, a five-minute interval may be used.) 
Assignment to Schedule. If, in the judgment of the city, an account is expected to have usage over eight thousand kWh per billing cycle, the city has the option of placing the account immediately on this schedule. 
When an account billed on this schedule permanently changes the nature of electrical operations to such an extent that the account would in time qualify for another rate schedule, such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city of any such changes. 
If energy consumption drops below eight thousand kWh and remains there for twelve consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate schedule. If the billing demand reaches or exceeds four thousand kW for three consecutive billing cycles, the account will be transferred to the appropriate rate schedule as soon as practicable. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer charge: 
(per meter per 
billing cycle) ..... $60.38 
Demand charge: 
All kW of billing 
demand, per kW ..... 4.18 
Energy charge: (per kWh) 
Summer (May through October) ..... 0.15829 
Winter (November through April) ..... 0.12671 
Energy cost adjustment (ECA): 
An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
C.  Voltage Discount. When delivery is made at the same primary distribution voltage as that of the line from which the service is supplied, a four percent discount will be allowed on the sum of the demand charge and the energy charge. 
D.  Community Benefits Incentive Discount. G2-Non-profit (as defined in Federal Internal Revenue 501(c)(3)) industrial/commercial customers who are currently receiving Federal Community Development Block Grant funds or have received such funds not more than two years before preparation of the current billing cycle charge are eligible for the following discount on energy and demand charges: 
July 1, 1996 
and after ..... 30% 
It is the customer's responsibility to notify the finance department of this eligibility. 
This discount may not be used in conjunction with any other incentive discount. 
E.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the demand charge, the energy charge, the ECA and the voltage discount, if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.260 - Schedule G3—General service—Group 3 commercial/industrial. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule shall be applied to accounts with billing period demands of between four hundred kilowatts (kW) and five hundred kW for three consecutive billing cycles. This schedule is not available for service when another commercial/industrial schedule is applicable. 
Demand: The billing period and peak period demands will be the maximum average power taken during any fifteen-minute interval in the billing period and peak period, respectively, but not less than the diversified resistance welder load. In cases where the use of energy is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuations, a five-minute interval may be used. 
Assignment to Schedule: If, in the judgment of the city, an account is expected to have billing period demand of four hundred kW or more and less than five hundred kW per billing cycle, the city has the option of placing the account immediately on this schedule. 
When an account billed on this schedule permanently changes the nature of electrical operations to such an extent that the account would in time qualify for another rate schedule, such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city of any such changes. 
If billing period demand drops below four hundred kW and remains there for twelve consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate rate schedule. If billing period demand reaches or exceeds five hundred kW for three consecutive billing cycles, the account will be transferred to the appropriate rate schedule. 
_____
B.  Rates: 
Customer Charge (per meter per billing cycle) 	$137.23 
Service Voltage: 	Secondary (G3-S) 	Primary (G3-P) 
Season: 	Summer 	Winter 	Summer 	Winter 

Demand Charges: 
Per kW of peak 
period demand 	$11.70 	— 	$ 10.98 	— 
Per kW of billing 
period demand 	$ 4.18 	$ 4.18 	$ 3.23 	$ 3.23 

Energy Charges: 
Peak Period (per kWh) 	$0.17228 	— 	$0.16606 	— 
Partial peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.13799 	$0.12504 	$0.13348 	$0.12118 
Off peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.11853 	$0.11412 	$0.11499 	$0.11079 
 
_____
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA - Energy Cost Adjustment. 
D.  Types of Charges. The billing cycle charge for service is the sum of the customer charge, the demand charges, the energy charges, the ECA and the power factor adjustment: 
1.  Customer Charge: The customer charge is a flat monthly fee. 
2.  Demand Charges: This schedule has two demand charges: A peak period demand charge and a billing period demand charge. The peak period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval during the billing cycle's peak hours. The billing period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval at any time during the billing cycle. The bill will include both demand charges. Time periods are defined below. 
3.  Energy Charges: This schedule has three energy charges: A peak period energy charge, a partial peak period energy charge, and an off peak period energy charge. The peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's peak hours. Partial peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's partial peak hours. Off peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's off peak hours. The bill will include all of these energy charges. Time periods are defined below. 
4.  ECA: The ECA is a per kWh charge applied to the total kWh used during the billing cycle. 
Monthly charges may be decreased or increased based upon power factor as defined below. 
As shown on the rates above, demand and energy charges are based on the voltage at which service is taken. Service voltages are defined below. 
E.  Definition of Service Voltage. The service voltage classes are: 
(a)  Primary: Service voltage class for service at twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
(b)  Secondary: Service voltage class for service at available voltages below twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
F.  Power Factor Adjustment. Bills will be adjusted for billing cycle average power factor as follows: 
1.  The total charge (except taxes and customer charge) for any billing cycle as computed on the above rates shall be increased by 0.0006% for each 0.01 percentage point that the average power factor of the customer's load in the billing cycle is less than ninety-seven percent, such average power factor to be computed (to the nearest hundredth of a percent) from the ratio of lagging kilovolt ampere-hours to kilowatt-hours consumed in the billing cycle. 
2.  Customers with service entrance equipment unable to accommodate the city's reactive metering equipment shall have their billing power factor determined by testing performed by the city. 
G.  Definition of Time Periods. Times of the year and times of the day are defined as follows: 
1.  Summer: (May 1 through October 31) 
Peak: 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
2.  Winter: (November 1 through April 30) 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
3.  Holidays: 
"Holidays," for the purpose of this rate schedule, are New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. The dates will be based on those days on which the holidays are legally observed. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 3-21-2018)  
13.20.270 - Schedule G4—General service—Group 4 commercial/industrial. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule shall be applied to accounts with billing period demands of between five hundred kilowatts (kW) and one thousand kW for three consecutive billing cycles. This schedule is not available for service when another commercial/industrial schedule is applicable. 
Demand: The billing period and peak period demands will be the maximum average power taken during any fifteen-minute interval in the billing period and peak period, respectively, but not less than the diversified resistance welder load. In cases where the use of energy is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuations, a five-minute interval may be used. 
Assignment to Schedule: If, in the judgment of the city, an account is expected to have billing period demand between five hundred kW and one thousand kW per billing cycle, the city has the option of placing the account immediately on this schedule. 
When an account billed on this schedule permanently changes the nature of electrical operations to such an extent that the account would in time qualify for another rate schedule, such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city of any such changes. 
If billing period demand drops below five hundred kW and remains there for twelve consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate rate schedule. If billing period demand reaches or exceeds one thousand kW for three consecutive billing cycles, the account will be transferred to the appropriate rate schedule. 
_____
B.  Rates: 
Customer Charge (per meter per billing cycle) 	$137.23 
Service Voltage: 	Secondary (G4-S) 	Primary (G4-P) 
Season: 	Summer 	Winter 	Summer 	Winter 

Demand Charges: 
Per kW of peak 
period demand 	$11.70 	— 	$ 10.98 	— 
Per kW of billing 
period demand 	$ 4.18 	$ 4.18 	$ 3.23 	$ 3.23 

Energy Charges: 
Peak Period (per kWh) 	$0.15904 	— 	$0.15288 	— 
Partial peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.12470 	$0.11252 	$0.12027 	$0.10870 
Off peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.10528 	$0.10168 	$0.10181 	$0.09840 
 
_____
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA - Energy Cost Adjustment. 
D.  Types of Charges. The billing cycle charge for service is the sum of the customer charge, the demand charges, the energy charges, the ECA and the power factor adjustment: 
1.  Customer Charge: The customer charge is a flat monthly fee. 
2.  Demand Charges: This schedule has two demand charges: A peak period demand charge and a billing period demand charge. The peak period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval during the billing cycle's peak hours. The billing period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval at any time during the billing cycle. The bill will include both of these demand charges. Time periods are defined below. 
3.  Energy Charges: This schedule has three energy charges: A peak period energy charge, a partial peak period energy charge, and an off peak period energy charge. The peak period Energy Charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's peak hours. Partial peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's partial peak hours. Off peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's off peak hours. The bill will include all of these energy charges. Time periods are defined below. 
4.  ECA: The ECA is a per kWh charge applied to the total kWh used during the billing cycle. 
Monthly charges may be decreased or increased based upon power factor as defined below. 
As shown on the rates above, demand and energy charges are based on the voltage at which service is taken. Service voltages are defined below. 
E.  Definition of service voltage. The service voltage classes are: 
(a)  Primary: Service voltage class for service at twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
(b)  Secondary: Service voltage class for service at available voltages below twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
F.  Power Factor Adjustment. Bills will be adjusted for billing cycle average power factors as follows: 
1.  The total charge (except taxes and customer charge) for any billing cycle as computed on the above rates shall be increased by 0.0006% for each 0.01 percentage point that the average power factor of the customer's load in the billing cycle is less than ninety-seven percent, such average power factor to be computed (to the nearest hundredth of a percent) from the ratio of lagging kilovolt ampere-hours to kilowatt-hours consumed in the billing cycle. 
2.  Customers with service entrance equipment unable to accommodate the city's reactive metering equipment shall have their billing power factor determined by testing performed by the city. 
G.  Definition of Time Periods. Times of the year and times of the day are defined as follows: 
1.  Summer (May 1 through October 31) 
Peak: 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
2.  Winter (November 1 through April 30) 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
3.  Holidays: 
"Holidays," for the purpose of this rate schedule, are New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day, the Day after Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. The dates will be based on those days on which the holidays are legally observed. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 3-21-2018)  
13.20.280 - Schedule G5—General service—Group 5 commercial/industrial. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule shall be applied to accounts with billing period demands of one thousand kilowatts (kW) or more for three consecutive months, unless the customer elects an optional rate schedule the account would otherwise qualify. 
Demand: The billing period and peak period demands will be the maximum average power taken during any fifteen-minute interval in the billing period and peak period, respectively, but not less than the diversified resistance welder load. In cases where the use of energy is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuations, a five-minute interval may be used. 
Assignment to Schedule: If, in the judgment of the city, an account is expected to have billing period demand of one thousand kW or more per billing cycle, the city has the option of placing the account immediately on this schedule. 
When an account billed on this schedule permanently changes the nature of electrical operations to such an extent that the account would in time qualify for another rate schedule, such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city of any such change. 
If billing period demand drops below one thousand kW and remains there for twelve consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate rate schedule. 
_____
B.  Rates: 
Customer Charge (per meter per billing cycle) 	$137.23 
Service Voltage: 	Secondary (G5-S) 	Primary (G5-P) 
Season: 	Summer 	Winter 	Summer 	Winter 

Demand Charges: 
Per kW of peak 
period demand 	$11.70 	— 	$10.98 	— 
Per kW of billing 
period demand 	$ 4.18 	$ 4.18 	$ 3.23 	$ 3.23 

Energy Charges: 
Peak Period (per kWh) 	$0.14652 	— 	$0.14070 	— 
Partial peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.11225 	$0.10022 	$0.10814 	$0.09671 
Off peak period 
(per kWh) 	$0.09497 	$0.09189 	$0.09173 	$0.08880 

Economic Stimulus Rate Credit: (per kWh) 	$0.00440 	$0.00440 	$0.00440 	$0.00440 
 
_____
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA - Energy Cost Adjustment. 
D.  Types of Charges. The billing cycle for service is the sum of the customer charge, the demand charges, the energy charges, the ECA and the power factor adjustment. 
1.  Customer Charge: The customer charge is a flat monthly fee. 
2.  Demand Charges: This schedule has two demand charges: A peak period demand charge and a billing period demand charge. The peak period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval during the billing cycle's peak hours. The billing period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval at any time during the billing cycle. The bill will include both of these demand charges. Time periods are defined below. 
3.  Energy Charges: This schedule has three energy charges: A peak period energy charge, a partial peak period energy charge, and an off peak period energy charge. The peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's peak hours. Partial peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's partial peak hours. Off peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's off peak hours. The bill will include all of these energy charges. Time periods are defined below. 
4.  ECA: The ECA is a per kWh charge applied to the total kWh used during the billing cycle. 
Monthly charges may be decreased or increased based upon power factor as defined below. 
As shown on the rates above, demand and energy charges are based on the voltage at which service is taken. Service voltages are defined below. 
E.  Definition of service voltage. The service voltage classes are: 
(a)  Primary: Service voltage class for service at twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
(b)  Secondary: Service voltage class for service at available voltages below twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
F.  Power Factor Adjustments. Bills will be adjusted for billing cycle average power factor as follows: 
1.  The total charge (except taxes and customer charge) for any billing cycle as computed on the above rates shall be increased by 0.0006% for each 0.01 percentage point that the average power factor of the customer's load in the billing cycle is less than ninety-seven percent, such average power factor to be computed (to the nearest hundredth of a percent) from the ratio of lagging kilovolt ampere-hours to kilowatt-hours consumed in the billing cycle. 
2.  Customers with service entrance equipment unable to accommodate the city's reactive metering equipment shall have their billing power factor determined by testing performed by the city. 
G.  Definition of Time Periods. Times of the year and times of the day are defined as follows: 
1.  Summer: (May 1 through October 31) 
Peak: 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
2.  Winter: (November 1 through April 30) 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
3.  Holidays: 
"Holidays," for the purpose of this rate schedule, are New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. The dates will be based on those days on which the holidays are legally observed. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 3-21-2018)  
13.20.290 - Schedule EP—Energy purchase. 
APPLICABILITY: 
This schedule is applicable to qualifying customer-owned and operated generating alternating current (AC) facilities operating in parallel with the City's electric distribution system. The customer-generator must currently be, or will be, served by the city of Lodi Electric Utility (LEU). 
Generating facilities must be rated 1 MW CEC-AC or less, located on the customer-generator's premises, and intended for the purpose of offsetting a part or all of the customer-generator's own electrical requirements. In no case shall the energy, capacity, and/or other attributes be available for resale by the customer. 
This schedule is available only to customers who do not otherwise qualify for compensation for customer-owned generation under another LEU rate schedule or contract. 
RATES: 
Energy Charges: Customer will be billed for all usage at the applicable service rate in effect when the electric service was rendered in accordance with the eligible customer-generator's otherwise applicable rate schedule based on metered usage for energy delivered and received after the customer-generator serves its own instantaneous load. 
Energy Purchase Credit: Credit will be provided to the customer for all metered customer-generated energy that exceeds the energy consumed, and is therefore exported to LEU's distribution system, at a rate equal to the avoided cost to LEU; the specific value of which will be determined and updated annually by LEU based on the following components: avoided energy and transmission costs, environmental attribute value (if applicable, based on generation type), avoided system loss, and avoided capacity value. 
Energy purchase credit values will be published each year by June 1 on LEU's website and provided to customers receiving service under this schedule. 
The above charges and credits will be determined in accordance with LEU's metering specifications. LEU reserves the right to install additional metering equipment for statistical and/or billing purposes. 
BILLING: 
For each billing month, the customer shall receive a bill including all applicable energy charges, including, but not limited to, customer charges, energy charges, demand charges, and any surcharges, taxes, and/or discounts in accordance with their otherwise applicable rate schedule. The bill will also include all applicable energy purchase credits which shall be used to offset the energy charges in a given billing month. Any credit(s) remaining at the end of each billing month shall carry forward and be applied to the customer's next monthly electric bill. Any outstanding charges will be due and payable at the end of each billing month. Monthly customer charges, public benefit charges, and all other surcharges shall be non-bypassable. 
SPECIAL CONDITIONS: 
Other conditions shall apply to this schedule as specified in the city of Lodi Electric Utility Department's Rules and Regulations, as updated from time to time, and engineering standards and specifications (including metering requirements) which are available for review on LEU's website. 
Customers will be responsible for any and all metering and interconnection charges as required to provide service under this schedule. Said charges will be determined and updated annually by LEU and be based on the cost(s) associated with providing service under this schedule. A schedule of charges will be available on LEU's website. 
Any capacity or environmental attributes associated, now or in the future, with the credited excess energy produced by the customer-generator at sites subject to this schedule shall belong to the city. Capacity attributes include, but are not limited to, system, local, and/or flexible resource adequacy capacity, if any. Environmental attributes include, but are not limited to, renewables portfolio standard eligible resources, renewable energy credits, greenhouse gas credits, and/or emission reduction credits, if any. 
LEU reserves the right to require a contract should it determine the customer-owned generator does not otherwise meet the specified applicability requirements to qualify under this schedule or another LEU rate schedule. 
Customers currently taking service under schedule NEM shall continue to be billed in accordance with schedule NEM for twenty years from the date of interconnection of their existing customer-owned generation facility, after which time they will be given the option to take service under this schedule EP in order to continue to receive credit for their customer-owned generation. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1944, § 1, 8-2-2017)  
13.20.300 - Schedule SS—Standby service. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to commercial/industrial customers who would otherwise qualify for Schedule G2, G3, G4, G5, or I1 and who have privately-owned generating facilities with a combined nameplate rating greater than one megawatt on their premises and where the city must stand ready to supply electric service to replace such a facility. This schedule will apply in addition to any other schedule applicable to the customer of record; any multiple generation facilities for one customer of record will be under one contract. 
B.  Service by Contract. Service under this schedule shall be provided on a contract basis to commercial/industrial customers who have privately- owned generating facilities on their premises. Contracts shall be subject to terms approved by the city council and shall obligate the customer to pay the city for its costs associated with providing standby service for the actual life of the privately-owned generating facilities and for three months following written notice to the City of Lodi Electric Utility of the removal of the privately-owned generating facilities from operation. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.310 - Schedule I1—General service—Group 5 commercial/industrial-optional. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is an optional rate for accounts who would otherwise qualify for primary service under the G5 rate schedule with billing period demands of one thousand kilowatts (kW) or more for three consecutive months. 
Demand: The billing period and peak period demands will be the maximum average power taken during any fifteen-minute period interval in the billing period and peak period, respectively, but not less than the diversified resistance welder load. In cases where the use of energy is intermittent or subject to violent fluctuations, a five-minute interval may be used. 
Assignment to Schedule: Assignment to this schedule is at the option of the customer and does not supersede any standby service contracts. 
This rate schedule is prospective and not subject to rebate or retroactivity. 
When a customer chooses to be assigned to this schedule, the customer elects the city of Lodi (city) to be the sole electric power requirements provider of choice. The customer must give the city three-year written notice before the customer can elect to use another electric power requirements provider. 
When a customer has a measurable incremental permanent load increase of two hundred kW or greater, over the highest billing period demand in the previous twelve months the customer will be eligible for a ten percent discount on the incremental demand and energy charges. Such billing change will be made as soon as practicable after verification of said changes and is not subject to rebate or retroactivity. It shall be the responsibility of the customer to notify the city of any such change. 
When an account billed on this schedule qualifies for another city bundled rate schedule, the customer may elect to be billed on that other rate schedule. When a customer chooses to be assigned to another bundled rate a three-year written notice is still required before the customer can elect to use another electric power requirements provider. 
If the billing period demand drops below one thousand kW and remains there for twelve consecutive billing cycles, the city will transfer the account to the appropriate rate schedule and the customer will be subject to the requirements of the appropriate schedule, rather than Schedule I1. 
_____
B.  Rates. 
Customer Charge (per meter per billing cycle) 	$137.23 
Service Voltage: 	Primary (I1-P) 
Season: 	Summer 	Winter 

Demand Charges: 
Per kW of peak period demand 	$10.98 	— 
Per kW of billing period demand 	$ 3.23 	$ 3.23 
Energy Charges: 
< 4,000 kW 	Summer 	Winter 
Peak period (per kWh) 	$0.14310 	— 
Partial peak period (per kWh) 	$0.11023 	$0.10171 
Off peak period (per kWh) 	$0.09430 	$0.09361 
= 4,000 kW 	Summer 	Winter 
Peak period (per kWh) 	$0.13646 	— 
Partial peak period (per kWh) 	$0.10359 	$0.09507 
Off peak period (per kWh) 	$0.08766 	$0.08697 

Economic Stimulus Rate Credit: (per kWh) 	$0.01386 	$0.01386 
 
_____
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA - Energy Cost Adjustment. 
D.  Types of Charges. The billing cycle charge for service is the sum of the customer charge, the demand charges, the energy charges, the ECA and the power factor adjustment: 
1.  Customer Charge: The customer charge is a flat monthly fee. 
2.  Demand Charges: This schedule has two demand charges: A peak period demand charge and a billing period demand charge. The peak period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval during the billing cycle's peak hours. The billing period demand charge per kW applies to the maximum average power taken during any metering interval at any time during the billing cycle. The bill will include both of these demand charges. Time periods are defined below. 
3.  Energy Charges: This schedule has three energy charges: A peak period energy charge, a partial peak period energy charge, and an off peak period energy charge. The peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's peak hours. Partial peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycle's partial peak hours. Off peak period energy charge per kWh applies to the total kWh used during the billing cycles off peak hours. The bill will include all of these energy charges. Time periods are defined below. 
4.  ECA: The ECA is a per kWh charge applied to the total kWh used during the billing cycle. 
Monthly charges may be decreased or increased based upon power factor as defined below. 
As shown on the rates above, demand and energy charges are based on the voltage at which service is taken. Service voltage is defined below. 
E.  Definition of Service Voltage. The service voltage class: 
a.  Primary: Service voltage class for service at twelve thousand volts (nominal). 
F.  Power Factor Adjustments. Bills will be adjusted for billing cycle average power factor as follows: 
1.  The total charge (except taxes and customer charge) for any billing cycle as computed on the above rates shall be increased by 0.0006% for each 0.01 percentage point that the average power factor of the customer's load in the billing cycle is less than ninety-seven percent, such average power factor to be computed (to the nearest hundredth of a percent) from the ratio of lagging kilovolt ampere-hours to kilowatt-hours consumed in the billing cycle. 
2.  Customers with service entrance equipment unable to accommodate the city's reactive metering equipment shall have their billing power factor determined by testing performed by the city. 
G.  Definition of Time Periods. Times of the year and times of the day are defined as follows: 
1.  Summer: (May 1 through October 31) 
Peak: 3:00 p.m. to 7:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 3:00 p.m. and 7:00 p.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
2.  Winter: (November 1 through April 30) 
Partial Peak: 8:30 a.m. to 9:30 p.m. Monday through Friday (except holidays). 
Off Peak: 9:30 p.m. to 8:30 a.m. Monday through Friday and all day Saturday, Sunday and holidays. 
3.  Holidays: 
"Holidays," for the purpose of this rate schedule, are New Year's Day, Presidents' Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans' Day, Thanksgiving Day, the day after Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day. The dates will be based on those days on which the holidays are legally observed. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1950, § 1, 3-21-2018)  
13.20.315 - Schedule EDR—Economic development rates. 
Applicability: 
A.  New Business Rate (NBR) Discount. NBR discount, applicable to any new commercial or industrial customer that locates their operations/business in the City of Lodi and receives electric utility service from the City of Lodi, with the following stipulations: a customer assigned to the G1 electric utility rate shall receive a discount for twelve consecutive months of twenty-five dollars per month; and, customers assigned to the G2, G3, G4, G5, or I1 electric utility rate shall receive a discount for twelve consecutive months of five percent; and this rate discount may not be combined with any other electric discount or rate, including but not limited to the NJR discount, and shall only apply to the base rate. Surcharges including, but not limited to, the California Energy Commission fee, public benefits charge, state energy tax, and other assessments or charges after the date of this rate schedule shall not be subject to this discount. 
B.  New Jobs Rate (NJR) Discount. NJR discount, applicable to any commercial or industrial customer that adds a minimum of one full-time position, and retains that position for at least twelve consecutive months, with the following stipulation: a two percent discount for one to three new positions; four percent discount for four to six new positions; six percent discount for seven to nine positions; and eight percent discount for ten or more new positions. The maximum discount available is eight percent; all discounts are available for twelve consecutive months; and this rate discount may not be combined with any other electric discount or rate, including but not limited to the NBR discount, and shall only apply to the base rate. Surcharges including, but not limited to, the California Energy Commission fee, public benefits charge, state energy tax, and other assessments or charges after the date of this rate schedule shall not be subject to this discount. Proof of full-time position count must be sent to the City of Lodi for validation six months and twelve months after the customer's effective date of the NJR Discount. 
C.  The rate schedules referenced above shall be effective on applicable electric utility billings prepared by the City of Lodi on or after December 1, 2018 and said utility rate discounts shall expire on December 31, 2023. 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017; Ord. No. 1958, § 1, 10-3-2018)  
13.20.320 - Reserved.  
13.20.325 - Schedule EV—Electric vehicle charging service. 
A.  Applicability. This schedule is applicable to single-phase electric vehicle charging service in single-family and multi-family dwellings separately metered by the city. 
B.  Rates: 
Customer Charge ..... $3.00 
Energy Charge: 
EV Charging period (per kWh) 	Schedule EA 

Tier 1 Energy Charge 
Non-EV Charging period (per kWh) 	Schedule EA 
Tier 3 Energy Charge 
 
C.  Energy Cost Adjustment (ECA). An energy cost adjustment shall be included in each bill for service as provided in Section 13.20.180 Schedule ECA—Energy cost adjustment. 
D.  Billing Cycle Charge (Monthly Bill). The billing cycle charge is the sum of the customer charge, the energy charge and the ECA. 
E.  Definition of Time Periods: 
Times of the day are defined as follows: 
EV Charging period: 8:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m. Monday through Friday (and all day weekends and holidays). 
Non-EV Charging period: 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Monday through Friday (excluding weekends and holidays). 
(Ord. No. 1941, § 1, 5-3-2017)  
13.20.330 - Reserved.  
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapters:  
Chapter 15.04 - BUILDING CODE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1932, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.04, §§ 15.04.010—15.04.060, and enacted a new Ch. 15.04 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.04 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1886, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.04.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the 2016 California Building Code, Volumes 1 and 2, including Chapter 1, Division II, Appendix I and J, California Existing Building Code including Chapter 1, Division II, thereto, are hereby adopted as the Building Code of the City of Lodi and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Building Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to all matters pertaining to the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Lodi, California; the issuance of building permits and the collection of fees therefore; and the enforcement of the rules and regulations as set forth in said "2016 California Building Code," Volumes 1 and 2, California Existing Building Code and the above designated appendixes thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.020 - CBC Chapter 1, Division II (Board of Appeals). 
Sec.113.1. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the Board shall be valid unless a majority of the full board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Building Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.030 - CBC Chapter 1, Division II (Building Permit Fees and Valuation). 
Sec. 109.1. Building Permit Fees. A fee for each building permit required by this Chapter shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
Sec. 109.3. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by the Building Official and shall be based on the latest building valuation data as printed in the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan check fees shall be the total value of all construction work, including materials and labor for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. 
EXCEPTION: The Building Official shall determine the valuation when no applicable data is available in Building Safety Journal. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.032 - CEBC Code Chapter 1, Division II (Board of Appeals). 
Sec. 112.1. In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the Board shall be valid unless a majority of the full board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Building Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.034 - CEBA Chapter 1, Division II (Building Permit Fees and Valuation). 
Sec. 108.1 Building Permit Fees. A fee for each building permit required by this Chapter shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
Section 108.3. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by the Building Official and shall be based on the latest building valuation data as printed in the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan check fees shall be the total value of all construction work, including materials and labor for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. 
EXCEPTION: The Building Official shall determine the valuation when no applicable data is available in Building Safety Journal. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.040 - Fee Schedule. 
The schedule of building permit fees required by this Chapter will be those established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.050 - Special Inspections—Downtown Business District. 
A.  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Chapter, special inspection fees required to determine compliance with this Chapter for all buildings and structures located within the area designated by Lodi Municipal Code Section 13.12.195(B) as the "downtown business district" are waived. 
B.  The City Council finds and declares that the waiver of special inspection fees is taken to protect and preserve a crucial part of City's economy and to preserve a portion of the City's heritage by offering incentives for businesses to locate, relocate, or expand existing commercial uses within the "downtown business district." 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.04.060 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure located within the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion of thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.04.060(B) above, City may at its sole discretion, seek to enforce this Chapter under Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1932, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.06 - RESIDENTIAL CODE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1936, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.06, §§ 15.06.010—15.06.060, and enacted a new Ch. 15.06 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.06 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1890, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.06.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the 2016 California Residential Code, including Chapter 1, Division II, Appendix H and J, Sections AJ102, AJ104.1, AJ105, AJ501.7, AJ501.8, AJ601.1 only, Appendix V thereto, are hereby adopted as the Residential Building Code of the City of Lodi and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Residential Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to all matters pertaining to the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area, and maintenance of buildings or structures in the City of Lodi, California; the issuance of building permits and the collection of fees therefore; and the enforcement of the rules and regulations as set forth in said "2016 California Residential Code" and the above-designated appendixes thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.06.020 - CBC Chapter 1 Division II (Board of Appeals). 
Sec.112.1 - In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the Board shall be valid unless a majority of the full Board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Building Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.06.030 - CBC Chapter 1, Division II (Building Permit Fees and Valuation). 
Section 108.1. Building Permit Fees. A fee for each building permit required by this Chapter shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
Section 108.3. The determination of value or valuation under any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be made by the Building Official and shall be based of the latest building valuation data as printed in the Building Safety Journal, published by the International Code Council, 5360 South Workman Mill Road, Whittier, CA 90601. The valuation to be used in computing the permit and plan check fees shall be the total value of all construction work, including materials and labor for which the permit is issued, as well as all finish work, painting, roofing, electrical, plumbing, heating, air conditioning, elevators, fire extinguishing systems, and any other permanent work or permanent equipment. 
EXCEPTION: The Building Official shall determine the valuation when no applicable data is available in Building Safety Journal. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.06.040 - Fee Schedule. 
The schedule of building permit fees required by this Chapter will be those established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.06.050 - Repetitive submittals (Master Plans). 
A.  Fees for the repetitive submittals of Master Plans shall be as follows: 
1.  Original plan: 100% of building permit fee, plus 10%. 
2.  Subsequent plans: 25% of building permit fee. 
3.  City's Residential Code (Chapter 15.06) is subject to review and adoption every three years; as such, Master Plans expire upon the effective date of City's most recent Residential Code. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.06.060 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or structure located within the City, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion of thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.06.060(B) above, City may at its sole discretion, seek to enforce this Chapter under Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1936, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.08 - MECHANICAL CODE[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1933, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.08, §§ 15.08.010—15.08.070, and enacted a new Ch. 15.08 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.08 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1887, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.08.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the "2016 California Mechanical Code," together with Chapter 1, Administration Division II, are hereby adopted as the Mechanical Code of the City of Lodi, and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Mechanical Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to all matters pertaining to erection, installation, alteration, repair, relocation, replacement, addition to, use, or maintenance of any heating, ventilation, comfort cooling, refrigeration systems, incinerators or other miscellaneous heat-producing appliances; to the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefore; and the enforcement of the rules and regulations as set forth in said "2016 California Mechanical Code" within the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.020 - Mechanical Permit Fees. 
A fee for each mechanical permit required by this Chapter shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.030 - Fee Schedule. 
Section 104.5 is amended to read as follows: The schedule of Mechanical Permit fees required by this Chapter will be those established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.040 - Investigation Fee—Work Without a Permit. 
Sections 104.5.1 and 104.5.2 are amended to read as follows: Work Commenced before permit is issued. Any person who commences work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.050 - Installation. 
Section 303.1 Installation. The California Mechanical Code adopted in Section 15.08.010, is amended to read as follows: 
Section 303.1.2 Location of heating and cooling equipment. Heating, cooling, and swimming pool equipment shall not be located within the required five-foot side yard setback as defined by the City of Lodi Zoning Ordinance for residential zonings. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.060 - CMC Chapter 1, Division II (Board of Appeals). 
Section 107.0 and 107.1 In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the board shall be valid unless a majority of the full board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Building Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.08.070 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, to erect, install, alter, repair, relocate, add to, replace, use, or maintain heating, ventilating, comfort cooling, or refrigeration equipment in the jurisdiction, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provision of this Chapter. Maintenance of equipment, which was unlawful at the time it was installed and which would be unlawful under this Code if installed after effective date of this Chapter, shall constitute a continuing violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion of thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.08.070(B) above, City may at its sole discretion, seek to enforce this Chapter under Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1933, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.12 - PLUMBING CODE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1935, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.12, §§ 15.12.010—15.12.060, and enacted a new Ch. 15.12 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.12 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1889, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.12.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the "2016 California Plumbing Code" together with Chapter 1 Administration Division II are hereby adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City of Lodi and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Plumbing Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to all matters pertaining to plumbing, drainage systems, and gas fittings in the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.12.020 - Department Having Jurisdiction. 
The Building Division of the Community Development Department and the Building Official or his/her authorized representative shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter and shall have all of the duties and rights of the Administrative Authority as provided in the 2016 California Plumbing Code. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.12.030 - Plumbing Permit Fees. 
A fee for each plumbing permit required by this Chapter shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.12.040 - Fee Schedule. 
Section 104.5 The schedule of plumbing permit fees required by this Chapter will be those established and adopted by City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.12.050 - Investigation Fee—Work Without a Permit. 
Sections 104.5.1 and 104.5.2 Work Commenced before permit is issued. Any person who commences work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.12.060 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use or maintain any plumbing or permit the same to be done in violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion of thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.12.060(B) above, City may at its sole discretion, seek to enforce this Chapter under Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1935, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.15 - ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATION STREAMLINED PERMITTING PROCESS 
 
15.15.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this ordinance is to create an expedited, streamlined electric vehicle charging station permitting process that complies with Government Code Section 65850.7 to achieve timely and cost-effective installation of electric vehicle charging stations within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.020 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all electric vehicle charging stations in the city. 
B.  Electric vehicle charging stations legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this ordinance are not subject to the requirements of this ordinance unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of an electric vehicle charging station in such a way as to require a new permit. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.030 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of this chapter, words and terms shall be defined as set forth in this section. Where words and terms are not defined in this section, they shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter the most reasonable application. 
B.  An "electric vehicle charging station" means the following: 
1.  Any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of this section, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of the following: 
1.  Any computer-based electronic plan review software maintained, operated, and utilized by the city while receiving applications through the internet. 
D.  "Specific adverse impact" means the following: 
1.  A significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.040 - Requirements. 
A.  All electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable health and safety standards and the requirements imposed by the state and the city, local fire department, and electric utility department. 
B.  Electric vehicle charging stations shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
C.  Electric vehicle charging stations must demonstrate compliance with the city's electric utility interconnection policies prior to approval of an application by the building and safety division of the community development department. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.050 - Application and documents. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited electric vehicle charging station application shall be made available on the publicly-accessible city website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents through city-utilized computer-based software shall be made available to all electric vehicle charging station permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and their documents in lieu of a wet signature. 
D.  The building and safety division shall adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The building and safety division may refer to the recommendation contained in the most current version of the Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist and the Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook published by the governor's office of planning and research, when adopting the electric vehicle charging permit process and checklist. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.060 - Permit review requirements. 
A.  The building official shall implement an administrative review process to expedite approval of electric vehicle charging stations. Where the application meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standards and there are no specific adverse impacts upon public health or safety, the building and safety division shall complete the building permit approval process, which is nondiscretionary. Review of the application for electric vehicle charging stations shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
B.  If a permit application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the permit application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
C.  The building official may require an applicant to apply for a special use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. 
D.  If a use permit is required, the city may only deny such application if it makes written findings based upon substantial evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. 
E.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
F.  A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly-situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.070 - Fees. 
The city council may establish by resolution fees that shall be charged for permits issued under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
15.15.080 - Appeals—Decisions of the building official. 
Pursuant to subdivisions (b) and (c) of Government Code Section 65850.7, decisions of the building official may be appealed to the planning commission. A written appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten business days of the issuance of the decision of the building official accompanied by a filing fee in an amount that may set by city council resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1945, § 1, 8-16-2017)  
Chapter 15.16 - ELECTRICAL CODE[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1934, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.16, §§ 15.16.010—15.16.070, and enacted a new Ch. 15.16 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.16 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1888, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.16.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the "2016 California Electrical Code" together with Annex C, Annex H, and Administration and Enforcement thereto, are hereby adopted as the Electrical Code of the City of Lodi, and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Electrical Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to all matters pertaining to the installation, alteration, or addition of electrical wiring, devices, appliances, or equipment in the City of Lodi; and the enforcement of the rules and regulations as set forth in the 2016 California Electrical Code together with Annex C, Annex H and Administration and Enforcement thereto. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.020 - Fees. 
A fee for each electrical permit required by this Code shall be paid to the City of Lodi. Fees shall be paid prior to permit issuance. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.030 - Fee Schedule. 
The Schedule of Electrical Permit Fees required by this Chapter will be those established and adopted by the City Council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.040 - Investigation Fee—Work Without a Permit. 
Work commenced before permit is issued. Any person who commences work requiring a permit before obtaining the necessary permits shall be subject to a fee established by the applicable governing authority that shall be in addition to the required permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.050 - Appeals Board (CEC Annex H). 
Annex H 80.15 - is amended to read: In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Building Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the Board shall be valid unless a majority of the full board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Building Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.060 - Qualifications of Inspectors. 
Annex H 80.27- is amended to read: All electrical inspectors shall meet the minimum certification and experience as required by the City of Lodi's job description. (Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.16.070 - Violation—Misdemeanor. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, or maintain any electrical wiring, devices, appliances or equipment or permit the same to be done in violation of this Chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this Chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor punishable on conviction as set forth in Chapter 1.08 of this Code. Each separate day or any portion of thereof, during which any violation of this Chapter occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense and punished accordingly. 
C.  In addition to the penalties set forth in Section 15.16.070(B) above, City may at its sole discretion, seek to enforce its Building Code under Chapter 1.10 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1934, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.18 - GREEN BUILDING CODE[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1937, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.18, § 15.18.010, and enacted a new Ch. 15.18 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1891, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.18.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the 2016 California Green Building Standard Code is hereby adopted as the Green Building Code of the City of Lodi, and a copy of the same is maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department. The Green Building Code of the City of Lodi shall apply to the planning, design, operations, construction, use, and occupancy of every newly constructed building or structure requiring a Building Permit in the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1937, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.19 - EXPEDITED PERMIT PROCESS FOR SMALL RESIDENTIAL ROOFTOP SOLAR SYSTEMS 
 
15.19.010 - Definitions. 
A.  A "Solar energy system" means either of the following: 
1.  Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating. 
2.  Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating or cooling, or for water heating. 
B.  A "small residential rooftop solar energy system" means all of the following: 
1.  A solar energy system that is no larger than ten kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty kilowatts thermal. 
2.  A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the City of Lodi and all state and city health and safety standards. 
3.  A solar energy system that is installed on a single or duplex family dwelling. 
4.  A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height as defined by the city. 
C.  "Electronic submittal" means the utilization of one or more of the following: 
1.  Email; or 
2.  Facsimile 
D.  An "association" means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development. 
E.  A "common interest development" means any of the following: 
1.  A community apartment project. 
2.  A condominium project. 
3.  A planned development. 
4.  A stock cooperative. 
F.  "Specific, adverse impact" means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. 
G.  "Reasonable restrictions" on a solar energy system are those restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or significantly decrease its efficiency or specified performance, or that allow for an alternative system of comparable cost, efficiency, and energy conservation benefits. 
H.  "Restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance" means: 
1.  For water heater systems or solar swimming pool heating systems: An amount exceeding ten percent of the cost of the system, but in no case more than one thousand dollars, or decreasing the efficiency of the solar energy system by an amount exceeding ten percent, as originally specified and proposed. 
2.  For photovoltaic systems: An amount not to exceed one thousand dollars over the system cost as originally specified and proposed, or a decrease in system efficiency of an amount exceeding ten percent as originally specified and proposed. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.020 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to adopt an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process that complies with the Solar Rights Act and AB 2188 (Chapter 521, Statutes 2014) to achieve timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter encourages the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the City of Lodi, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems. This chapter allows the City of Lodi to achieve these goals while protecting the public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.030 - Applicability. 
A.  This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the City of Lodi. 
B.  Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of a small residential rooftop solar energy system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.040 - Solar energy system requirements. 
A.  All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the state, the City of Lodi, its fire department and electric utility. 
B.  Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code. 
C.  Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the public utilities commission regarding safety and reliability. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.050 - Duties of building official and electric utility director. 
A.  All documents required for the submission of an expedited solar energy system application shall be made available to the public on the city's website. 
B.  Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents by email, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants. 
C.  An applicant's electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature. For purposes of this chapter, the city will accept as an electronic signature an electronic copy, such as a facsimile image or an electronic image, of an applicant's written signature. 
D.  The city's building and safety inspection division in coordination with city's electric utility and fire department is authorized and directed to develop and adopt a standard plan and checklist, of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply to be eligible for expedited review. 
E.  The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plan(s), and checklist(s) shall from time to time be revised to substantially conform to recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard plans contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor's Office of Planning and Research. 
F.  All fees prescribed for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy system shall comply with Government Code Section 65850.55, Government Code Section 66015, Government Code Section 66016, and State Health and Safety Code Section 17951. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.060 - Pre-application verification by applicant. 
A.  Prior to submitting an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system, an applicant shall: 
1.  Verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction through the use of standard engineering evaluation techniques that the support structure for the small residential solar energy system is stable and adequate to transfer all wind, seismic, and dead and live loads associated with the system to the building foundation; and 
2.  At the applicant's cost, verify to the applicant's reasonable satisfaction using standard electrical inspection techniques that the existing electrical system, including existing line, load, ground, and bonding wiring, as well as main panel and subpanel sizes are adequately sized, based on the existing electrical system's current use, to carry all new photovoltaic electrical loads. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.070 - Authorization by Lodi Electric Utility. 
Applicant shall obtain authorization from city's electric utility to connect the proposed small residential rooftop solar energy system to the Lodi Electric Utility electricity grid prior to submittal to city's building and safety division. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
15.19.080 - Permit review and inspection requirements. 
A.  The city's building and safety division is authorized and directed to implement an administrative, nondiscretionary review process, to expedite approval of small residential rooftop solar energy systems within thirty days of the adoption on this chapter. The building and safety division shall issue a building permit or other nondiscretionary permit within one to three business days of receipt of a complete application that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan. The city's building official may require an applicant to apply for a use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety or on the city's electric distribution system. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. 
B.  Review of the application shall be limited to the building official's review of whether the application meets local, state, and federal health and safety requirements. 
C.  If a use permit is required, a building official may deny an application for the use permit if the official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence in the record that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid, as defined, the adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of the potential feasible alternative for preventing the adverse impact. Such decisions may be appealed to the city planning commission. 
D.  Any condition imposed on an application shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost. 
E.  "A feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact" includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition, or mitigation imposed by the city, on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a permit. The city, shall use its best efforts to ensure that the selected method, condition, or mitigation meets the conditions of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) of subdivision (d) of Section 714 of the Civil Code defining restrictions that do not significantly increase the cost of the system or decrease its efficiency or specified performance. 
F.  City shall not condition approval of an application on the approval of an association, as defined in Section 4080 of the Civil Code. 
G.  If an application is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission. 
H.  Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the city's building and safety division and its fire department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. 
I.  The inspection shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections. An inspection will be scheduled within two business days of a request. 
J.  If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1913, § 1, 8-19-2015)  
Chapter 15.20 - FIRE CODE[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1938, § 1, adopted Dec. 7, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 15.20, §§ 15.20.010—15.20.380, and enacted a new Ch. 15.20 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.20 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1892, § 1, adopted Nov. 20, 2013. 
 
15.20.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the California Fire Code (2016 Edition), including Chapters 1, Division II, Chapter 11 in its entirety and Chapter 4. Appendix , A, B, BB, C, CC, D, E, F, G, H, I, , K and N with the exception of Section 103.2 (published by the International Code Council), are hereby adopted as the Fire Code of the City of Lodi, and copies of the same are maintained by the City Building Official and available for review in the Community Development Department, regulating and governing the safeguarding of life and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage, handling, and use of hazardous substances, materials, and devices, and from conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings and premises as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees therefore; and the enforcement of the rules, regulations, penalties, conditions and terms of the Fire Code of the City of Lodi, are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this ordinance, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes as prescribed in this ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.020 - Enforcement. 
Peace officers and persons employed in positions authorized to exercise the authority provided in California Penal Code Section 836.5 are authorized to issue citations for violation of this Chapter. The following designated employee positions may enforce the provisions of this Chapter by issuance of citations: the City Manager or his/her duly authorized representative, the Fire Chief, the Fire Marshal, Fire Inspectors, and all sworn members of the City's fire department. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.030 - Definitions. 
A.  Whenever the words "International Fire Code" are used in this Chapter, it shall mean the California Fire Code (2016 Edition), Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 9. 
B.  Whenever the words "California Fire Code" are used in this Chapter, it shall mean the California Fire Code (2016 Edition), Title 24, California Code of Regulations, Part 9, as adopted. 
C.  Whenever the word "municipality" is used in the California Fire Code (2016 Edition), it shall mean the City of Lodi. 
D.  Whenever the words "Chief" or "Fire Code Official" is used in the California Fire Code (2016 Edition), they shall mean the Fire Chief for the City of Lodi or his/her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.040 - Findings and filings. 
The findings of fact required in accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5 are set forth in Section 15.20.380 of this Chapter and are filed separately with the California Building Standards Commission and Lodi City Clerk's Office. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.050 - Open burning, Recreational Fires and Portable Outdoor Fireplaces. 
Section 307.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
A person shall not kindle or authorize to be kindled or maintain any outdoor burning within the limits of the City of Lodi, except that this section shall not prohibit those fires that are approved by the Fire Code Official for the following purposes: 
a.  The prevention of a fire hazard that cannot be evaded by any other means. 
b.  The instruction of public employees in the methods of fighting fire. 
c.  The instruction of employees in the methods of fighting fire, when such fire is set, pursuant to permit, on property used for industrial purposes. 
d.  The setting of backfires necessary to save life or valuable property pursuant to Section 4462 of the Public Resource Code. 
e.  The abatement of fire hazards pursuant to Section 13055 of the Health and Safety Code. 
f.  Disease or pest prevention, where there is an immediate need for and no reasonable alternative to burning. 
Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting open outdoor fires used only for cooking food for human consumption where such use is accomplished in an approved fireplace or barbecue pit, or for recreational purposes in areas approved by the Fire Code Official, provided that the combustible is clear dry wood or charcoal and it is a permissive burn day. Approval shall be in accordance with Sections 307.1.1 - 307.5 of the California Fire Code. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.65 - Sky Lanterns. 
Section 308 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
No person shall release or cause to be released an untethered sky lantern. 
Sky Lantern. An unmanned device with a fuel source that incorporates an open flame in order to make the device airborne. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.070 - Miscellaneous Combustible Materials Storage—Pallets, Palletized Packing Boxes and Bin Boxes. 
Section 315 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
A permit shall be required to store pallets, palletized packing boxes, or bin boxes in excess of 30,000 board feet, in accordance with the following restrictions. 
Pallets, palletized packing boxes, and bin boxes shall be piled with due regard to stability of piles and in no case higher than 12 feet. Where pallets are piled next to a property line, the distance from the property line shall not be less than one half the pile height and in no case less than 5 feet from the property line. 
Exception: Bin boxes may be stacked to a maximum height of 20 feet. 
Driveways between and around pallets, bin boxes, and palletized packing boxes shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and maintained free from accumulations of rubbish, weeds, machinery or other articles that would block access or add to the fire hazard. Driveways shall be spaced so a maximum grid of storage is no more than 50 feet by 50 feet. 
Pallets, palletized packing boxes, and bin boxes, operating under a permit, shall be enclosed by a suitable fence of at least 6 feet in height, unless storage is in a building. 
An approved water supply and/or fire hydrants capable of supplying the required fire flow shall be provided to the premises within all portions of the storage areas in accordance with Section 507, California Fire Code and Lodi Municipal Code 15.20.370. 
For permitting purposes one pallet will be calculated as having 25 board feet and palletized packing boxes and bin boxes will be calculated based on average board feet per box. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.080 - Fire Apparatus Access Roads—Dimensions. 
Section 503.2.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Fire apparatus access roads shall have an unobstructed width of not less than 24 feet, exclusive of shoulders, except for approved security gates in accordance with Section 503.6 of the California Fire Code and an unobstructed vertical clearance of not less than 13 feet 6 inches. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.090 - Fire Apparatus Access Roads—Surfaces. 
Section 503.2.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Fire apparatus access roads shall be designed and maintained to support the imposed loads of fire apparatus and shall provide a permanent surface of asphalt or concrete installed the full width of all streets, cul-de-sacs, and fire lanes. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.100 - Premises Identification. 
Section 505.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
A.  Address Identification. 
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building numbers, or approved building identification placed in a position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be a minimum of 4 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. 
The approved minimum size dimensions of the numbers shall be as specified by Table 1. 
Where a building is set back from the street or road fronting the property and where addresses may not be clearly identifiable due to distance from the street or roadway, landscape and architectural appendages, or other obstructions, address posting shall be required both at the street driveway serving such building and on the building. 
Table 1 	
Distance to Building address 
measured from back of walk. 	Size 
Height 
25 Feet 	4 inches 
26—40 Feet 	6 inches 
41—55 Feet 	9 inches 
Over 55 Feet 	12 inches 
 
B.  Address Identification—Rear. 
Any business or apartment building which affords vehicular access to the rear through a driveway, alley way, or parking lot shall also display approved identification or address numbers on the rear of the building for such business or apartment building in a location approved by the Fire Code Official. 
C.  Address Identification—Multiple Dwelling Units. 
An approved diagram of the premises, which clearly indicates all individual addresses of each unit in the complex, shall be erected at the entrance driveways to every multiple dwelling complex having more than one building on the premises or when required by the Fire Code Official. 
In addition, the Fire Code Official may require that individual buildings on the premises be identified in an approved manner. 
D.  Address Identification—Multiple Buildings. 
An approved identification of multiple buildings within an industrial complex shall be required which clearly indicates each individual building in the complex. Identification shall be placed on each building in a size and location, when required by the Fire Code Official, and be visible for responding emergency personnel in an approved manner. 
E.  Address Identification—Illumination. 
Addressing shall be illuminated at night in all new buildings. Signs shall be internally or externally illuminated. When the luminance or the face of a sign is from an external source, it shall have an intensity of not less than 5.0 foot-candles. Internally illuminated signs shall provide equivalent luminance. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.110 - Key Boxes—Hazardous Materials Management Plan Box. 
Section 506 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
When a business which handles hazardous materials is required to complete a Hazardous Materials Management Plan (HMMP), the Fire Code Official may require the installation of a secured box at the primary facility entrance or the fire control room, which contains a copy of the Hazardous Materials Management Plan. This box shall be waterproof and capable of holding the document in a rolled condition without folding. Other characteristics of the box shall be approved by the Fire Code Official. 
Businesses which handle acutely hazardous material as defined in Section 25532 of the Health and Safety Code shall install a Hazardous Material Management Plan Box in accordance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.120 - Emergency Responder Radio Coverage—Public Safety Radio Building Amplification System. 
Section 510 (Emergency Responder Radio Coverage) of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
A.  Requirement for Approved Emergency Responder Radio Coverage in Buildings. 
All buildings shall have approved indoor radio coverage for emergency responders. Except as otherwise provided, no person shall erect, construct, change the use of or provide an addition of more than 20 percent to, any building or structure or any part thereof, or cause the same to be done which fails to support adequate radio coverage for the City of Lodi radio communications system. Determining the existence of approved radio coverage and the correction of any deficiencies shall be the responsibility of the building owner. Existing buildings, buildings of one or two single family dwellings, or those below minimum areas as determined by the fire code official may be exempted from this requirement by the Fire Code Official. 
B.  Approved Radio Coverage. 
Approved radio coverage shall conform to the current standards of the Lodi Fire Department. These standards shall define the acceptable indoor signal levels to provide 90% reliability of the Lodi Public Safety Radio System inside structures. The fire code official may determine exceptions and additions to these standards as required to protect the integrity of the public safety radio system and provide acceptable signal levels in structures critical to public health and safety. 
C.  Indoor Public Safety Radio Enhancement Systems. 
If required by this code, any indoor pubic safety radio enhancement system must comply with current standards set by the Lodi Fire Department, and the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission. Systems shall be inspected, maintained, and modified as necessary to provide approved emergency responder radio coverage. If changes in FCC regulations or modifications to the Lodi Public Safety Radio System require modifications to a public safety radio enhancement system, the building owner, at his/her own expense, shall make necessary changes to conform to the existing standard. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.130 - Fuel-Fired Appliances—Gas Meters, Gas Service Identification. 
Section 603.9 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
All buildings providing natural gas service through more than one (1) service meter or through multiple service connections shall have individual gas shutoffs identified in a manner approved by the Fire Chief indicating areas or units served. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.140 - Electrical Equipment, Wiring and Hazards—Electrical Disconnect. 
Section 605 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
All buildings constructed after July 1, 2005, shall have main electrical shut off accessible to the exterior of the structure. This may be accomplished by placing the shut off on the building exterior, an electrical room with a door leading directly to the exterior or a remote electrical (shunt) switch on the building exterior. Breakaway locks are allowable for security. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.150 - Fire Protection Systems—System Maintenance. 
Section 901.7 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
All individuals or companies installing, repairing, testing, servicing, or maintaining sprinkler systems, fire hydrant systems, standpipes, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishes, smoke and heat ventilators, smoke-removal systems, and other fire protection or extinguishing systems or appliances shall be a fire protection contractor or contractor licensed for said work by the State of California or have the appropriate license required by the California State Fire Marshal's Office or both. 
The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified immediately when a fire protection or detection system or portion thereof is found inoperable. 
The authority having jurisdiction shall be notified in writing within 72-hours by the person performing repairs, testing, or maintenance when a fire protection or detection system is not in compliance with applicable codes. 
When changes involve shutting off water for a considerable number of sprinklers for more than 4-hours, temporary water supply connections shall be made to sprinkler systems so that reasonable protection can be maintained. Protection shall be restored each night. The Fire Code Official may require a fire watch while any system is inoperative. 
When shorts, failures, or other interruptions of service occur within a building's fire alarm system that connects to an approved alarm service provider's Type A (listed) Central Station or is a local alarm only, the Fire Code Official may require the system to be disconnected or shunt out the private fire alarm system and/or circuit. When shorts, failures, or other interruption of service occur within a building's fire alarm system that connects to an approved alarm service provider's Type A (listed) Central Station, the Fire Code Official may require the system to be repaired and written notification to be provided to the Fire Code Official before he or she responds to alarms generated by the system. 
Where alarm system(s) are wholly or partially out of service for more than 8 hours, the alarm company having responsibility shall notify the fire dispatch center. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.160 - Automatic Sprinkler Systems. 
Section 903 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
In addition to the requirements specified in Section 903 of the California Fire Code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout and maintained in an operable condition regardless of the installation of area separation walls in the following buildings: 
(1)  Every building hereafter constructed in which the total floor area is 6,000 square feet or more. 
(2)  Every building hereafter constructed of three or more stories as defined in the California Building Code. 
(3)  Every building hereafter in which the square footage existing as of September 1, 1997, is increased by 50% or the total square footage of the building exceeds 6,000 square feet. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.170 - Sprinkler Coverage Identification. 
Section 903 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
When required by the Fire Code Official, approved signs shall identify the building(s) or portions of building(s) served by a fire department connection and/or riser. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.180 - Fire Control Room. 
Section 903 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
An approved fire control room shall be provided for all buildings protected by an automatic fire extinguishing system. Existing buildings installing automatic fire extinguishing system shall have a fire control room added unless approved by the Fire Code Official or his/her designee for good cause. Fire control room shall contain all system control valves, fire alarm control panels, and other fire equipment required by the Fire Code Official. Fire control rooms shall be located within the building at a location approved by the Fire Code Official and shall be provided with a means to access the room directly from the exterior. Durable signage shall be provided on the exterior side of the access door to identify the fire control room. 
EXCEPTION: Group R, Division 3 occupancies. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.190 - Fire Alarm and Detection Systems—Certification. 
Section 907.8.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The permittee shall provide a serially numbered certificate from an approved nationally recognized testing laboratory for all required fire alarm systems indicating that the system has been installed in accordance with the approved plans and specifications and meets National Fire Protection Association Standards. Certification shall be required for all new systems to be installed after July 1, 2003. All existing systems must obtain certification in a timely manner, as approved by the Fire Code Official. A copy of the certification shall be provided to the Fire Code Official at no cost. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.200 - Precautions Against Fire—Open Burning Construction Sites. 
Section 3404.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
No fire shall be permitted to burn on any construction site for any purpose. This section is not intended to prohibit the use of devices or tools producing a flame when used in an approved manner and necessary for the construction of the building. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.210 - Tire Rebuilding and Tire Storage—Indoor Tire Storage. 
Chapter 34 (Tire Rebuilding and Tire Storage) 3409.1 of the California Fire Code are hereby amended to add the following: 
Inside tire storage shall be in accordance with the following requirements. 
Tires stored on side walls shall not be higher than six feet. Tires stored in a lace pattern shall not be higher than 5 feet. A minimum of 3 feet of clearance from tire storage racks shall be maintained in all directions to roof structure, sprinkler deflectors, unit heaters, supply and return air duct registers, lighting fixtures, electrical outlets or any other producing device. On-tread storage piles, regardless of storage needs, shall not exceed 25 feet in the direction of the wheel holes. On-floor, on-tread storage shall not exceed 5 feet in height. The width of the main aisles between piles shall not be less than 8 feet. Any aisle other than the main aisles shall not be less than 4 feet in width. 
Definitions: 
On-side storage: Tires stored horizontally or flat. 
On-tread storage: Tires stored vertically or on their treads. 
Laced storage: Tires stored where the sides of the tires overlap, creating a woven or laced appearance. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.220 - Explosives and Fireworks—Seizure of Fireworks. 
Chapter 56 (Explosives and Fireworks) of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The Fire Code Official is authorized to seize, take, remove, or cause to be removed at the expense of the owner all stocks of fireworks offered or exposed for sale, stored, or held in violation of local, state, or federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.230 - Explosives and Fireworks—Limits Explosive and Blasting Agents. 
Chapter 56 (Explosives and Fireworks) of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The storage of explosives and blasting agents is prohibited within the City limits, except in areas zoned M-2 as such zone is defined in the zoning regulations of the City. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.240 - Explosives and Fireworks—Manufacturing of Fireworks. 
Chapter 56 (Explosives and Fireworks) of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The manufacture of fireworks within the limits of the City of Lodi is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.250 - Storage—Locations where aboveground tanks are prohibited—Class I & II Liquids. 
Section 5704.2.9.6.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Storage of Class I and Class II liquids in aboveground tanks outside of buildings is prohibited within the limits of the City of Lodi, except areas zoned IP, M-1, and M-2 as such zones are defined in the zoning regulations of the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.260 - General Authority—Contract Inspector. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 Section 104.7.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The Fire Code Official may require the owner or the person in possession or control of the building or premise to provide, without charge to the fire department, a special inspector ("Contract Inspector") when the department requires technical expertise for assistance to conduct the required inspections. 
The Contract Inspector shall be a qualified person who shall demonstrate his/her competence to the satisfaction of the Fire Code Official for inspection of a particular type of construction, operation, fire extinguishing, or detection system or process. 
Duties and responsibilities of the Contract Inspector shall include but not be limited to the following: 
1.  The Contract Inspector shall observe the work assigned for conformance with the approved design drawing and specifications. 
2.  The Contract Inspector shall furnish inspection reports to the Fire Code Official, Building Official, and other designated persons as required by the Fire Code Official. All discrepancies shall be brought to the immediate attention of the contractor for correction, then if uncorrected, to the proper design authority, Fire Code Official, and to the building official. 
3.  The Contract Inspector shall submit a final signed report stating whether the work requiring inspection was, to the best of his/her knowledge, in conformance with the approved plans and specifications and the applicable workmanship provision of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.270 - General Authority—Fire Investigators. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 104.10 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
All sworn members assigned to the Fire Prevention Bureau or Fire Investigation Unit are hereby assigned as Fire Investigators and as such shall enforce the provisions of the California Penal Code as it pertains to fire and arson investigations. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.280 - Permits—Required Fees. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 113.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The fee for each permit shall be as set forth from time to time by resolution of the Lodi City Council. The City may establish fees sufficient to recover its costs in administering this Code. No permit shall be issued until such fees have been paid, and administrative citations may be issued to persons violating this Code by the persons allowed to issue citations as stated in Lodi Municipal Code - Chapter 1.10 - Administrative Enforcement Provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.290 - Permits—Inspection Authorized. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 105.2.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Before a new operational permit is approved, the Fire Code Official is authorized to inspect the receptacles, vehicles, buildings, devices, premises, storage spaces, or areas to be used to determine compliance with this Code or any operational constraints required. In instances where laws or regulations are enforced by departments other than the fire department, joint approval shall be obtained from all departments concerned. 
No final inspection under this Code, as to all or any portion of the development, shall be deemed completed and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the requirements imposed by this Code have been completed and the final approval thereof by the Fire Department has been given as provided herein and all plan reviews and inspection fees paid. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.300 - Permits—Revocation. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 105.5 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The Fire Code Official further shall have the power to revoke, suspend, or deny the granting of any permit required pursuant to the provision of this Code for any of the following reasons: 
(a)  When deemed necessary for the protection of life, limb, or property; or 
(b)  For changing the occupancy, equipment, materials, processes, or other conditions in such a manner as to create a greater danger of fire or explosion or less protection than was present at the time of the issuance of such permits. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.310 - Permits—Required. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 105.6 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
Christmas Tree Lots. A permit issued by the Fire Code Official is required to operate a Christmas Tree Lot with or without flame proofing services. 
Haunted Houses. A permit issued by the Fire Code Official is required to operate a temporary or permanent haunted house. 
Special Events. A permit issued by the Fire Code Official is required to conduct a special event that is not otherwise listed in this Code and in the opinion of the Fire Code Official or his or her designee poses a fire or life safety concern to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.320 - Inspections—Administrative Costs. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 106.2 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
When a test or inspection is scheduled and the contractor fails to perform to the satisfaction of the authority having jurisdiction, the authority having jurisdiction may bill the contractor for actual time spent traveling to and from the test/inspection location and the time spent at the test/inspection site as well as administrative costs. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.325 - Board Of Appeals. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 108 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials and types of construction and to provide for reasonable interpretations of this Chapter, the City Council shall sit as a Board of Appeals. The Fire Code Official shall be an ex-officio member and shall act as secretary of the Board. Three members present shall constitute a quorum and no act of the Board shall be valid unless a majority of the full board shall concur therein. 
The Board of Appeals shall adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting a meeting and investigations and shall render a decision and findings in duplicate. A copy will go to the Fire Code Official with the other copy to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.330 - Violations—Administrative Enforcement Provisions. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 109.2 and 109.3 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Notices of violation, citation, or penalties shall comply with Lodi Municipal Code - Chapter 1.10 - Administrative Enforcement Provisions with the following terminology changes or deletions wherever stated in Chapter 1.10. 
(a)  Whenever the word "Community Improvement Officer" is used, it shall mean the Fire Code Official. 
(b)  Whenever the word "Department of Public Safety" is used, it shall mean the Lodi Fire Department. 
(c)  Whenever the word "Community Development Director" or "Director" is used, it shall mean the Fire Chief or his designee. 
(d)  Whenever the word "Uniform Codes" is used, it shall mean the California Fire Codes. 
(e)  Section 1.11.260E is not applicable to the provisions of this chapter, (Community Awareness and Responsibility Education Classes) as it pertains to residential dwellings. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.340 - Violations—Abatement of Hazard by Fire Code Official. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 109.3.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
If any person fails to comply with the orders of the Fire Code Official, or if the Fire Code Official is unable to locate the owner, operator, occupant, or other person responsible within a reasonable time, the Fire Code Official or his or her authorized representative may take such steps as are necessary to abate the hazard for the protection of the public health and safety. No event notice is necessary before abatement when the hazard is a clear and present danger to the public welfare. All costs related to such abatement shall become a lien or special assessment on the subject property. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.350 - Unsafe Buildings—Structural Fires. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 110.1.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to add the following: 
The Chief Officer at the scene shall attempt to notify all occupants or owners of structures, which have suffered damage by fire, that such structures or buildings must be inspected before any repairs thereof are made. A permit covering the structural, electrical, and plumbing repairs shall be obtained from the City of Lodi Community Development Department. The Chief Officer shall report all such structural fires to the Chief Building Official or his/her designee within twenty-four hours after the occurrence of such fire. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.360 - Stop Work Order—Failure to Comply. 
Chapter 1, Division II, Part 2 - Section 111.4 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not less than that stated in Lodi Municipal Code - Chapter 1.10 - Administrative Enforcement Provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.370 - Fire Hydrants Locations and Distribution - Distribution of Fire Hydrants. 
Appendix C - Section C105.1 of the California Fire Code is hereby amended to read as follows: 
Private fire hydrants and public off site fire hydrants shall be spaced with the maximum distances as specified by Table 2. 
Table 2 
Zoning Type 	Maximum 
Spacing 
Commercial, high density, 
Industrial or high-value 	  
300 feet 
Low Density Residential 	500 feet 
Residential Reverse Frontage 	1000 feet 
 
Hydrants shall be required on both sides of the street whenever one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  Streets have median center dividers that make access to hydrants difficult, cause time delays, or create undue hazard or both. 
2.  On major arterials when there is more than four lanes of traffic. 
3.  Width of street in excess of 88 feet. 
4.  The existing street being widened or having a raised median center divider in the future pursuant to the General Plan Roadway Improvements Plans for the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
15.20.380 - Changes or Modifications. 
In accordance with Health and Safety Code Section 17958.5, the adoption of amendments more restrictive than the requirements contained in the provisions published in the California Building Standard Code, are needed because of local conditions, as specified below: 
(A)  Climatic. 
(1)  Conditions. Precipitation averages 18 inches per year and can reach as high as 35 inches per year. Virtually all of the rain occurs during the months of October through April. The remaining months receive little or no rain. Temperatures during the summer months can reach as high as 110 and City of Lodi averages 19 days over 100 each year. Relative humidity during these summer months is very low. Lodi averages 34 days of dense fog per year, and has had as many as 64 foggy days. 
(2)  Impacts. The generally dry, hot summer months create extreme fire conditions. Adding to this situation is the dryness and combustibility of many structures during the summer, especially true of structures with wood siding and roofs constructed of wood shakes and shingles. The cyclical uncertainty that allow weather events can cause rapid melting of the snow pack, which causes flood potential in areas surrounding the Mokelumne River. The foggy conditions can inhibit the dispatch and timeliness of emergency equipment reaching the site of a fire. During foggy periods, it is common place for visibility to be near zero, which results in emergency equipment having to decrease their speed to less than 25 miles per hour. 
(B)  Geographic. 
(1)  Conditions. The City of Lodi is subject to ground tremors from seismic events as the County is in seismic Category D. The Mokelumne River, which borders the northern city limits, is subjected to flood potential and its levies are subject to failure from seismic activity or high water. 
(2)  Impacts. The geologic conditions in San Joaquin County in general, and the City of Lodi, in particular, have the potential of restricting access to structures, especially in remote or isolated areas. A moderate earthquake or extended periods of rain can impact local access roads. 
(C)  Topographic. 
(1)  Conditions. The City of Lodi consists mainly of the San Joaquin Valley floor. The valley floor is typically flat land area bisected by intermittent and year round stream and river systems. Much of the valley floor is irrigated agriculture. Low land areas protected by a complex and extensive levee system characterize the Delta area. Union Pacific Railroad Tracks bisect the eastern and western portions of Lodi as well as Highway 99 creating traffic congestion and emergency response delays. 
(2)  Impacts. The valley floor is frequently subject to both general and localized flooding. Because the area is so flat and low, it is not unusual for local drainage systems to be inadequate during heavy rain periods. This condition can isolate areas where roads are flooded and thereby block access. With the OSHA "two-in two-out" rule requiring two fire fighters ready to make attack only when two others are present, the potential delay in east-west response increases the risk to firefighter and the public. 
While it is clearly understood that the adoption of such amendments may not prevent the incidence of fire, the implementation of these various amendments to the code attempt to reduce the severity and potential loss of life, property, and protection of the environment. 
(Ord. No. 1938, § 1, 12-7-2016)  
Chapter 15.22 - ATC-20 SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS 
Sections: 
 
15.22.010 - Intent. 
This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy. This chapter further authorizes the building official and his/her authorized representatives to post the appropriate placard at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment. 
(Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 11-17-2010)  
15.22.020 - Application of provisions. 
The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures of all occupancies regulated by the city of Lodi. The council may extend the provisions as necessary. 
(Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 11-17-2010)  
15.22.030 - Definitions. 
"Safety assessment" is a visual, non-destructive examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining the condition for continued occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 11-17-2010)  
15.22.040 - Placards. 
A.  The following are verbal descriptions of the official jurisdiction placards to be used to designate the condition for continued occupancy of buildings or structures. Copies of actual placards are attached. 
1.  INSPECTED — Lawful Occupancy Permitted is to be posted on any building or structure wherein no apparent structural hazard has been found. This placard is not intended to mean that there is no damage to the building or structure. 
2.  RESTRICTED USE is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged wherein the damage has resulted in some form of restriction to the continued occupancy. The individual who posts this placard will note on the placard in general terms the type of damage encountered and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on continued occupancy. 
3.  UNSAFE - Do Not Enter or Occupy is to be posted on each building or structure that has been damaged such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life safety. Buildings or structures posted with this placard shall not be entered under any circumstance except as authorized in writing by the building official, or his/her authorized representative. Safety assessment teams shall be authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard is not to be used or considered as a demolition order. The individual who posts this placard will note on the placard in general terms the type of damage encountered. 
B.  The number of the ordinance adopting this chapter, along with the address and phone number of the building division of the city's community development department, shall be permanently affixed to each placard. 
C.  Once it has been attached to a building or structure, a placard is not to be removed, altered, or covered until done so by an authorized representative of the building official, including deputized safety assessment evaluators. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to alter, remove, cover, or deface a posted placard unless authorized to do so pursuant to this section. 
D.  Placards shall read as follows: 
  
  
  
(Ord. No. 1841, § 1, 11-17-2010)  
Chapter 15.24 - HOUSING CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.24.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, together with appendixes thereto, are adopted as the housing code of the city of Lodi. The Uniform Housing Code shall apply in all matters pertaining to all buildings or portions thereof used, or designed or intended to be used, for human habitation within the city of Lodi. 
(Ord. 1679-D § 2, 1999)  
15.24.020 - Section 203.1 deleted—Housing advisory and appeals board. 
Section 203.1, Housing Advisory and Appeals Board, of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, is deleted. 
(Ord. 1679-D § 3, 1999)  
15.24.030 - Section 401 amended—Definitions. 
Section 401, Definitions, of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, is amended as follows: 
A.  Add to subparagraph "Board of Appeals" to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "Board of Appeals," "Appeals Board," or "Housing Advisory Board," it shall mean the Administrative Hearing Officer. 
B.  Add subparagraph "Building Officials" to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "Building Official," it shall mean the legally designated Chief Building Inspector or Community Improvement Manager of the City of Lodi or his authorized representative. 
C.  Change subparagraph "Health Officers" to read: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "City Health Officer" or "Health Officer," it shall mean the legally designated Director of the San Joaquin County Environmental Health Division or his authorized representative. 
D.  Add subparagraph "Fire Marshal" to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "City Fire Marshal" or "Fire Marshal," it shall mean the Fire Marshal of the City of Lodi or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.040 - Sections 1201.1, 1201.2, and 1201.3 amended—Appeal to administrative hearing officer. 
Sections 1201.1, 1201.2, and 1201.3 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1994 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, are amended to read as follows: 
 Section 1201. Appeal to Administrative Hearing Officer 
 Any person aggrieved by any order of the Building Official hereunder to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or portion thereof, may appeal such order to the Administrative Hearing Officer. The appeal, which shall be in writing and which shall state the substance of the order appealed from, shall be submitted to the Administrative Hearing Officer within ten (10) days from the date of personal service or mailing of the order which is being appealed. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall set the matter for hearing. Notice of the date, hour, and place of hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the persons specified in Sections 1101.3, 1101.4, and 1101.5. The notice shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appeal and show cause, if any they have, why the building or structure, or portion thereof, involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.050 - Section 1205 added—Administrative hearing officer hearing. 
Section 1205 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1994 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, is added to read as follows: 
 Hearing before Administrative Hearing Officer. At the time stated in the notice, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall hold a hearing and hear and consider any evidence offered by the Building Official, owner, occupant or person in charge and in control, mortgagee, or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other persons having any estate or interest in said building or structure, pertaining to the matters set forth in the Notice to Repair, Vacate and Repair or Demolish. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall render its decision. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.060 - Section 1206 added—Order of the administrative hearing officer. 
Section 1206 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, is added to read as follows: 
 Order of the Administrative Hearing Officer. If, from a full and fair consideration of the evidence and testimony received at the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine that the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is unsafe and a public nuisance, then it shall overrule the appeal and issue an order certified by the City Clerk: 
 1. That the building or structure must be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished; 
 2. That the occupant, lessee, or other person in possession must vacate said building or structure, or that he may remain in possession while repairs are being made; 
 3. That any mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or any other persons having an interest or estate in the said building or structures may, at his own risk, repair, vacate and repair, or demolish it. 
 The order shall (i) set forth the information required in Section 1101.2; (ii) contain a statement of the particulars that render the building or structure unsafe and a public nuisance; and (iii) contain a statement of the things required to be done. The order shall specify (i) the time within which the work required must be commenced, which shall be not less than ten days after the issuance of the order, and (ii) a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.070 - Section 1207 added—Serving and posting of order of administrative hearing officer. 
Section 1207 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, is added to read as follows: 
 Serving and Posting of Order of Administrative Hearing Officer. Copies of the order of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be posted on the building or structure involved and served in the manner and upon the persons specified in Section 1101.3, 1101.4, and 1101.5. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.080 - Sections 1301 through 1305 deleted—Procedure for conduct of hearing appeals. 
Sections 1301 through 1305 inclusive, "Procedure for Conduct of Hearing Appeals," of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, are deleted. 
(Ord. 1679-D § 9, 1999)  
15.24.090 - Sections 1501.1 and 1501.2 amended—Sale, repair, or demolition. 
Sections 1501.1 and 1501.2 of the Uniform Housing Code, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.24.010, are amended to read as follows: 
 Section 1501. Sale, Repair or Demolition. Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or any portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the Building Official, or by the Administrative Hearing Officer, whether under appeal or not, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to: 
 1. Cause the material of any such building or structure to be sold in any manner that the Administrative Hearing Officer may determine upon; provided, however, that any such sale shall be upon condition that the building or structure be forthwith demolished, the wreckage and debris thereof removed and the lot cleaned. The Administrative Hearing Officer may sell any such building singly or otherwise. Any surplus from the sale of any such building or structure, or group of buildings and structures, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the site shall be retained to be distributed to the parties or persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
 2. Cause the building or structure to be repaired or demolished. The cost thereof shall be assessed against the property upon which the particular building or structure is located or the Repair and Demolition Fund. The repair of any building or structure, or sale of the materials thereof, shall be by a contract awarded following advertisement for bids, to the lowest and best bidder in the case of repair or demolition work and to the highest and best bidder in the case of the sale of material. 
 Arrangements, as prescribed by the Administrative Hearing Officer in this section, preparing for the repair, demolition, or sale of materials, of or from any structure discussed in this Code shall be the responsibility of the Building Official. However, no such arrangements nor other work to that end shall be initiated prior to specific instructions from the Administrative Hearing Officer indicating such action. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
15.24.100 - Violations—Penalty. 
A.  No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to, or in violation of, any of the provisions of this housing code. 
B.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment set forth by the governing laws of the jurisdiction. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 1778 § 5 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 15.28 - ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS CODE 
Sections: 
 
15.28.010 - Adoption. 
The provisions set forth in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, are adopted as the unsafe building abatement code of the city of Lodi. The unsafe building abatement code of the city of Lodi shall apply in all matters pertaining to dangerous buildings, as defined in this chapter, which are in existence or which may be constructed in the city of Lodi. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 2, 1999)  
15.28.020 - Section 205 deleted—Board of appeals. 
Section 205, Board of Appeals, of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is deleted. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 3, 1999)  
15.28.030 - Section 303 added—Board of appeals. 
Section 303, Board of Appeals, is added to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "Board of Appeals," it shall mean the Administrative Hearing Officer of the City of Lodi. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.040 - Section 304 added—Building official. 
Section 304, Building Official, is added to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to "Building Official" it shall mean the legally designated Chief Building Inspector or the Community Improvement Manager of the City of Lodi or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 5, 1999)  
15.28.050 - Section 305 added—City health officer. 
Section 305, City Health Officer, is added to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "City Health Officer," or "Health Officer," it shall mean the legally designated Director of the San Joaquin County Environmental Health Division or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 6, 1999)  
15.28.060 - Section 306 added—Fire marshal. 
Section 306, Fire Marshal, is added to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, to read as follows: 
 Whenever in this Code reference is made to the "City Fire Marshal" or "Fire Marshal" it shall mean the Fire Marshal of the City of Lodi or his authorized representative. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 7, 1999)  
15.28.062 - Section 307 added—Declaration of public nuisance. 
Section 307, Declaration of Public Nuisance, is added to the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010 as follows: 
 Any structure found by the building official to be maintained as a dangerous building, as defined in Section 302 of this code, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and shall be abated pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. The procedures for abatement herein shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other ordinances or regulations or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 8 (part), 1998)  
15.28.068 - Section 401.2 amended—Notice and order. 
Section 401.2, Notice and Order, of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010 is amended as follows: 
 The building official shall issue a notice and order directed to the record owner of the building. The notice shall contain: 
 1. The street address and a legal description sufficient for identification of the premises upon which the building is located. 
 2. A statement that the building official has found the building to be dangerous with a brief and concise description of the conditions found to render the building dangerous under the provisions of Section 302 of this code. 
 3. A statement of the action required to be taken as determined by the building official. 
 3.1 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be repaired, the order shall require that all required permits be secured therefor and the work physically commenced within such time (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order) and completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under all of the circumstances. 
 3.2 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be secured, the order shall specify the general manner in which the structure is to be secured, the type of material to be used for securing and the approved method of fastening said material to the openings in the building or structure. Furthermore, the order shall require that the securing be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable under the circumstances. 
 3.3 If the building official has determined that the building or structure poses an extreme hazardous or dangerous condition such that it must be secured immediately, the building official shall attempt to give notice to the record owner of the building, his or her agent or legal representative, by way of personal contact ordering that the building or structure be secured within 24 hours of the issuance of the order. If at the end of the 24 hour period following receipt of the notice the owner, agent or legal representative has not completed the securing of the building or structure in the manner so ordered or, if all diligent attempts to contact the record owner, his or her agent or legal representative have failed, the building official shall be authorized to proceed according to Section 401.2, paragraph 4, of this code. 
 3.4 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be vacated, the order shall require that the building or structure all be vacated within a time certain from the date of the order as determined by the building official to be reasonable. 
 3.5 If the building official has determined that the building or structure must be demolished, the order shall require that the building be vacated within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable (not to exceed 60 days from the date of the order); that all required permits be secured therefor within 60 days from the date of the order; and that the demolition be completed within such time as the building official shall determine is reasonable. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 8 (part), 1999)  
15.28.070 - Section 501.1, 501.2, and 501.3 added—Appeal to administrative hearing officer. 
Section 501.1, 501.2, and 501.3 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1994 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is added to read as follows: 
 Section 501 Appeal to Administrative Hearing Officer. 
 Any person aggrieved by any order of the Building Official hereunder to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or portion thereof, may appeal such order to the Administrative Hearing Officer. The appeal which shall be in writing and which shall state the substance of the order appealed from, shall be submitted to the Administrative Hearing Officer within ten (10) days from the date of personal service or mailing of the order which is being appealed. The Administrative Hearing Officer shall set the matter for hearing. Notice of the date, hour, and place of the hearing shall be posted and served at least ten (10) days before the date set for the hearing in the manner and upon the person specified in Section 401.3, 401.4, and 401.5. The notice shall order all interested parties who desire to be heard to appear and show cause, if any they have, why the building or structure, or portion thereof, involved in the proceedings should not be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.080 - Section 505 amended—Hearing before administrative hearing officer. 
Section 505 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is amended to read as follows: 
 Hearing Before Administrative Hearing Officer. At the time stated in the notice, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall hold a hearing and hear and consider any evidence offered by the Building Official, owner, occupant or person in charge and control, mortgagee, or beneficiary under any deed of trust, lessee, or any other person having any estate or interest in said building or structure, pertaining to the matters set forth in the Notice to Repair, Vacate and Repair, or Demolish. Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall render its decision. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.090 - Section 506 amended—Order of administrative hearing officer. 
Section 506 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is amended to read as follows: 
 Order of Administrative Hearing Officer. If, from a full and fair consideration of the evidence and testimony received at the hearing, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall determine that the building or structure, or any portion thereof, is unsafe and a public nuisance, then it shall overrule the appeal and issue an order certified by the City Clerk; 
 1. That the building or structure must be repaired, vacated and repaired, or demolished; 
 2. That the occupant, lessee, or other person in possession must vacate said building or structure, or that he may remain in possession while repairs are being made; 
 3. That any mortgagee, beneficiary under a deed of trust, or any other person having an interest or estate in said building or structure may, at his own risk, repair, vacate and repair, or demolish it. 
 The order shall (i) set forth the information required in Section 401.2 Item 1; (ii) contain a statement of the particulars that render the building or structure unsafe and a public nuisance; and (iii) contain a statement of the things required to be done. The order shall specify (i) the time within which the work required must be commenced, which shall be not less than ten days after the issuance of the order, and (ii) a reasonable time within which the work shall be completed. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.100 - Section 507 amended—Serving and posting of order of administrative hearing officer. 
Section 507 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is amended to read as follows: 
 Serving and Posting of Order of Administrative Hearing Officer. Copies of the order of the Administrative Hearing Officer shall be posted on the building or structure involved and served in the manner and upon the persons specified in Section 401.3, 401.4, and 401.5. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.110 - Sections 601 through 605 deleted—Procedure for conduct of hearing appeals. 
Sections 601 through 605 inclusive, Procedure for Conduct of Hearing Appeals, of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, are deleted. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 12, 1999)  
15.28.120 - Section 801.1 amended—Sale, repair or demolition. 
Section 801.1 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is amended to read as follows: 
 Section 801.1. Sale, Repair, or Demolition. Whenever an order to repair, vacate and repair, or demolish any building or structure, or any portion thereof, has not been complied with within the time set by the Building Official, or by the Administrative Hearing Officer, whether under appeal or not, the Administrative Hearing Officer shall have the power, in addition to any other remedy herein provided, to: 
 1. Cause the material of any such building or structure to be sold in any manner that the Administrative Hearing Officer may determine upon; provided, however, that any such sale shall be upon condition that the building or structure be forthwith demolished, the wreckage and debris thereof removed and the lot cleaned. The Administrative Hearing Officer may sell any such building singly or otherwise. Any surplus from the sale of any such building or structure, or group of buildings and structures, over and above the cost of demolition and of cleaning the site shall be retained to be distributed to the parties or persons lawfully entitled thereto. 
 2. Cause the building or structure to be repaired or demolished. The cost thereof shall be assessed against the property upon which the particular building or structure is located or the Repair and Demolition Fund. The repair or demolition of any building or structure, or sale of the materials thereof, shall be by a contract awarded following advertisement for bids, to the lowest and best bidder in the case of repair or demolition work and to the highest and best bidder in the case of the sale of material. 
 Arrangements, as prescribed by the Administrative Hearing Officer in this Section, preparing for the repair, demolition, or sale of materials, of or from any structure discussed in this Code shall be the responsibility of the Building Official. However, no such arrangements or other work to that end shall be initiated prior to specific instructions from the Administrative Hearing Officer indicating such action. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
15.28.130 - Section 901 amended—Record of work done by city. 
Section 901 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, 1997 Edition, adopted by Section 15.28.010, is amended to read as follows: 
 The Building Official shall keep an itemized account of the expense incurred by the city in the repair or demolition of any building done pursuant to the provisions of Section 701.3 Item 3 of this Code. Upon the completion of the work of repair or demolition, said Building Official shall prepare and file with City Clerk a report specifying the work done, the itemized and total cost of the work, a description of the real property upon which the building or structure is or was located, and the names and addresses of the persons entitled to notice pursuant to Section 401.3. 
(Ord. 1679-E § 14, 1999)  
15.28.140 - Violation—Penalty. 
A.  No person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee or occupant, shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this code shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine and/or imprisonment set forth by the governing laws of the jurisdiction. Each separate day or any portion thereof, during which any violation of this code occurs or continues, shall be deemed to constitute a separate offense. 
C.  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 1778 § 6 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 15.30 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE AND THE DESIGNATION OF CERTAIN KINDS OF NUISANCES 
Sections: 
 
15.30.010 - Findings and intent. 
A.  The city council finds and declares that the regulations in this chapter are necessary in order to: 
1.  Control or eliminate conditions which are detrimental to health, safety and welfare; 
2.  Preserve the quality of life and alleviate certain socioeconomic problems created by physical deterioration of property; and 
3.  Protect property values and further certain aesthetic considerations for the general welfare of all residents of the City of Lodi. 
B.  This chapter is not intended to repeal, amend or in any way impair other laws or regulations applicable to property in the city, as they now exist or may later be amended, nor to affect or modify any deed restriction or covenant running with the land which is more restrictive. 
(Ord. 1528 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.30.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Back yard" means that portion of property between a building and the back property line. 
B.  "Building" means any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering of any use or occupancy of any nature. 
C.  "City" means the city of Lodi. 
D.  "City manager" means the city manager or the city manager's designee. 
E.  "Front yard" means that portion of property between the street and a building. 
F.  "Owner" means any person owning property, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll for city taxes and also includes the lessee, tenant or other person having control or possession of the property, unless otherwise specified. 
G.  "Person" means any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other organization, however formed. 
H.  "Property" means all real property within the city including but not limited to front yards, side yards, backyards, driveways, walkways, and sidewalks and shall include any building located upon such property. 
I.  "Side yard" means that portion of any property between a building and the side property lines. 
(Ord. 1528 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.30.030 - Nuisances prohibited. 
It is unlawful and an infraction for any person owning, leasing, renting, occupying or having charge or possession of any property within the city to maintain or allow to be maintained such property in any such manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist thereon, except as may be allowed by any other provision of law: 
A.  Accumulations of dirt, litter or debris; 
B.  Clothes lines or clothes hanging in front yards, or from porches, balconies or windows, provided however, that clothes lines and clothes hanging in rear yards shall be permitted; 
C.  Accumulations of packing boxes, lumber, salvaged materials, fire wood, or similar materials in the front yard or visible from a public right-of-way; 
D.  Attractive nuisances dangerous to children including abandoned, broken, or neglected equipment, machinery, refrigerators and freezers, hazardous or unmaintained pools, ponds, and excavations; 
E.  Broken, discarded or dilapidated furniture, household equipment, or furnishings, or shopping carts on the exterior of the front or side yards; 
F.  Overgrown vegetation likely to harbor rats, vermin or other nuisances dangerous to public health, safety, and welfare, or obstructing a necessary view of drivers on public streets or private driveways; 
G.  Dead, diseased, decayed or hazardous trees, weeds or other vegetation constituting unsightly appearance, which is either dangerous to public health or safety, or detrimental to neighboring properties or property values; 
H.  Vehicle parts or other articles of personal property which are abandoned or left in a state of partial construction or repair; 
I.  Buildings which are abandoned, boarded up, partially destroyed, or left in a state of partial construction for an unreasonable period of time, and buildings which are unpainted or where the paint on the exterior of the building is mostly worn off. 
J.  Fences in a dilapidated, partially destroyed or deteriorated condition. 
(Ord. 1528 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.30.040 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any property found to be maintained in violation of the foregoing section is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to the administrative procedures set forth in Chapter 1.10. The procedures for abatement set forth therein shall not be exclusive, and shall not, in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner. 
(Ord. 1778 § 7 (part), 2006)  
15.30.050 - Alternative actions available. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the commencement of a civil proceeding to abate the nuisance pursuant to applicable law or restricting the city from pursuing any other remedy available under applicable law. 
(Ord. 1778 § 7 (part), 2006)  
15.30.060 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 1778 § 7 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 15.31 - WEED AND REFUSE ABATEMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.31.010 - Short title. 
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Weed and Refuse Abatement" ordinance. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.020 - Findings by city council. 
The city council finds that weeds and refuse, as defined in this chapter, on lots or parcels within the city, constitute public nuisances. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.030 - Enforcement officer designated. 
The fire chief of the city is designated as the enforcement officer, whose duty it is shall be to administer and enforce provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise provided herein. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.040 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
A.  "Weeds" means any weeds or grasses which when mature bear seeds of a downy or wingy nature, or which because of having attained, or which may attain, such a large growth that when dry shall become a fire or safety hazard, or which are otherwise noxious or dangerous to health. 
B.  "Refuse" means any waste matter, litter, trash, rubbish, debris, grass clippings, tree or shrub trimmings, and dirt which is, or when dry may become a hazard to health, or which is offensive to the senses and/or detrimental to the attractiveness of the surroundings. 
C.  "Lot" means a lot, parcel, tract, or piece of land, improved or unimproved, including the sidewalk area abutting or adjoining such lot, parcel, tract or piece of land, and the parkways or areas lying between such abutting sidewalk and the curb or street line, or between the abutting property ownership line and any street line. 
D.  "Private lot" means any lot as above defined not owned and in the possession of a governmental agency or entity. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.050 - Removal of weeds and refuse required—Notice provisions. 
A.  Whenever weeds or refuse, as defined in Section 15.31.040 of this code are situated upon any private lot, the enforcement officer shall cause notice to be posted upon or in front of such property requiring that any such weeds be destroyed or removed and any such refuse be removed by the owner or occupant within fourteen days from and after the date of such posting. In the event such weeds or refuse are not so destroyed or removed within such period of time, or if a hearing is timely requested as provided for in Section 15.31.070, within the time therein provided for, the enforcement officer shall forthwith cause the same to be destroyed or removed, and he or she and other employees of the city and any contractors for the city may enter upon the property for such purpose. Such notice shall be in the following form, the heading to be in letters not less than one inch in height. 
NOTICE TO DESTROY WEEDS AND 
TO REMOVE REFUSE 
 Pursuant to Chapter 1531 of the Lodi Municipal Code, notice is hereby given that weeds and/or refuse are situated upon this lot, and are a public nuisance. Said weeds are required to be destroyed or removed from this lot, and the public nuisance thus abated, within fourteen (14) days after the date of this posting, unless within ten (10) days after said posting date a person interested in this lot files in writing with the City Clerk of the City of Lodi a request for a hearing before the City Council to consider objections to this abatement order. Said hearing shall be at the next regularly scheduled City Council meeting, or any adjournment thereof, after the filing of said request. The date, time and place may be obtained from the City Clerk. If a hearing is so requested, said public nuisance is required to be abated within fourteen (14) days after the date of said posting, or within five (5) days after the decision of the Council, whichever is later, unless a longer period is directed by said Council. 
 If said public nuisance is not abated as required, the City of Lodi will abate or cause it to be abated, and the costs thereof shall be immediately due and payable and shall be assessed against this lot and become a lien thereon. A hearing before the City Council to consider objections to said costs will be held on _______, 19___. Said costs can be obtained from the City Clerk ten (10) days before said hearing date. 
 Said Chapter 15.31 is available in the office of the City Clerk. 
 Dated and posted: 
 CITY OF LODI 
 By: 
 ___________ 
 Public Official 
B.  Such notice shall be posted in front of or on the front portion of each separately owned parcel according to the last equalized assessment roll then available to the city. In the event that the parcel fronts on two or more streets, one posting shall be sufficient. In the event that such weeds or refuse have not been caused to be removed or destroyed by the city within sixty days after the date notice is posted on the property, a new notification shall first be posted. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.060 - Notice by city clerk. 
In addition to the notice above provided for, the city clerk, within three business days after the posting of such notices on the property, shall send a written notification, through the United States mail, first class, postage prepaid, to the owner of the subject property as shown on the last equalized assessment roll then available to the city, which shall describe the property on which the notice has been posted, by street address, property description, or by reference to a nearby address of other property, or by any other description sufficient to identify the property. Such notice shall thereupon repeat the wording of the notice so posted, including the date thereof and the name of the public official so posting. Notwithstanding the requirements of this section, the failure to send the written notice herein provided for or any defect therein shall not invalidate any proceedings under this chapter. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.070 - Hearing. 
Any person with an interest in any property on which a notice to destroy weeds and to remove refuse sign has been posted may, within ten days of such posting, request a hearing before the city council with respect to the abatement order. Such request shall be in writing, and shall identify the property and the interest of the person making such request for a hearing. It shall be automatically scheduled for the next regular city council meeting, at which the council shall hear and consider all objections to the abatement order. It shall be the responsibility of the party requesting the hearing to ascertain from the city clerk the date, time and place of the hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. By motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing, the council shall allow or overrule any objections. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive, and the burden shall be upon the objecting party to show that the abatement order is improper. In holding such hearing, the council need not adhere to formal rules of evidence. In the event the objections are overruled, the owner and/or occupant will cause such abatement within five days after the date of such hearing or within fourteen days from and after the date such notice was posted, whichever is later, unless a longer period is permitted by the city council in its motion or resolution overruling such objections. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.080 - Entry by city on lots. 
The enforcement officer, and any employees of the city, and any contractors within the city, are authorized to enter upon any lot in the city for the purpose of posting notices under Section 15.31.050, and for the purpose of entering to destroy or remove weeds and to remove refuse. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.090 - Payment of costs—Lien on property. 
Each cost so confirmed by the council in accordance with Section 15.31.120 shall be billed forthwith to the property owner of the lot at his or her address as shown by the last equalized county assessment roll then available to the city, or at such other address as may have been furnished to the city by the owner in connection with abatement proceedings, excepting those as to which such council action occurs after July 1st and before August 10th of any year. However, the failure to furnish such bill will not invalidate the lien herein provided. The cost of abatement on each lot shall constitute a special assessment against that lot, and from the date of the council action pursuant to Section 15.31.120 is made a lien upon such lot. To the extend such assessments have not been paid by July 1st of the particular year (whether or not billed to the property owner), a certified copy of all assessment records adopted by the city council and not theretofore forwarded to the county auditor shall be forwarded to him or her on or before August 10th. All such assessments which so constitute a lien shall be collected in the same manner as general city property taxes are collected and shall be contained on the tax bill therefor as prepared and mailed by county officials. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.100 - Refunds. 
The council may order refunded all or part of an assessment paid pursuant to this chapter if it finds that all or part thereof was erroneously levied. No refund shall be made unless a written claim is filed with the city clerk on or before December 10th of the tax year next following that in which the work resulting in the assessment was purportedly done. The claim shall be verified by the person who paid the assessment, or his or her guardian, executor or administrator, and shall set forth the basis for the claim. The council shall hold a hearing with respect thereto at its next regular meeting scheduled at least ten days after the filing of the claim, or at any adjourned session thereof, and claimant shall not be entitled to special notice thereof. The hearing may be continued from time to time. No refund shall be made of penalties or interest. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.110 - Cost of abatement. 
The enforcement officer shall keep a record of the cost of abatement on each separate lot wherein the city, or its contractors, abate any nuisance under this chapter. He or shall quarterly submit to the city clerk a written report showing such cost as to each such lot on which such abatement has been completed for at least ten days prior to the filing of such report with the city clerk, but may include the costs of more recent abatements. Such written reports shall be filed with the city clerk no later than January 2nd, April 2nd, July 2nd, and October 2nd of each year. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.120 - Hearing on costs. 
At the council meeting next regularly scheduled at least eleven days following the date on which such written report is to be filed with the city clerk, or at any adjourned session thereof, the city council shall conduct a hearing with respect to such costs contained in the written report of the enforcement officer. Any property owner or other person interested in a lot as to which a cost is proposed to be assessed may be heard and present such evidence in opposition to the proposed assessment as that person desires. The council shall make its determination to each objection by motion, and, except to the extent that it may uphold any objection in whole or in part, or may decrease or eliminate any assessment on its own motion, shall adopt and confirm the written report of the enforcement officer by motion or resolution. The determination of the council shall be final. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.130 - Summary abatement. 
The enforcement officer, upon a written determination filed with the city clerk that weeds or refuse on any private lot constitute an immediate threat to the public health, safety and welfare, may enter or authorize other city employees or its contractors to enter on such private lot and forthwith destroy or remove such weeds and remove such refuse without notice of any nature. The resulting cost shall be payable by the same persons, in the same manner, and shall be a lien upon such lot and collectible as such all as provided in the preceding and succeeding sections of this chapter. Written notice of the hearing to be held pursuant to Section 15.31.20 shall be mailed to the owner of record of such lot as appears from the last equalized county assessment roll then available, by first class mail, at least seven days before the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.140 - Costs of abatement when work performed by contractor. 
Costs of abatement, if done by a contractor, shall be the cost to the city, plus a reasonable amount on account of city's overhead attributable thereto. In the event city crews perform the work, cost and reasonable overhead for city personnel and equipment shall be applied. The city shall, by resolution, adopt labor and equipment rates to be utilized in determining costs when city crews perform the abatement work and a percentage overhead factor to be applied thereto and to contract costs. 
(Ord. 1662 § 1 (part), 1998)  
15.31.150 - Declaration of public nuisance. 
Any property found to be maintained in violation of the foregoing section is declared to be a public nuisance and shall be subject to the administrative procedures set forth in Chapter 1.10. The procedures for abatement set forth therein shall not be exclusive, and shall not, in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner. 
(Ord. 1778 § 8 (part), 2006)  
15.31.160 - Alternative actions available. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city council from ordering the commencement of a civil proceeding to abate the nuisance pursuant to applicable law or restricting the city from pursuing any other remedy available under applicable law. 
(Ord. 1778 § 8 (part), 2006)  
15.31.170 - Violation—Penalty. 
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to enforcement and penalty provisions set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
(Ord. 1778 § 8 (part), 2006)  
Chapter 15.32 - COMMUNITY HOUSING PROJECT CONVERSIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.32.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to: 
A.  Establish criteria for conversion of the existing multifamily rental housing to condominiums, community apartments or stock cooperatives; 
B.  To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate during the conversion of apartments to condominiums, by providing for procedures for notifications for such relocation; 
C.  To assure that the purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical conditions of the structure which is offered for purchase; 
D.  To ensure that converted housing achieves a high degree of appearance, quality and safety, and is consistent with the goals of the city. 
(Prior code § 8B-1)  
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
As used in this chapter: 
A.  "Association" means an organization of persons who own a lot, parcel, area, condominium, shares in a stock cooperative, or right of exclusive occupancy in a community housing project. 
B.  "Community housing project" includes the following: 
1.  A condominium project containing two or more condominiums as defined in Section 783 of the Civil Code: 
 ["Condominium."] A condominium is an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common in a portion of a parcel of real property together with a separate interest in space in a residential, industrial or commercial building on such real property, such as an apartment, office or store. A condominium may include in addition a separate interest in other portions of such real property. 
 Such estate may, with respect to the duration of its enjoyment, be either (1) an estate of inheritance or perpetual estate, (2) an estate for life, or (3) an estate for years, such as a lease hold or subleasehold. 
2.  A community apartment project containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy, as defined in Section 11004 of the Business and Professions Code: 
 Community apartment projects. A community apartment project in which an undivided interest in the land is coupled with the right of exclusive occupancy of any apartment located thereon . . . . 
3.  A stock cooperative containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy, as defined in Section 11003.2 of the Business and Professions Code: 
 Stock cooperative. A "stock cooperative" is a corporation which is formed or availed of primarily for the purpose of holding title to, either in fee simple or for a term of years, improved real property, if all or substantially all of the shareholders of such corporation receive a right of exclusive occupancy in a portion of the real property, title to which is held by the corporation, which right of occupancy is transferable only concurrently with the transfer of the share or shares of stock in the corporation held by the person having such right of occupancy. 
4.  A planned development containing two or more separately owned lots, parcels or area, as defined in Section 11003 of the Business and Professions Code. 
C.  "Conversion" means a change in the type of ownership of a parcel or parcels of land, together with the existing attached structures to that defined as a community housing project, regardless of the present or prior use of such land and structures and whether substantial improvements have been made to such structures. "Conversion" does not include a structure for which a condominium plan has been recorded in accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Civil Code. 
(Prior code § 8B-2)  
15.32.030 - Conditional use permit—Required. 
No conversion to a community housing project shall be permitted unless and until a conditional use permit therefor has been applied for and issued pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 17.72 of this code and the additional requirements as set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8B-3)  
15.32.040 - Conditional use permit—Application. 
A.  In recognizing that the conversion of structures which have been previously occupied to a community housing project presents unique problems to present tenants and future buyers, in addition to the requirements of Chapter 17.72 of this code relating to the application for a use permit, the application for a conversion to a community housing project shall include the following information: 
1.  A physical elements report detailing the structural condition of all elements of the property, including foundations, electrical, plumbing, utilities, structural frame, roof, windows, recreational facilities, sound transmissions of each building, mechanical equipment, parking facilities and appliances. Regarding each such element, it shall be sufficient for such report to state, to the best knowledge or estimate of the applicant, when such element was built, the condition of each element, when the element was replaced, the approximate date upon which the element will require replacement, the cost of replacing the elements, and any variation of the physical condition of the element from the current zoning and from the Uniform Housing Code and Uniform Building Code in effect on the date that the last building permit was issued for the subject structure. The report shall identify any defective or unsafe elements and set forth the proposed corrective measures to be employed. The report is to be prepared by a licensed architect, engineer, inspector or similar person, as approved by the community development director; 
2.  A report from a licensed structural pest-control operator, approved by the city, on each structure and each unit within the structure; 
3.  A statement of repairs and improvements to be made by the applicant; 
4.  The date and description of each major repair and/or renovation of any element since the date of construction. For the purpose of this subsection, "major repair and/or renovation" means any repair and/or renovation for which an expenditure of more than two thousand dollars was made; 
5.  A statement regarding current ownership of all improvements and underlying land; 
6.  The name and mailing address of each present tenant of the project; 
7.  A declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions which would be recorded on behalf of any and all owners of the community housing project as required by Section 15.32.170; 
8.  A statement of the estimated annual operating and maintenance costs for all common facilities and services for the next three years as prepared or reviewed by a professional management firm familiar with operating and maintenance costs of similar properties in the area; 
9.  A copy of a warranty or a statement granting to each purchaser a one-year warranty on all appliances installed in his/her unit, as required by Section 15.32.180; 
10.  A copy of a statement granting to each purchaser of a unit, the right to cancel his/her purchase of such unit without cost or liability as required by Section 15.32.180; 
11.  Applicant shall submit evidence that a notification of the notice of intent to convert as described in Section 15.32.180 was received by each tenant; 
12.  Any other information which in the opinion of the community development director will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purpose of this chapter; 
13.  A statement from the public works department listing all on-site and off-site improvements necessary to bring the project up to city standards as described in subsection (A)(3) of Section 15.32.060. 
B.  An applicant who is unable to provide the information required by subsection A of this section shall submit an affidavit, given under penalty of perjury, setting forth in detail all efforts undertaken to discover such information, and all reasons why the information cannot be obtained. 
(Prior code § 8B-4)  
15.32.050 - Community development department reports. 
The application for a conditional use permit for a conversion shall not be complete until the final form of the physical elements report and other documents are approved by the community development department. The reports, in their acceptable form, shall remain on file with the community development department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referred to the city planning commission. 
(Prior code § 8B-5)  
15.32.060 - Construction code and community development requirements. 
To achieve the purpose of this chapter, the planning commission shall not approve a conditional use permit for any project which does not comply with the following physical standards unless the standards cannot be reasonably complied with by the applicant and the planning commission has waived or modified the standards: 
1.  All residential buildings shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of the Uniform Housing Code, as adopted by the city, in effect at the time of the filing of the application to convert to a community housing project. 
2.  All buildings shall comply with the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Fire Code and National Electrical Code that was in existence at the time that the building was constructed. 
3.  All projects shall comply with the city development requirements, including, but not limited to, dedication of public utility easements, streets, rights-of-way and construction of curb, gutter, sidewalk, streets, drainage, street lighting, fire protection, and water and sewer service. 
B.  The public works director shall set forth, in a written form, the city development requirements applicable to the project. 
C.  If the proposed project does not comply with the three standards set out in subsection A of this section, unless modified or waived by the planning commission, any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall require the applicant to furnish a bond in an amount equal to the reasonable estimated costs to bring the project into compliance with subsection A. The bond shall run in favor of individual purchasers and the association. 
(Prior code § 8B-6)  
15.32.070 - Specific development standards. 
A.  No conditional use permit for a community housing project shall be approved unless the project conforms to the development standards set out in Sections 15.32.080 through 15.32.160, unless the development standards are modified or waived by the planning commission. 
B.  If the proposed project does not comply with the applicable provisions of this section relating to compliance with the various physical standards, unless modified or waived by the planning commission, any conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter shall require the applicant to furnish a bond in an amount equal to the reasonable estimated costs to bring the project into compliance with this section. The bond shall run in favor of the individual purchaser and the association. 
(Prior code § 8B-7 (part))  
15.32.080 - Smoke detectors. 
Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat, conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(a))  
15.32.090 - Sound transmission. 
A.  Shock Mounting of Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment such as motors, compressors, pumps, and compactors which is determined by the chief building inspector to be a source of structural vibration or structure-borne noise, shall be shock-mounted with inertia blocks or bases and/or vibration isolators in a manner approved by the chief building inspector. 
B.  Sound Standards. The structure shall conform to all interior and exterior sounds transmission standards of Chapter 35 of the Appendix of the Uniform Building Code. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(b))  
15.32.100 - Utility meters and shutoffs. 
Each unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. A water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit or for each plumbing fixture. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(c))  
15.32.110 - Private storage space. 
Each unit shall have at least two hundred cubic feet of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space in addition to guest, linen, pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space shall be for the sole use of the unit owner. Such space may be provided in any location approved by the community development department, but shall not be divided into two or more locations for any unit. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(d))  
15.32.120 - Laundry facilities. 
A laundry area shall be provided for each unit or, if common laundry facilities are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(e))  
15.32.130 - Parking. 
Parking requirements for a community housing project shall be as set forth in this code for the district in which the project is located. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(f))  
15.32.140 - Trash collection areas. 
Trash collection areas shall conform to standards adopted by the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(g))  
15.32.150 - Circuit breakers. 
Each unit shall have its own circuit breaker panel for all electrical circuits and outlets which serve the unit. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(h))  
15.32.160 - Lighting. 
A.  Exits, aisles, passageways and recesses related to and within the units shall be illuminated with an intensity of at least one foot-candle at the ground level during the hours of darkness. Open parking lots and carports shall be provided with and maintain a minimum of 0.25 foot-candle of light on the parking surface during the hours of darkness. 
B.  Outdoor lighting devices, required by this section, shall be approved exterior fixtures, protected by weather-resistant covers and adequately shielded to prevent glare. 
C.  Common trash areas shall be lit with a minimum of 0.5 foot-candle when located within a building. 
(Prior code § 8B-7(i), (j), (k))  
15.32.170 - Covenants, conditions and restrictions. 
A.  The declaration of covenants, conditions and restrictions on project elements relating to the management of the common area facilities shall be approved by the planning commission. In addition to such covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be required by the Department of Real Estate of the state pursuant to Title 6 of the Civil Code and other state laws and policies, such declaration shall be subject to recording and shall provide for the following: 
1.  Off-street Parking Spaces. Required off-street parking spaces shall be permanently and irrevocably specifically assigned to particular units within the project on the basis of the parking spaces required per unit pursuant to Chapter 17.60 of this code. To the maximum practical extent, spaces assigned to each unit shall be contiguous to such unit. 
2.  Maintenance of Common Areas and Facilities. In order to protect the public health, safety and welfare, provisions shall be made, both for annual assessments of the owner for maintenance and special assessment for capital improvements. The procedure for the change of the regular annual assessment shall be specified. The manner in which special assessments may be levied for the purpose of defraying, in whole or in part, the costs of construction, reconstruction, repair or replacement of a capital improvement upon the common area shall be specified. Both annual and special assessment may be collected on a monthly basis. The remedies which the association may bring for the nonpayment of assessment shall be specified and may include penalties for late payments. 
3.  Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas. If a community housing project contains private access ways, provisions shall be made for the public utility easements over the entire private accessway. 
4.  Access for Construction Maintenance or Repairs. Each owner and the association shall have an easement for entry upon any privately owned unit where necessary in connection with the construction and maintenance or repair for the benefit of the common area or the owners of the units in common. Unless otherwise prohibited by law or any local, state or federal regulation, the association shall have the right to terminate contract with any person or organization engaged by the applicant to perform management or maintenance duties three months after the association assumes control of the project, or at that time renegotiate such contract. 
B.  None of the covenants, conditions and restrictions provided for in subsection A of this section, when approved by the planning commission, shall be amended, modified or changed without the written consent of the planning commission, and the declaration shall contain a statement to that effect. 
(Prior code § 8B-8)  
15.32.180 - Tenant notice and right-to-purchase requirements. 
All conditional use permits approved by the planning commission for conversion to a community housing project shall be subject to, at a minimum, the following conditions, unless the conditions are modified or waived by the planning commission: 
A.  Notice of Intent to Convert. A notice of intent to convert shall be delivered to each tenant sixty days prior to the filing of a tentative map. Evidence of receipt by each tenant shall be submitted with the application for conditional use permit to convert to a community housing project. 
B.  The form of the notice shall be as approved by the community development department. It shall contain not less than the following: 
1.  Name and address of the current owner; 
2.  Name and address of the proposed applicant; 
3.  Approximate date on which the application for conditional use permit is going to be filed; 
4.  Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by nonpurchasing tenants; 
5.  Tenant's right to purchase; 
6.  Tenant's right of notification to vacate; 
7.  Provisions for special cases; 
8.  Other information may be required as deemed necessary by the community development department. 
B.  Tenant's Right to Purchase. Any present tenant of any unit shall be given the nontransferable right to purchase a unit occupied at a price not higher than the price offered to the general public. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least ninety days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report. 
C.  Tenant's Right of Notification to Vacate. Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he/she occupies a unit, shall have not less than one hundred eighty days from the date of receipt of notification from the applicant of his intent to convert or from the approval of the conditional use permit, to convert or from the following date of the approval of the final subdivision map or parcel map pursuant to Title 16 of this code, whichever date is later, to vacate his/her unit. 
D.  Provisions for Special Cases. Any nonpurchasing tenant, age sixty-two or older, or handicapped, or with minor children in school, shall be given at least an additional one hundred twenty days from the date established by subsection C of this section in which to vacate his/her unit. 
E.  Warranty. A statement is required granting to each purchaser a one-year warranty on all appliances installed in his/her unit, and granting to the association and to all purchasers of the individual units, a one-year warranty on all structures in the community housing project and on all electrical, heating, air-conditioning, plumbing, ventilation equipment and elevators. 
F.  Purchase Cancellation. A statement is required granting to each purchaser of a unit, the right to cancel his/her purchase of such unit without cost or liability, provided he/she gives written notice of cancellation within fifteen days after he/she signs the purchase agreement. 
(Prior code § 8B-9)  
15.32.190 - Prospective tenant notice. 
After submittal of the application for conditional use permit to convert, any prospective tenant shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert prior to leasing or renting any unit. 
(Prior code § 8B-10)  
15.32.200 - Prospective purchaser documents. 
The applicant shall furnish each prospective purchaser of a unit within a project a true copy of the conditional use permit issued under this chapter and each of the following informational documents: The application for a conditional use permit and all attachments thereto which were required by Section 15.32.040. 
(Prior code § 8B-11)  
15.32.210 - Fee. 
The application for a conditional use permit under this chapter shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount to be determined from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 8B-12)  
15.32.220 - Hearing. 
The planning commission shall order a public hearing on any application. Due notice of the public hearing shall be given as required and in the manner required by law. In addition thereto, each tenant of the proposed project shall be given written notice, postage prepaid, of the time, place and the purpose of such application on the agenda, ten days prior to the meeting. The public hearing may be continued from time to time by the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 8B-13)  
15.32.230 - Approval findings. 
The planning commission shall not approve an application for conditional use permit unless the planning commission finds that: 
A.  The application for conditional use permit is complete; 
B.  All fees as required by this chapter are paid for; 
C.  All bonds required by this chapter are furnished to the city; 
D.  The overall design and physical condition of the condominium conversion achieves a high degree of appearance, safety and quality; 
E.  The establishment, maintenance or conducting of the use will not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, morals, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use, or to property or improvements in the neighborhood, or will not be contrary to the general public welfare; 
F.  Applicant has complied with all provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 8B-14)  
15.32.240 - Report to city council. 
Any and all actions and decisions of the planning commission in connection with the conditional use permit for conversion to community housing project shall be reported in writing to the city council. 
(Prior code § 8B-15)  
15.32.250 - Appeal. 
Any applicant or person claiming to be directly or inversely affected by the actions of the planning commission on matters referred to in this section, may within five days after the action, file written appeal with the city clerk for transmittal to the city council. Appeal shall stay the issuance of any permits in connection with the action pending from the decision of the city council. Upon receipt of any such appeal, the city council shall, after receiving a report from the planning commission and after at least one public hearing on the case as provided by law, render a decision sustaining, amending or overruling any actions of the planning commission on the case. 
(Prior code § 8B-16)  
Chapter 15.34 - GROWTH MANAGEMENT PLAN FOR RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT 
Sections: 
 
15.34.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to state clearly the various policies which shall govern the future growth and development of the city. It is further the purpose of this chapter to provide a growth management system to regulate the character, location, amount and timing of future development so as to achieve the policies stated in the Lodi General Plan. It is further the purpose of this chapter to provide for increased housing opportunities for all segments of society and to promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare by regulating the future use and development of land in the city. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.020 - Findings 
The city council, pursuant to Government Code Section 65863.6, finds and determines as follows: 
A.  San Joaquin County is one of the most rapidly growing areas in the state of California and the United States. Projections indicate such growth is likely to continue. 
B.  Experience has shown that rapid growth which occurs in the absence of a growth management plan produces negative impacts upon housing, traffic, parks, air quality, water, aesthetics, and the general quality of life of city residents. 
C.  The growth projections and policies established by this chapter reflect the estimated planned capacity of the city to serve new growth as it occurs. In doing so, the council has studied the existing and projected capacity of the city's wastewater and water systems, ability of city streets to handle further traffic, levels of police and fire protection, the necessity of providing schools, and other related data. 
D.  Rapid uncontrolled growth is also a direct cause of serious adverse environmental and economic effects, some of which are: 
1.  Loss of significant agricultural lands, including prime agricultural lands; 
2.  The ability of the community to provide adequate and decent housing for its citizens. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.030 - Policies. 
The city council determines that in order to minimize or eliminate the problems described above, and to assure the public health, safety and welfare, the following policies shall guide the future growth and development of the city. 
A.  It shall be the policy of the city to ensure that prime agricultural land is preserved by discouraging new residential developments in rural or unincorporated areas and to provide, to the extent possible, that new residential development shall occur in urban areas. 
B.  It shall be the policy of the city to minimize degradation of natural resources, including but not limited to, air, water and wildlife habitat. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.040 - Allocation of residential development approvals. 
A.  The number of residential units approved by the city shall reflect a two percent yearly limitation on growth based on population, to be compounded annually. Calculations for residential building approval shall be based on a population figure of fifty thousand nine hundred ninety as of September 1, 1989, and assuming an average number of persons per residential unit as determined annually by the State Department of Finance. This limitation of formula shall be applicable to approvals of residential units for years beginning with calendar year 1990 and thereafter. 
B.  This limitation shall not apply to: 
1.  Commercial and industrial projects; 
2.  Senior citizen housing; 
3.  On-site replacement of housing in existence as of September 1, 1989; and 
4.  Projects of four units or less. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.050 - Allocations nontransferable. 
No allocation or approval granted under this chapter may be transferred or assigned to any other location or project by the applicant or applicant's heirs, assigns or successors. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.060 - Priority development map. 
The city council shall, each year, adopt or update a map of the city and surrounding areas showing lands eligible for development as part of the city and assigning thereto, priority classifications of 1, 2 or 3. This map shall be based upon the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the Public Works Department, and the Community Development Department, as determined by the availability of city services including but not limited to water, wastewater, storm drains, streets, police and fire protection and parks. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.070 - Development plan required. 
Prior to submission of a tentative map, parcel map or other approval under the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), an application for growth management review shall be made to the planning commission on forms provided by the community development department and shall include or be accompanied by a development plan. The format and information to be contained in such development plan shall be determined by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.080 - Amendments. 
If, at any point after approval and before construction begins, the applicant shall substantially modify the plan submitted, city may require that the plan be resubmitted for evaluation from the first step. A determination of the need for resubmission shall be made by the community development department in the exercise of its sole discretion. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.090 - Multi-year allocations. 
Applicant shall specify, if desired, that multi-year approval is sought. The planning commission and city council may, in their discretion, grant up to three years' allocations. However, any such number of units approved shall be deducted from the total number of allocations available in such future years. (Ord 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.100 - Criteria—Point system. 
Evaluation of proposed projects shall be done with reference to and in conformance with a point system/criteria schedule to be established by council resolution. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
15.34.110 - Allocation of building permits/approvals. 
If, in any year, the number of applications for residential units subject to this chapter exceeds the number of building permits to be issued in that year by the city, as calculated herein, such available building permits/approvals shall be issued as follows: 
A.  By reference to the point system/criteria specified in Section 15.34.100 of this chapter, the project with the lowest number of points shall be eliminated from consideration until the number of unit applications remaining equals the number of building permits to be issued during that year. 
B.  During the elimination of projects under subsection A above, if two or more projects are tied for low score after all lower scores have been eliminated, the community development director shall reduce the number of units in each of the tied low-scoring projects, on an equal percentage basis, until the number remaining coincides with the number of building permits available. 
C.  No single project shall receive more than one-third of all single-family permits available in any single year, unless the number of applications received is less than permits available in that year. 
(Ord. 1521 § 1 (part), 1991)  
Chapter 15.36 - SETBACK LINES 
Sections: 
 
15.36.010 - Statutory authority. 
This article is adopted to promote the public health, safety and general welfare by providing for the establishment of setback lines to protect the future rights of way for existing and planned streets. The specific setback lines which are provided for in this article are hereby designated precise plans as authorized in section 65601 of the state Government Code. 
(Prior code § 5-13)  
15.36.020 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Building" means any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls. 
B.  "Setback area" means the area lying between setback lines established on each side of a street or planned street and including the full width of the future right-of-way. 
C.  "Setback line" means a line parallel to the future centerline of a street and designating the future right-of-way line of the street. 
D.  "Structure" means anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on the ground or which is attached to something requiring permanent location on the ground. 
(Prior code § 5-12)  
15.36.030 - Establishment—Building permit moratorium. 
A.  Declaration of Intention. When the planning commission or the city council determines that a setback line is desirable and necessary in the public interest, either body may initiate proceedings by declaring its intention to establish a specific setback line. 
B.  Hearing by Planning Commission. The planning commission shall then hold at least one public hearing on the proposed setback line and shall make a recommendation and report to the city council. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
C.  Hearing by Council. Upon receipt of the recommendation and report from the planning commission, the city council shall hold a public hearing and may adopt an ordinance establishing the setback line. Notice of the hearing shall be published at least ten days prior to the hearing. 
D.  Changes. If the city council proposes a change in the setback line recommended by the planning commission, the change shall be referred to the planning commission for a report before the ordinance is adopted. 
E.  Building Permits Moratorium. During the period between the declaration of intention to establish a setback line and the effective date of an ordinance establishing the setback line, no building permit shall be issued for the erection of a building or structure in the proposed setback area. 
(Prior code § 5-14)  
15.36.040 - Conformance. 
A.  After the adoption of a specific setback line on an existing or planned street, no building or structure or addition thereto shall be erected closer to the centerline of the street than the setback line so established, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
B.  Exemptions from the setback line: 
1.  Cornices, eaves, canopies and similar architectural features of a building when conforming to Section 15.36.060; 
2.  Uncovered terraces and paved areas; 
3.  Fences and walls not exceeding forty-two inches in height; 
4.  Signs supported back of the setback line when conforming to Section 15.36.060; 
5.  Public street improvements and utility structures. 
(Prior code § 5-15)  
15.36.050 - Construction within. 
After a report from the planning commission, the city council may permit the erection of a building or structure within the setback area if the following requirements are met: 
A.  The strict application of the ordinance will result in unnecessary hardship to the property owner amounting to practical confiscation of the property. 
B.  The intent of the ordinance to preserve future rights-of-way from obstructions will be observed through the imposition of conditions necessary to protect the public welfare and safety. The conditions may include a recorded agreement from the property owner to remove the encroachment at no expense to the city or state agency at such time that it becomes necessary to widen the street. 
(Prior code § 5-16)  
15.36.060 - Zoning and building code requirements. 
Where a setback line has been established on a street, all applicable zoning yard requirements and building code requirements shall be measured from the setback line and shall be based, where applicable, on the future curbline of the street. 
(Prior code § 5-17)  
15.36.070 - Existing and future lines. 
A.  All setback lines previously adopted and in effect in the city as of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are continued. 
B.  All setback lines adopted in the future shall be established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-18)  
Chapter 15.40 - ON-SITE FIRE PROTECTION 
Sections: 
 
15.40.010 - Definitions. 
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
A.  "Adequate water supply" means the available flow of water which the fire chief determines is, or reasonably may be, necessary to protect any building or structure on the land to be developed against fire. (See Sections 15.40.050 and 15.40.060.) 
B.  "Develop" means to make any improvements or do any work upon land which would require the issuance of a building permit under the building code. 
C.  "Facilities" means such water mains, fire hydrants and appurtenances thereto as are necessary for fire protection. 
D.  "Fire chief" means the fire chief of the city or any other official in the fire department duly appointed by him to administer the provisions of this chapter. 
E.  "Judgment" means the judgment of the fire chief or his appointee as provided in this chapter, based upon sound fire prevention and engineering principles, which judgment shall be conclusive. 
F.  "Land" means any lot, parcel, acreage or building site, or any other land or portion thereof embraced within a common plan of development whether improved or unimproved. 
G.  "Reasonable working distance" means the distance from the available water supply and shall be deemed not to exceed three hundred feet, except where, in the judgment of the fire chief, the application of such rule under the circumstances would be harsh or impracticable. 
(Prior code § 5-30)  
15.40.020 - Facilities required. 
A.  When any land is proposed to be developed in such a manner that all or a substantial part of any building or structure thereon will be in excess of the reasonable working distance from an adequate water supply for fire protection facilities upon the land as is determined necessary under this chapter, the fire chief may prescribe that the development include the installation of such on-site fire protection facilities as in his judgment are necessary to provide an adequate water supply on the land to be developed. The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or developer. 
B.  All facilities required to be installed under this chapter shall be approved by and meet the specifications of the fire chief as to location, size and type of materials and manner of installation. 
C.  Construction shall be carried out under the inspection of the department of public works. All inspection costs shall be paid by the owner or developer. 
D.  This section shall not apply to "U" occupancies as classified by the building code. 
(Ord. 1759 § 3 (part), 2005: prior code § 5-31)  
15.40.030 - Building permit plans—Review for referral to fire chief. 
A.  Every application for a building permit and its accompanying plans shall be reviewed by the division of building inspection to determine whether any of the following facts exist: 
1.  The proposed development will consist of one or more buildings, or additions thereto whose total floor area including that of any existing buildings, will exceed twenty-five thousand square feet; 
2.  The proposed development will consist of one or more buildings, or additions thereto, any one of which exceeds either two stories or thirty feet in height; 
3.  The proposed development will consist of one or more buildings, or additions thereto, wherein any part of any building is situated more than two hundred feet from the public street to which such building has its principal access, measured along the route of such access; 
4.  The proposed development is such that there is reasonable cause to believe that all or a substantial part of any building or structure thereon will be or become in excess of the reasonable working distance from an adequate supply of water for protection as defined in this chapter. 
B.  If any fact set out in subsection A of this section exists, the division of building inspection shall submit the plans for the proposed development to the fire chief for his review. 
(Prior code § 5-32)  
15.40.040 - Building permit plans—Review by fire chief. 
When any plans are submitted under Section 15.40.030, the fire chief shall review the same and determine whether any building or structure on the land to be developed is or will by virtue of such development become in excess of the reasonable working distance from an adequate water supply. If upon such review it is determined either that the fire protection facilities mentioned in this chapter are not required or that they are adequately provided for in the plans, the fire chief shall endorse his approval thereon. If adequate provision for such facilities is not made the fire chief shall either disapprove the plans and indicate to the division of building inspection in writing wherein they are deficient (in which case any revised plans shall be resubmitted to the fire chief) or approve the plans subject to conditions. 
(Prior code § 5-33)  
15.40.050 - Water flow and pressure. 
A.  The following table shall serve as a guide to determine the flow required to furnish an adequate water supply to individual buildings: 
FLOW REQUIRED, IN GALLONS PER MINUTE 
Item 	Formula 	Not to Exceed 	Gallons/min. Required 
1. Ground area of Building in square feet (a) 	1,000 plus A/10 	5,000 	Add_______ 
2. Height in number of stories 	500 x (H-1) 	3,000 	Add_______ 
3. Exposure to and from the building (spreading or conflagration factor) 	Judgment 	2,000 	Add____________ 
TOTAL 	_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
4. Credit for fireproof or semifireproof construction 	Not in excess of 1/3 of the sum of items 1 plus 2 plus 3 		Less_______ 
BALANCE 	_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
5. Credit for nonhazardous contents 	Not in excess of 1/4 of the sum of items 1 plus 2 plus 3 		Less_______ 
BALANCE 	_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
6. Credit for automatic sprinklers and other protective equipment 	Judgment 	3,000 	Less_______ 
7. In no case shall the quantity be less than the number of fire engines responding on first alarm times 500 			
TOTAL 	_______ 	_______ 	_______ 
 
B.  The required quantity of water shall be available with provision for a residual pressure in the mains, taking into account ground elevation, of not less than twenty pounds, except where the building is equipped with automatic sprinklers dependent upon the distribution mains for supply, in which case the required fireflow shall be available, at a residual pressure which will correspond to fifteen pounds on the top line of the sprinklers. 
(Prior code § 5-34 (part))  
15.40.060 - Water sources. 
City hydrants shall be taken into account in determining whether an adequate water supply exists with reference to a given building. Other water sources may be counted as contributing to the supply if, in the judgment of the fire chief, the source is dependable, readily accessible, adaptable to use by city equipment and within reasonable working distance of the building or portions thereof, to be served by the source. No source on private land adjoining the land to be developed shall be considered to be readily accessible unless there shall be obtained the irrevocable and unobstructed right to use the same upon such terms as may be approved by the fire chief. 
(Prior code § 5-35)  
15.40.070 - Firefighting equipment access. 
Whenever any hydrant or other appurtenance for use by the fire department is required to be installed under the provisions of this chapter, there shall be included in the development plans and delineated thereon, adequate provision for access to and from every such hydrant and appurtenance by city firefighting equipment. The access shall be in the form of an improved, permanently maintained roadway or of an open paved area, or of any combination thereof designed, constructed and at all times maintained in such a manner that there shall be an accessway kept clear and unobstructed and having sufficient width and height clearance to permit ingress and egress by city firefighting equipment. 
(Prior code § 5-36)  
15.40.080 - Final inspection. 
No final inspection under the building code as to all or any portion of the development is completed and no certificate of occupancy or temporary certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the installation of the prescribed facilities and accessways has been completed and the final approval thereof by the fire chief and department of public works given as provided in this chapter, and all inspection costs paid. Such final inspection shall be conducted solely to implement the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter and is in no manner an assurance on the part of the city that the facilities are or will continue to be in good working order. 
(Prior code § 5-37)  
15.40.090 - Facility maintenance. 
All on-site fire protection facilities, whether installed before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall at all times be maintained as installed, free of leaks and in good working order by the owner or lessee thereof. To this end the fire chief is empowered in his discretion to conduct periodic tests and inspections of the facilities. 
(Prior code § 5-38)  
15.40.100 - Access maintenance. 
Whenever any on-site fire protection facilities or accessways have been installed, as provided in this chapter, either pursuant to this chapter or prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the following provisions shall be applicable: 
A.  Hydrants. With respect to hydrants located along private accessways where curbs exist, the curbs shall be painted red or otherwise appropriately marked by the owner, lessee or other person in charge of the premises to prohibit parking for a distance of fifteen feet in either direction from any such hydrant. In such cases where curbs do not exist, there shall be appropriate markings painted on the pavement, or signs erected, or both, giving notice that parking is prohibited for a distance of fifteen feet away from any hydrant. When such areas are signed or marked as provided in this subsection, no person shall park or leave standing a vehicle within fifteen feet of any such fire hydrant. 
B.  Accessway Obstruction. No owner or lessee of the land or proprietor, partner, officer, director, manager or agent of any business or other activity carried on upon the land shall, after receiving notice thereof, permit or otherwise allow, and no person shall cause any activity, practice or condition to occur or exist or continue to exist upon the land which shall lessen, obstruct or impair the access required to be maintained under Section 15.40.070. 
C.  Parking Prohibitions. If in the judgment of the fire chief it is necessary to prohibit vehicular parking along private accessways in order to keep them clear and unobstructed, he may require the owner, lessee or other person in change of the premises to paint the curbs red and/or paint the edge of the roadway red to a width of four inches, upon which is closely marked the words "Fire Lane" in white letters four inches in height and have a three-fourths-inch stroke, at intervals of not less than fifty feet. 
At the property owner's expense, the fire chief shall direct the owner, lessee or other person in charge to post at all entrances and/or at the extremities of each fire lane a sign reading "FIRE LANE - NO PARKING AT ANY TIME - VIOLATORS SUBJECT TO TOW AT OWNER'S EXPENSE. Lodi City Code Section 15.40.100c; CVC Section 22500(1), Lodi Police Department, 333-6727." Thereafter, it is unlawful for such owner, lessee or other person in charge to fail to install and maintain in good condition the form of notice so prescribed. When such areas are marked and signed as provided in this subsection, no person shall park or leave standing a vehicle adjacent to any such sign and shall be subject to being towed or removed at the direction of a peace officer. 
All required signs shall be twenty-four inches vertically by eighteen inches horizontally. The minimum size lettering on the sign shall be as follows: 
Sign Lettering 	Minimum Height (inches) 
FIRE LANE 	2 
NO PARKING AT ANY TIME 	2 
VIOLATORS SUBJECT TO TOW AT OWNER'S EXPENSE 	2 
Lodi City Code 	
15.40.100 	1 
C.V.C. Sec. 22500(1) 	1 
Lodi Police Department 	
333-6727 	1 
 
The sign face shall be white in color. All lettering or printing shall be red in color, and all two-inch letters shall have a minimum one-fourth-inch stroke, and all one-inch letters shall have a minimum three-sixteenths-inch stroke. 
D.  Prosecutions. Chapter 1.08 of this code applies to prosecutions under this section. 
(Ord. 1759 § 3 (part), 2005: Ord. 1384 § 1, 1986; prior code § 5-40)  
15.40.110 - Alteration or modification. 
On-site fire protection facilities, whether installed before or after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, may be altered or repaired with the written consent of the fire chief; provided, that such alteration or repairs shall be carried out in conformity of Section 15.40.030. 
(Ord. 1759 § 3 (part), 2005: prior code § 5-39)  
Chapter 15.44 - OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS AND DEDICATIONS 
Sections: 
 
15.44.010 - Purpose. 
The purpose of this chapter is to set forth requirements for the installation of nonexistent or inadequate nonconforming public off-site improvements and the dedication of public rights-of-way and easements as a condition to the issuance of a building permit or development approval in order to protect and improve the public's safety, convenience and general welfare. 
(Prior code § 5-19)  
15.44.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Development" means all residential, commercial and industrial construction or remodeling, as well as developments of public agencies, including but not limited to on-site parking facilities, open storage areas, and other similar improvements which may or may not require a building permit. 
B.  "Off-site improvement" means all publicly owned facilities that are or will be located in the public right-of-way which typically include, but are not limited to, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street paving, storm drains, water mains, sewer lines, fire hydrants, electrical facilities, street lights and landscaping. 
(Prior code § 5-20)  
15.44.030 - Compliance required. 
No building permit shall be issued for a development nor shall an on-site parking facility, open storage area or other similar improvement be created or constructed within the city unless compliance is made with the public off-site improvements and dedication requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 5-21)  
15.44.040 - Exemption or deferment. 
A.  The requirements of Section 15.44.030 do not apply if the cost of development within any twelve-month period is determined by the public works director to be less than twenty-five thousand dollars. This amount shall be adjusted by the public works director on July 1st of each year, beginning on July 1, 1994, based upon the change of the U.S. Average Engineering News-Record Building Cost Index, using the following formula: 
Amount = $25,000 × ENR Index for June 
2838 (ENR Index for June 1992) 
and that the amount shall be rounded to the nearest one hundred dollars. 
B.  The city may defer compliance with the requirements of Section 15.44.030 if the public works director determines that it would be in the best interest of the city to cause all or a portion of the work to be done on an area-wide basis, provided that the property owner enters into an agreement with the city agreeing that the property owner will undertake and start the construction of the required improvements within ninety days after notice is given by the city. The agreement shall further provide that in the event of default in undertaking and completing the required improvements within the time specified, the city may cause such work to be done and the cost thereof to be assessed as a lien against the property. Such agreement shall also be considered as a covenant running with the land and shall be recorded in order to constitute notice to any prospective buyer of such property. The city manager is authorized to execute such an agreement for and on behalf of the city. 
(Prior code § 5-22; Ord. 1569 § 1, 1993)  
15.44.050 - Improvements required. 
A.  The off-site improvements required for all developments under this chapter are as follows: 
1.  Curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveways and street improvements shall be installed fronting all portions of the developer's property being developed which fronts upon a public street or future public street. The improvements shall be in accordance with the then-current city policies and city standards. 
2.  Water, sewer, storm drains and landscaping shall be installed in accordance with the then-current city policies and city standards. 
3.  Electrical facilities and street lights shall be installed in accordance with plans prepared and approved by the city utility department. 
B.  Plans showing the off-site improvements shall be prepared by a registered civil engineer unless waived by the public works director. 
C.  The installation of off-site improvements within existing public right-of-way requires an encroachment permit from the city. 
D.  If off-site improvements exist that do not meet existing city standards or are inadequate or a hazard to the general public, then these off-site improvements shall be reconstructed to current city standards. 
E.  No occupancy permit shall be issued or utility connections made unless the required off-site improvements and dedications have been completed and approved. 
F.  Street improvements and dedications made pursuant to this chapter are eligible for reimbursement as provided in Chapter 16.24 of this code. 
(Ord. 1527 § 9, 1991; prior code § 5-23)  
15.44.060 - Right-of-way and easement dedications. 
The public right-of-way and easement dedications required under this chapter shall be in conformance with the then-current city design standards and adopted specific plans. The required dedications shall be made prior to the issuance of a building permit or allowing the development to proceed. 
(Prior code § 5-24)  
15.44.070 - Completion or guarantee. 
Any person required to construct off-site improvements under this chapter shall either complete same to city specifications or shall guarantee such completion by furnishing to the city, prior to the issuance of a building permit or allowing a development to proceed, a surety bond, instrument of credit, or cash in the amount of the development's construction cost. 
(Prior code § 5-25)  
15.44.080 - Inspection and approval. 
Off-site improvements required under this chapter are subject to the inspection and approval of the public works director. 
(Prior code § 5-26)  
15.44.090 - Fees. 
The then-current applicable development fees must be paid prior to the issuance of a building permit, or allowing the development to proceed, including: 
A.  Development impact mitigation fees; 
B.  Wastewater connection fee; 
C.  Engineering fee; 
D.  Other established development fees and fees for service. 
(Ord. 1518 § 3, 1991: prior code § 5-27)  
15.44.100 - Appeal. 
A.  Any person required to make improvements or dedications under this chapter may appeal any decision of the public works director to the city council. Such appeals shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen days of the date notice of the decision is made. 
B.  The city council shall hold a hearing on the appeal within thirty days of the date on which the appeal was filed. The city clerk shall send written notice of the hearing to the appellant at least seven days prior to the date of the hearing. The determination of the city council shall be considered as final. 
(Prior code § 5-28)  
Chapter 15.48 - SCHOOL FACILITIES DEDICATIONS 
Sections:  
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
15.48.010 - Title and purpose. 
The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as the "school facilities dedication ordinance." The purpose of this chapter is to provide a method for financing interim school facilities necessitated by new residential developments causing conditions of overcrowding. 
(Prior code § 19A-1A)  
15.48.020 - Statutory authority—Conflicts. 
This chapter is enacted pursuant to Chapter 4.7 (commencing with Section 65970) of Division 1 of Title 7 of the Government Code. In the case of any conflict between the provisions of this chapter and those of Chapter 4.7, the latter shall prevail. 
(Prior code § 19A-1B)  
15.48.030 - General plan conformance. 
The city's general plan provides for the location of public schools. Interim school facilities to be constructed from fees or land required to be dedicated, or both, shall be consistent with the general plan. 
(Prior code § 19A-1C)  
15.48.040 - Regulation promulgation. 
The council may from time to time, by resolution, issue regulations to establish administration, procedures, interpretation and policy direction for this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19A-1D)  
Article II. - Definitions 
 
15.48.050 - Applicability. 
Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this article govern the construction of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19A-2A)  
15.48.060 - Developer. 
"Developer" includes every person, firm, corporation, or other business entity constructing or installing a new dwelling unit or mobile home space, either directly or through the services of any employee, agent or independent contractor. 
(Prior code § 19A-2B)  
15.48.070 - Dwelling unit. 
"Dwelling unit" includes each single-family dwelling and each unit of a multiunit dwelling structure designed as a separate habitation for one or more occupants. "Dwelling unit" also includes a new factory-built housing installed in accordance with Section 19960 et seq. of the Health and Safety Code of the state. 
(Prior code § 19A-2C)  
15.48.080 - Mobile home space. 
"Mobile home space" includes each space in a mobile home park designed to be used for parking a mobile home on a temporary, semipermanent or permanent basis. 
(Prior code § 19A-2D)  
15.48.090 - School districts. 
"School districts" includes all school districts located in whole or in part within the city. 
(Prior code § 19A-2E)  
15.48.100 - Conditions of overcrowding. 
"Conditions of overcrowding" means that the total enrollment of a school, including enrollment from proposed development, exceeds the capacity of such school as determined by the governing body of the district. 
(Prior code § 19A-2F)  
15.48.110 - Reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding. 
"Reasonable methods for mitigating conditions of overcrowding" include, but are not limited to: 
A.  Any agreements entered into by the affected school district which would alleviate conditions of overcrowding caused by new residential development; 
B.  The use of relocatable structures, student transportation and school boundary realignments; 
C.  The use of available bond or state loan revenues to the extent authorized by law; 
D.  The use of funds which could be available from the sale of surplus school district real property and funds available from other appropriate sources, as determined by the governing body of affected school districts; 
E.  Agreements between a subdivider or other developer of residential developments in the affected school district whereby temporary-use buildings will be leased to or for the benefit of the school district or temporary-use buildings owned by the school district will be used. 
(Prior code § 19A-2G)  
15.48.120 - Residential development 
"Residential development" means a project containing residential dwellings, including mobile homes, of one or more units, or a division of land for the purpose of constructing one or more residential dwelling units. Residential development includes, but is not limited to, a preliminary or final development plan, a subdivision tentative map, a parcel map, conditional use permit, or any other discretionary permit for new residential dwelling use. 
(Prior code § 19A-2H)  
Article III. - Procedure and Requirements 
 
15.48.130 - Notice of overcrowding by school districts—Findings. 
The governing body of a school district which operates, in whole or in part, within the city may at any time, pursuant to Government Code Section 65971, notify the city council that it has found that: 
A.  Conditions of overcrowding exist in one or more attendance areas within the district which will impair the normal functioning of educational programs including the reason for such conditions existing; 
B.  All reasonable methods of mitigating conditions of overcrowding have been evaluated; and 
C.  No feasible methods for reducing such conditions exist. Such notification shall remain in effect until withdrawn in writing by the governing body of the school district. 
(Prior code § 19A-3A)  
15.48.140 - Notice of overcrowding by school districts—Contents. 
The notice shall be in writing and shall set forth the clear and convincing evidence upon which such findings are based. It shall specify: 
A.  The findings listed in Section 15.48.130; 
B.  The findings of fact and a summary of the evidence upon which the findings in Section 15.48.130 were based; 
C.  The mitigation measures and methods, including those listed in Section 15.48.110, considered by the school district in any determination made concerning them by the district; 
D.  The precise geographic boundaries of the overcrowded attendance area or areas; 
E.  Such other information as may be required by council regulation. 
(Prior code § 19A-3B)  
15.48.150 - Designation of overcrowded school. 
Upon receipt of a notice as described in Section 15.48.130, the city council shall schedule and conduct a public hearing on the notification for the purpose of allowing interested parties to comment on the matter. Following such hearing, the city council shall determine whether it concurs in such finding. If the city council concurs, it shall by resolution designate the school as an overcrowded school. 
(Prior code § 19A-3C)  
15.48.160 - Residential development approval—Findings required. 
Within the attendance area where it has been determined pursuant to Section 15.48.150 that conditions of overcrowding exist, the city's planning agency shall not thereafter approve a residential development as defined in Section 15.48.200 unless the planning agency makes one of the following findings: 
A.  That pursuant to this chapter, provision has been made for payment of fees, dedication of land, or both, or some other provision has been agreed upon by the applicant and the school district for a residential development to mitigate the conditions of overcrowding within that attendance area; or 
B.  There exist specific overriding fiscal, economic, social or environmental factors which, in the judgment of the city planning agency, would benefit the community as a whole, thereby justifying the approval of a residential development otherwise subject to the provisions of this chapter without requiring the payment of fees or the dedication of land or other alternative provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19A-3D)  
15.48.170 - Residential development approval—Exemptions. 
Residential developments shall be exempt from the requirements of this chapter when they consist only of the following: 
A.  Any modification or remodeling of an existing legally established dwelling unit that does not create an additional dwelling unit; 
B.  The proposed development is located within a redevelopment area designated by a redevelopment agency pursuant to the Community Redevelopment Law, Health and Safety Code Section 33000; or 
C.  A condominium project converting an existing apartment building into a condominium where no new dwelling units are added; 
D.  Any rebuilding of a legally established dwelling unit destroyed or damaged by fire, explosion, act of God or other accident or catastrophe; 
E.  Any rebuilding of an historical building recognized, acknowledged and designated as such by the planning agency. 
(Prior code § 19A-3E)  
15.48.180 - District schedule of use. 
Following the decision of the city to require the dedication of land or the payment of fees, or both, the governing body of the school district shall submit a schedule specifying how it will use the land or fees, or both, to solve the conditions of overcrowding. The schedule shall include the school sites to be used, the classroom facilities to be made available, and the time when such facilities will be available. In the event the governing body of the school district cannot meet the schedule, it shall submit modifications to the city council and the reasons for the modifications. 
(Prior code § 19A-3F)  
15.48.190 - Land or fees—Preference of developer. 
At the time of filing an application for the approval of a proposed residential development located in an attendance area where the council has concurred with the findings of the school district as provided in this chapter, the applicant shall, as part of such filing, indicate whether he prefers to dedicate land for interim school facilities or to pay a fee in lieu thereof or do a combination of these. If the applicant prefers to dedicate land, he shall describe the specific land. 
(Prior code § 19A-3G)  
15.48.200 - Land or fees—Determination. 
At the time of initial residential development or building permit approval, the planning agency shall determine whether to require a dedication of land within the development, payment of a fee in lieu thereof, or a combination of both. In making this determination, the agency shall consider the following factors: 
A.  Whether lands offered for dedication will be consistent with the general plan; 
B.  The topography, soils, soil stability, drainage, access, location and general utility of land in the development available for dedication; 
C.  Whether the location and amount of lands proposed to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, will bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the needs of the community for interim elementary and/or high school facilities including all mandated educational programs and will be reasonably related and limited to the need for schools caused by the development; 
D.  Any recommendations made by affected school districts concerning the location and amount of lands to be dedicated; 
E.  If only a subdivision is proposed, whether it will contain fifty parcels or less. 
(Prior code § 19A-3H)  
15.48.210 - Dedication. 
When the dedication of land is required, the developer shall make a written offer of dedication to the affected school district, which shall then have thirty days in which to formally accept or reject the offer. If the school district rejects the offer of dedication, it shall notify the city council in writing of its reasons for so doing. The city council shall then determine whether to assess fees in lieu of dedication or require the dedication of other land within the proposed development. If the school district takes no action within thirty days of receiving the written offer, such offer shall be deemed to have been rejected. 
(Prior code § 19A-3I)  
15.48.220 - Fee payment. 
If the payment of fees is required, such payment shall be made at the time the building permit is issued. Only the payment of fees may be required in subdivisions or developments containing fifty parcels or less. 
(Prior code § 19A-3J)  
15.48.230 - Amount required. 
A.  The location and amount of land to be dedicated or the amount of fees to be paid, or both, shall bear a reasonable relationship and will be limited to the need for interim school facilities caused by the development. The location of land to be dedicated shall be consistent with the city's general plan. 
B.  The council shall by resolution establish the amount of fees to be paid when required pursuant to the terms of this chapter. The rate for mobile homes shall be established by dwelling unit. The rate for all other dwelling units shall be established on a per bedroom basis. Any room designed for sleeping which has a closet is a bedroom for the purposes of this chapter. The total land area required to be dedicated pursuant to this chapter shall be at least equal in monetary value to the fees which would be otherwise required. The planning agency shall determine and establish the monetary value of land area for the purposes of this section. 
(Prior code §§ 19A-4A, 19A-4B)  
15.48.240 - Use of land and fees. 
All land or fees, or both, collected pursuant to this chapter and transferred to a school district shall be used only for the purpose of providing interim elementary or high school classroom or related facilities. 
(Prior code § 19A-5A)  
15.48.250 - Accounting and report by school district. 
Any school district receiving funds pursuant to this chapter shall remain a separate account for any fees paid and shall file a report with the city council on the balance in the account at the end of the previous fiscal year and the facilities leased, purchased, or constructed during the previous fiscal year. In addition, the report shall specify which attendance areas will continue to be overcrowded when the fall term begins and where conditions of overcrowding will no longer exist. Such report shall be filed by August 1st of each year and shall be filed more frequently at the request of the city council. 
(Prior code § 19A-5B)  
15.48.260 - Termination of requirements. 
If overcrowded conditions no longer exist, the city shall cease levying any fee or requiring the dedication of any land pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 19A-5C)  
15.48.270 - School capacity determination. 
The governing body of each school district shall, no later than May 1st of each year, determine the capacity of each school in the district and project the enrollment expected in each school for the next succeeding school year. This information shall be kept on file at the district offices and shall be made available to the public pursuant to the Public Records Act. The determination of capacity shall set forth the formulas or other methods employed by the governing body in making its determination. 
(Prior code § 19A-5D)  
Chapter 15.52 - CAMP CARS AND TRAILER CAMPS 
Sections: 
 
15.52.010 - Definitions. 
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section: 
A.  "Camp car" or "trailer" is any vehicle used for living or sleeping purposes and which is equipped with wheels or similar devices used for the purpose of transporting the unit from place to place, whether by motive power or other means. 
B.  "Campground" is any place, area or tract of land upon which is located any camp car or trailer used for living or sleeping purposes. 
(Prior code § 6-1)  
15.52.020 - Applicability—Conformance. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable to every campground within the incorporated area of the city, and it is unlawful for any person maintaining, operating, conducting or carrying on any such campground or for any person living or sleeping in any camp car or trailer located in a campground or any other person to violate or contribute in any way to the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-2)  
15.52.030 - Permit—Required. 
Before building or constructing any campground or any improvements thereon situated or to be situated, the owner or party intending to operate the same shall first apply for and obtain such "special use permit" or other permit from the city council. 
(Prior code § 6-3)  
15.52.040 - Permit—Application. 
Each application for a use permit to operate shall be in writing, upon a form provided by the city council for that purpose. It shall state the name and address of the applicant and a description of the property whereon or wherein it is proposed to conduct a campground. It shall also contain such other information as the city council may require and it shall be filed by the applicant. It shall be filed with the city clerk not less than five days nor more than thirty days before the campground is made. 
(Prior code § 6-4)  
15.52.050 - Permit—Posting. 
It is unlawful for any person to establish, maintain, conduct or carry on any campground unless there shall be at all times posted in a conspicuous place at the campground the permit obtained from the city council in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-5)  
15.52.060 - Sanitation and maintenance. 
Every person owning or operating a campground shall maintain such campground and any toilets, baths or other permanent equipment in connection therewith in a clean and sanitary condition and shall maintain the equipment in a state of good repair, and it shall be the duty of the operator to comply with all rules and regulations contained in this chapter governing the operation and maintenance of such campgrounds. 
(Prior code § 6-6)  
15.52.070 - Layout—Sites. 
Every campground shall be laid out with available unoccupied space of not less than an average of five hundred square feet, but none of which shall be of an area of less than four hundred square feet for each camp car or trailer, and such available unoccupied spaces shall not be construed to include the space within any drive way. No more camping sites shall be allowed for such camping cars or trailers than the number of times five hundred square feet can be divided into the whole camping area of any campground exclusive of the area used for driveways. All camping spaces shall be designated with a separate number. Camp cars or trailers shall be arranged as near as possible, in rows abutting or facing on a driveway or clear unoccupied space of not less than eighteen feet in width which space shall have unobstructed access to a public street or alley. 
(Prior code § 6-7)  
15.52.080 - Drainage. 
Every campground shall be located on a well-drained area and the premises of every such campground or any existing campground shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of storm or casual waters. 
(Prior code § 6-8)  
15.52.090 - Water supply. 
An adequate supply of pure water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied to meet the requirements of such campground. Such water supply shall be obtained from faucets only, conveniently located in the campground. No dipping vessels or common cups shall be permitted. No camp car or trailer shall be located more than two hundred feet from a faucet. 
(Prior code § 6-9)  
15.52.100 - Removal of wheels—Fixing trailer. 
It is unlawful for any person owning or operating a camp car or trailer located in a campground to remove or cause to have removed the wheels or any similar transporting devices from the camp car or trailer or to otherwise permanently fix it to the ground in a manner that would prevent the ready removal of such camp car or trailer. Any such alteration to any camp car or trailer shall be construed as removing it from the requirements of this chapter and converting it into a dwelling and it shall thereupon be subject to the requirements of the building code of the city and the State Housing Act. 
(Prior code § 6-10)  
15.52.110 - Dogs at large. 
Dogs at no time shall be permitted to run at large in any campground. 
(Prior code § 6-11)  
15.52.120 - Water closets—Bathing facilities. 
A.  Flush water closets shall be provided in separate compartments for each sex within a distance of not more than two hundred feet from any camp unit. Not less than one water closet shall be provided for each fifteen persons, or fractional part thereof, of each sex. Such water closets shall be distinctly marked "For men" and "For women" and the location of the water closets plainly indicated by signs. All water closets shall be kept clean, free from obnoxious odor, flies, mosquitoes or other insects, be well lighted and ventilated directly to the outside air. 
B.  Shower baths or other bathing facilities with running water shall be provided in separate compartments for every twenty persons, or fractional part thereof, of each sex, within a distance of not more than two hundred feet from any camp unit. 
C.  All water closets or compartments containing bathing facilities shall be installed in proper compartments which shall be well lighted, ventilated, disinfected and screened. The floors and walls of such compartments shall be surfaced with impervious materials to a height of at least six feet. 
(Prior code § 6-12)  
15.52.130 - Solid-waste receptacles. 
There shall be provided in every campground such number of tight receptacles with close-fitting metal covers for garbage, refuse, ashes and rubbish as may be required to take care of the same, and such garbage receptacles shall at all times be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition, and such garbage shall be collected in accordance with provisions of this code and other city ordinances. 
(Prior code § 6-13)  
15.52.140 - Slop sinks. 
There shall be provided in every campground one or more slop sinks, properly connected with a sewer or cesspool, such sinks to be conveniently located at no greater distance than one hundred fifty feet from any camp car or trailer. 
(Prior code § 6-14)  
15.52.150 - Sewage disposal. 
It is unlawful to permit any wastewater or material from sinks, baths, showers or other plumbing fixtures in camp cars or trailers to be deposited upon the surface of the ground, and all such fixtures, when in use, must be connected to the city sewer system, or the drainage therefrom must be disposed of in a satisfactory and sanitary manner. 
(Prior code § 6-15)  
15.52.160 - Lighting. 
Every campground shall be provided with means of electrically lighting the same at night, and all water closets and bath units shall be provided with sufficient electric lighting facilities, and all water closets shall be kept lighted during the time from one-half hour after sunset until one-half hour before sunrise. 
(Prior code § 6-16)  
15.52.170 - Living or sleeping in camp cars or trailers. 
It is unlawful to occupy any camp car or trailer for living or sleeping purposes in the city unless the same is located upon a campground licensed under the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that where a residence building is built and used for residence purposes upon any lot within the city, the family or head thereof occupying such residence house may permit any relative or friend of such family to occupy for a term of not to exceed thirty days in the backyard of such lot, but not upon any adjoining or vacant lot, a camp car or trailer for sleeping purposes only, where the same is not prohibited as an auxiliary use under the terms and provisions of the zoning regulations of the city; provided, that no rent shall be charged for the privilege of so maintaining such camp car, trailer or tent in or upon the backyard. 
(Prior code § 6-17)  
15.52.180 - Register to be kept. 
The owner or operator of any such campground shall maintain at all times, in an orderly fashion, a register upon which shall be signed or entered the names of persons over the age of eighteen years occupying each camp car or trailer in such campground, the license number of each trailer or camp car, and motor number, if possible, opposite the names of such occupants, and the number of the camping space of such occupant shall also be entered after such names. Such register shall be kept at such campground at all times for a period of at least one year after such occupant has left or vacated such campground, and such records shall at all times be open to the inspection of any and all police officers of the city, sheriffs or other peace officers of the state and United States. 
(Prior code § 6-18)  
Chapter 15.56 - ALARM SYSTEMS AND PERMITS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1942, § 1, adopted May 17, 2017, repealed the former Ch. 15.56, §§ 15.56.010—15.56.210, and enacted a new Ch. 15.56 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.56 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. 1669 § 1 (part), adopted 1999. 
 
15.56.010 - Findings. 
A.  The city council finds and determines that the majority of alarms that police officers respond to are false alarms. 
B.  False alarms present a threat to the public health and safety by endangering police officers and the public by causing an emergency response to a non-emergency event and utilize valuable police services for non-emergency purposes. 
C.  False alarms are typically the result of user errors, service errors, faulty installation or service, and equipment failure. 
D.  The city council finds and declares that false alarms constitute a nuisance. 
E.  In enacting this chapter, the city council has been mindful of the preemptive effect of state law, in particular Business and Professions Code Sections 7590, et seq., and, in reliance upon Business and Professions Code Section 7592.8, this Chapter governs False Alarm activations and responses. 
F.  The city council finds that any regulatory fee established by this chapter is not a tax as that term is defined in subdivision (e) of Section 1 of Article XIIIC of the California Constitution (Proposition 26) because it is a charge for a specific benefit conferred directly to alarm users which is not provided to those not charged and which does not exceed the reasonable costs of conferring the benefit. Moreover, the regulatory fee established is a charge imposed for the reasonable regulatory costs incurred by the city in the enforcement of this chapter and fines and penalties are imposed as a result of a violation of law. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.020 - Definitions. 
For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed in this chapter as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
A.  "Alarm agent" means any person employed by an alarm company operator whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to (excluding public safety officer) or causing others to respond to an alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility or a person who manages or supervises a person employed by an alarm company operator to perform any of the duties described in this chapter. 
B.  "Alarm company operator" means any person who, for any consideration whatsoever, engages in business or accepts employment to install, maintain, alter, sell on premises, monitor, or service alarm systems or who responds to alarm systems except for any alarm agent. "Alarm company operator" includes any entity that is retained by a licensed alarm company operator, a customer, or any other person or entity, to monitor one or more alarm systems, whether or not the entity performs any other duties within the definition of an alarm company operator. "Alarm company operator" however, does not include a business that merely sells from a fixed location or manufactures alarm systems unless the business services, installs, sells on premises, monitors, or responds to alarm systems at the protected premises. 
C.  "Alarm dispatch request" means a notification to the Lodi Police Department that an alarm system has been activated that requires a response by the police department. 
D.  "Alarm response manager" (ARM) means a person designated by an alarm company operator that is knowledgeable of the provisions of this chapter, and has the ability and authority to ensure compliance with such provisions and respond to requests from the police department and deactivate or repair an alarm system. 
E.  "Alarm site" means a location served by one or more alarm systems. In a multi-unit building or complex, each unit shall be considered a separate alarm site, if served by a separate alarm system; in a single-unit building that houses two or more persons with separate alarm systems, each person's alarm system will be considered a separate alarm site. 
F.  "Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices arranged to signal the presence of an event or situation requiring urgent attention and to which police are expected to respond. 
Alarm systems include, but are not limited to silent alarms, audible alarms, proprietor alarms, and direct dial telephone devices. The following devices shall not constitute alarm systems within the meaning of this section: 
1.  Devices which are not installed, operated, or used for the purpose of reporting an emergency to the police department; 
2.  Alarm devices affixed to motor vehicles, trailers, or trailer coaches (as defined in California Vehicle Code Sections 415, 6300 and 635), vessel, or aircraft; and 
3.  Alarm devices installed on a temporary basis by the police department. 
G.  "Alarm user" means any person who owns, leases, rents, possesses, or operates an alarm system. 
H.  "Alarm user awareness class" means a class conducted for the purpose of educating alarm users about the prevention of false alarms and the responsible use, operation, and maintenance of alarm systems. 
I.  "Applicant" means a person, firm, or corporation who files an application for a permit as provided for in this chapter. 
J.  "Audible alarm" means an alarm system that emits a sound when activated. 
K.  "Automatic calling/dialing system" means an alarm system that automatically sends over telephone lines, by direct connect or otherwise, a recorded message indicating an emergency situation exists. 
L.  "Cancellation" means the termination of a police department response to an alarm dispatch request that is made before a responding officer arrives at the alarm site in response to such alarm dispatch request. 
M.  "City" means the city of Lodi, California. 
N.  "Day" means a calendar day. 
O.  "Enhanced call confirmation" ("E.C.C.") means the requirement that alarm company operator must first attempt to determine whether an emergency exists before making an alarm dispatch request. E.C.C. requires an alarm company operator to attempt to contact: (1) a person at the alarm site; (2) an alarm user, or their designated representative; or (3) a responsible party; and make a second call to a different number, if the first attempt is unsuccessful. 
P.  "False alarm" means the activation of an alarm system resulting in a response by the police department, or other emergency personnel, where an emergency of the kind for which the alarm system was designed to give notice does not exist. 
Q.  "Nuisance alarm system" means an alarm system that has been declared a public nuisance pursuant to this chapter, due to excessive false alarms. 
R.  "One-plus duress alarm" means the manual activation of a silent alarm signal by entering a code that adds one number to the last digit of the normal arm/disarm code (e.g., normal code = 1234, one-plus duress code = 12345). 
S.  "Person" means an individual, firm, company, corporation, limited liability company, partnership, association, or organization. 
T.  "Police department" means the City of Lodi Chief of Police and his or her designee. 
U.  "Proprietor alarm" means an alarm which is not regularly serviced by an alarm company operator. 
V.  "Protective or reactive alarm system" means an alarm system that produces a temporary disability or sensory deprivation through use of chemical, electrical, sonic or other means, including use of devices that obscure or disable a person's vision. 
W.  "Responsible party" means a person who is capable of appearing at an alarm site upon request who possesses: (1) lawful access to the alarm site; (2) a code to disarm or disable the alarm system; and (3) authority to approve repairs or modifications to the alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.030 - Permit for alarm system required. 
No person who owns, leases, rents, or otherwise possesses an alarm system shall operate such alarm system without first obtaining an alarm permit issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. A separate alarm permit is required for each alarm site. 
Owners of proprietor alarms shall abide by all provisions of this chapter and are subject to all applicable fees, fines, suspensions, penalties or other requirements. 
It is unlawful for any person to use an alarm system without having a valid alarm permit. Any person using an alarm system without having a valid permit shall be subject to a fine in an amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.040 - Application for alarm permit. 
An application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the police department on forms provided by the city, and the applicant shall, at the time of application, pay a fee in an amount as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. The application shall be signed and verified by the alarm user of the alarm system for which the permit is requested, and the application shall contain such information as may be required by the police department in order to ensure that the permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits provided for in this chapter shall be issued by the police department and shall be nontransferable. 
The applicant shall provide the names, addresses and phone numbers of the alarm company operator selling or installing the alarm system, or if the alarm user is not under a service contract with an alarm company operator, at least two responsible parties that are accessible in the event of an emergency. Failure on the part of the alarm user to keep emergency contact numbers provided in the alarm permit application current shall be grounds for revocation of the alarm permit. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.050 - Alarm permit issuance. 
The police department may issue an alarm permit to an applicant upon receipt of a completed alarm permit application form and the payment of all fees. 
The following shall be grounds for denial of an alarm permit: 
A.  The applicant has failed to pay an outstanding fee or fine assessed pursuant to this chapter; 
B.  The applicant's alarm permit has been suspended; 
C.  The applicant's alarm system is maintained or operated in violation of this chapter; 
D.  The alarm company operator designated in the permit application is not properly licensed; 
E.  Any false statement of a material fact made in an alarm permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.060 - Residential alarm permit fee and renewal. 
A.  Residential alarm permits shall be valid for a period of two years from the date of issuance. Residential alarm permit holders shall file a renewal application with updated information prior to the expiration of the alarm permit. A permit renewal fee shall not be required if an alarm permit is timely renewed. Residential alarm permits shall automatically expire upon change of ownership of the real property where the alarm site is located. 
B.  Residential alarm permit and renewal fees may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
C.  Residential alarm permit fees, as they now exist or may hereafter be modified under this chapter, may be reduced in an amount to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council for those residential alarm systems owned, operated, or rented by persons meeting the eligibility criteria for applicable electric service discounts, as provided in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 13.20. Proof of eligibility will be required by the city in order to qualify for the fee adjustment provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.070 - Non-residential alarm permit fees and renewal. 
A.  Non-residential alarm permits shall expire one year from the date of issuance, and must be renewed annually by the alarm user. Renewal applications and fees shall be submitted prior to the expiration of the permit. Non-residential alarm permits shall automatically expire upon change of ownership of the real property where the alarm site is located. 
B.  Non-residential alarm permit and renewal fees may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.080 - Suspension and revocation of permits. 
An alarm permit may be suspended and/or revoked as follows: 
A.  If, after investigation, the chief of police, or designee, determines that an alarm user has violated any provision of this chapter, has violated any rules and regulations promulgated by the chief of police pursuant to authority granted by this chapter, or fails to pay a false alarm penalty, fine, or fee as provided in this chapter, the chief of police, or designee, shall send to the alarm user, by registered mail, a notice of intent to suspend or revoke the permit, which notice shall specify the violation or violations determined by the chief of police, or designee, to exist. 
B.  The notice shall inform the alarm user of the right to appeal the determination of the chief of police, or designee, to suspend or revoke the permit to the city manager, as provided in Section 15.56.230 of this chapter. 
C.  The notice shall inform the alarm user that failure to remedy the violation or violations specified in the notice of suspension or revocation within fifteen days from receipt of notice of suspension or revocation, or within such additional time as may be allowed by the chief of police upon a showing of good cause thereof, or the filing of an appeal pursuant to Section 15.56.230, will cause the alarm permit to be suspended or revoked until the alarm permit has been reinstated. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.090 - Reinstatement of suspended alarm permits. 
Suspended alarm permits may be reinstated if the permittee fulfills the following requirements: 
A.  Pays all applicable reinstatement fees as may be established from time to time by resolution of the city council; 
B.  Pays, or otherwise resolves, all outstanding fees, fines, and other charges; 
C.  Submits a written statement from an alarm company operator or alarm agent certifying that the alarm system has been inspected, repaired or replaced, if necessary, and is functioning properly; and 
D.  Successfully completes an alarm user awareness class. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.100 - Alarm company operator registration. 
It is unlawful for any person to own, manage, conduct or carry on the business of selling, leasing, installing, servicing, maintaining, repairing, replacing, moving, removing or monitoring of an alarm system in any building, place or premises within the city without first having registered with the police department; provided, however, such registration shall not be recorded for any business which only sells or leases such alarm systems from a fixed location unless such business services, installs, monitors, or responds to such alarm systems at the alarm site. Registration shall be accomplished by furnishing the full name of the business and a copy of the state-issued alarm company operator identification card. There will be no charge for such registration. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.110 - Alarm agent registration. 
It is unlawful for any person to engage directly in the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing of an alarm system in or around any building, place or premises within the city without first having registered his or her full name and having filed with the chief of police a copy of his or her state-issued identification card; provided, however, nothing herein shall require a person to be so registered in order to install, service, repair, alter, replace or move an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by that person; and further provided, nothing herein shall require a person to so register when that person is merely a salesman for any business which is not required to obtain an alarm business permit, under the provisions of this chapter, if such salesman does not engage in any other activity related to this chapter, apart from selling. When registration is required, there will be no charge for registration. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.120 - Duties of alarm company operators—False alarm activations and responses. 
An alarm company operator shall: 
A.  Designate a person to serve as an alarm response manager (ARM) for the alarm company operator. The name, contact number, and email address of the ARM shall be provided to the police department; 
B.  Maintain all records pertaining to an alarm dispatch request for a period of one year from the date of such alarm dispatch request. Records must include the name, address and telephone number of the alarm user, each alarm system zone activated, and the time of alarm dispatch request. An alarm company operator shall furnish such records to the police department within fifteen days of receiving an alarm dispatch request; 
C.  Upon request, immediately provide the police department with the names and phone numbers of an alarm user's designated agents or persons who have been authorized to disable and/or reset an alarm user's alarm system; 
D.  Ensure that alarm users of alarm systems equipped with duress, robbery, hold-up or panic alarms have been provided adequate training as to the proper use, operation, and function of the alarm system; 
E.  Report alarm signals and alarm dispatch request cancellations to the police department using approved communication procedures designated by the police department; 
F.  Employ enhanced call confirmation (ECC) verification procedures prior to making an alarm dispatch request, except alarm signals transmitted by panic, duress, or holdup alarms; 
G.  Promptly inform the police department of any available zone information (north, south, front, back, door, window etc.) about the location of an alarm signal(s); 
H.  Promptly inform the police department of the type of alarm activation (silent or audible, interior or perimeter), if available; 
I.  Promptly inform the police department of any alarm site known, or believed, to have guard dog(s), pets, or a protective or reactive alarm system. During any alarm response to such alarm site, an alarm company operator shall contact a responsible party and confirm that he or she will respond to the alarm site to disarm the device or take control of any guard dog(s); 
J.  Promptly inform the police department whenever an alarm company operator knows that an alarm user or responsible party is at or on the way to the alarm site; 
K.  Provide within thirty days of the effective date of this chapter, a list of all alarm sites in the city that are monitored by the alarm company operator, which includes the alarm user, alarm site address, alarm user billing address, and telephone number to the police department. Alarm company operators shall provide an updated list of monitored alarm sites and alarm users upon request of the police department; 
L.  Not install an alarm system for a customer who does not have a current valid permit under this chapter; and 
M.  Not service a new customer who does not have a current valid alarm permit under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.130 - Notification of changes. 
Any alarm company operator registered with the police department shall, within thirty days, report to the chief of police any change of business name, address or ownership. 
Alarm company operators shall provide all required information, including the name, address and telephone number of new customers within fifteen days of installing an alarm system, or entering into a contract to monitor an alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.140 - Alarm user instruction required. 
A.  It is the responsibility of the alarm company operator or installer to instruct the alarm user of the requirements as defined in this chapter, the proper use and operation of the alarm system, whether silent or audible, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off such alarm system, and provide instruction on the prevention of false alarms. The alarm company operator and alarm installer shall advise the alarm user that intentionally activating an alarm system in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 of the California Penal Code and a violation of this chapter. 
B.  After the initial installation, it shall be the responsibility of the alarm user to instruct those individuals authorized by the alarm user to use the alarm system in the proper use and operation of such device or alarm system whether silent or audible, including specifically all necessary instruction in turning off or disabling such alarm system, and that intentionally activating an alarm system in the absence of an emergency is a criminal offense under Section 148.3 of the California Penal Code and a violation of this chapter. Alarm users shall be responsible for the actions of any persons authorized to operate an alarm system, and shall be jointly liable for any violations of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.150 - Duties of alarm users. 
Alarm users shall comply with the following duties: 
A.  Maintain their alarm site and alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms; 
B.  Make every reasonable effort to deactivate their alarm system; provide access to their alarm site; and provide alternative security for their alarm site when requested by the police department; 
C.  Keep written operating instructions for each alarm system at each alarm site; 
D.  Provide their alarm company operator with the current names and telephone numbers of at least two responsible parties who are capable of receiving notification of the activation of their alarm system and responding to the alarm site if necessary, to provide access to the alarm site and/or deactivate the alarm system; 
E.  Not allow their alarm system to transmit a false alarm; 
F.  Notify their alarm company operator if their alarm permit has been suspended or revoked; 
G.  Ensure that a representative of either an alarm company operator or the alarm user responds to the location of a false alarm within twenty minutes of receiving notice of the false alarm. If no representative is available, the police department may conduct an external visual check only; and 
H.  Provide the police department with updated information within five days if there are any changes to the information provided in the most recent permit application. 
Alarm users who fail to comply with the duties established in this section may be subject to a fine in an amount which may be established from time to time by resolution of the Lodi City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.160 - Automatic shutoff requirements—Audible alarms. 
All audible alarm systems shall include a device which will limit the generation of the audible sound of the system to not longer than fifteen consecutive minutes after the alarm system is activated and not repeat the fifteen minute audible sound more than two times during a single activation event. Such alarm systems shall include an automatic resetting device which shall cause the subject alarm system to be rearmed upon automatic shutoff. 
Alarm users with audible alarms shall appoint an agent who is authorized and capable of responding to such alarm site to disable the alarm system when it is activated and fails to reset itself, or continues to activate for more than thirty minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.170 - Power system. 
An alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of the normal utility electrical service will not activate the alarm system. The backup power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.180 - Testing alarm. 
An alarm user shall notify the police department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alterations or installations of alarm systems that would normally result in a police response. Any alarm system activated where such prior notice has been given shall not constitute a false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.190 - Prohibitions. 
A.  No person shall operate, install, or use an alarm system which, upon activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes. 
B.  No person shall operate or use an alarm system having an automatic calling/dialing system which, when activated, automatically dials a telephone line or transmits a pre-recorded message or signal to the police department or city. 
C.  No person shall operate or use an alarm system that emits an audible sound where the emission of such sound does not automatically cease within thirty minutes. 
D.  No person shall program an alarm system so that it is capable of sending a one-plus duress alarm. Alarm company operators may continue to report one-plus duress alarms received from alarm systems programmed with one-plus duress alarms installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives. 
E.  No person shall install, modify or repair single-action devices for the activation of hold-up, robbery, or panic alarms. New devices shall require two actions or an activation time delay to provide more positive assurance that the user intends to activate the device. 
F.  No person shall cause or allow an alarm system to emit a false alarm. 
Any person who fails to comply with the provisions of this section may be subject to a fine in an amount which may be established from time to time by resolution of the Lodi City Council. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.200 - False alarm penalty and fines. 
A.  Any person who maintains, uses, or possesses an alarm system that has caused a false alarm, or is from an alarm system which had been ordered disconnected by the chief of police, or designee, shall pay a false alarm penalty to the city, as follows: 
1.  For the second false alarm within a six-month period (January—June or July—December), the alarm user shall pay a false alarm penalty as may be designated from time to time by Lodi city council resolution. 
2.  For the third and each subsequent false alarm within that six-month period, the alarm user shall pay an additional false alarm penalty as may be designated from time to time by the Lodi City Council. 
B.  Failure to pay false alarm penalties as provided in this section shall be grounds for revocation of an alarm user's permit. The alarm user has the right of appeal as specified in Section 15.56.240 of this chapter, with respect to penalties imposed by the chief of police, or designee, for false alarms, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  An alarm dispatch request that has been cancelled prior to a police officer arriving at the alarm site, shall not be considered a false alarm. 
D.  An alarm company operator shall be assessed a fine in an amount designated by resolution of the Lodi City Council if a responding police officer determines that the actions, or inactions, of the alarm company operator caused the false alarm. Such false alarms shall be excluded from the number of false alarms attributed to an alarm user and the alarm user shall not be subject to a fine for such false alarm. 
E.  Any alarm company operator that fails to employ enhanced call confirmation ("E.C.C.") procedures shall be subject to a fine in an amount as designated by resolution of the Lodi City Council. 
F.  All fees and fines shall be due within thirty days of the date of written notice. Any fee or fine which is not paid within thirty days shall be subject to a late charge in an amount as designated by resolution of the Lodi City Council. 
G.  The permittee has the right to appeal any fines or penalties for false alarms, as specified in Section 15.56.240 of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.210 - Exceptions to false alarm count. 
The chief of police, or designee, may reduce the number of false alarms counted against an alarm user, and may waive all or part of any assessed fines or penalties, based on clear and convincing evidence establishing one or more of the following: 
A.  A false alarm was caused by the acts of a communications services provider, such as a telephone, cellular, or cable company; 
B.  A false alarm was caused by a power outage in duration of more than four hours; 
C.  A false alarm was caused by an act of God, such as severe weather; 
D.  An alarm dispatch request resulted from an event that was proven to be legitimate emergency; or 
E.  The alarm user has taken corrective action when multiple false alarms have occurred within a twenty-four-hour period, in which case, the events may be counted as one false alarm. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.220 - Procedure for imposition of false alarm fees, fines, suspension and revocation of permits. 
A.  Notice of Imposition. The chief of police, or designee, shall deliver a written notice of the imposition of false alarm fees, fines, or intent to suspend or revoke an alarm permit to the alarm user, by first class mail, at the address provided in the alarm permit, and the address where the false alarm originated, if different. The notice shall specify the amount of fees or fines to be assessed or action to be taken. The notice shall specify the date, time and nature of the events which are the basis for the imposition of false alarm fees, fines, or suspension, or revocation. The notice shall state any corrective actions required and state the consequences of failing to comply with the notice. 
B.  Right to Appeal. An alarm user may contest the assessment of a fee, fine, or alarm permit suspension or revocation by paying the fee or fine, if any, and timely requesting a hearing within fifteen days after service of the notice of imposition as set forth in Section 15.56.240 of this chapter. 
C.  Notice of Right to Appeal. A notice of the right to appeal shall be included with a notice of imposition of any fee, fine or action imposed under this chapter. The notice shall state that the alarm user has the right to request a hearing by submitting a written request within fifteen days after service of the notice of imposition. 
D.  Collection of Fees and Fines. In the event a person fails to pay fees and fines assessed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the city may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to collect any charges, together with interest, which may be due and payable, and all administrative costs of collection in the same manner as any other debt owing to the city may be collected. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.230 - Nuisance alarm systems. 
A.  The chief of police, or designee, may abate any nuisance alarm systems, by suspending or revoking an alarm permit, and demanding that the owner, lessee or user disconnect and cease using the nuisance alarm system, until the nuisance alarm system has been repaired or replaced within a reasonable time and the nuisance has been abated. 
B.  Any alarm system that causes two or more false alarms within a twelve-month period may be declared a nuisance alarm system by the chief of police, or designee. 
C.  Nuisance alarm systems shall be abated as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code, Chapter 1.10 and the alarm user shall be provided with notice of the intent to abate the alarm system, by serving the alarm user personally or by first class mail, at the address provided in the alarm permit and the address where the false alarm originated. The notice shall specify the date, time and nature of the events which are the basis of the abatement action, state the corrective actions to be taken and a reasonable timeline for complying, the consequences of failing to appeal, and the timeline and procedure to file an appeal. 
D.  It shall be unlawful to continue operating a nuisance alarm system after service of the notice of abatement. 
E.  If the alarm user has not corrected the nuisance alarm system within the time period specified in the notice to the alarm user, the nuisance alarm system may be disabled by the police department, or a third party under contract with the police department. The alarm user shall be liable for any costs or damages incurred in abating the nuisance. No liability will be assumed by the city or any of its agents in eliminating noise disturbance caused by nuisance alarm systems. 
F.  A hearing on whether an alarm system is a nuisance may be held in the same manner as set forth in Section 15.56.240 of this chapter. Alarm users shall be provided notice of the right to request such a hearing. 
G.  The chief of police, or designee, shall notify the alarm user of a decision in writing by certified mail, by no later than two weeks after the hearing. The decision may be appealed as set forth in Lodi Municipal Code Chapter 1.10. 
H.  A determination that an alarm system is a nuisance may be overturned by the chief of police, or designee, upon clear and convincing evidence that the nuisance has been abated and the cause of the false alarms or audible disturbances have been remedied. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.240 - Appeal procedure. 
If any person is aggrieved by an action of the city taken pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the person may file a notice of appeal with the city manager, setting forth the facts and circumstances and basis of the appeal. A notice of appeal shall be filed not later than fifteen days after service of a notice of the action to be appealed as provided in this chapter. The city manager, or designee, shall, within fifteen days from the date on which the appeal is filed, hold a hearing, consider all relevant evidence produced by the appellant, the city, and any other interested parties, make findings and determine the merits of the appeal. The city manager, or designee, may affirm, overrule, or modify the action of the city. The decision of the city manager, or designee, may be appealed within ten calendar days from the service of the notice of the decision, as provided in Lodi Municipal Code Sections 1.10.450 through 1.10.500 and 1.10.520, and the decision of the administrative hearing officer shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.250 - Fees. 
Fees prescribed in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city. The schedule of charges and fees for the alarm systems and permits will be established and adopted by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.260 - Limitation on liability. 
The city is under no obligation or duty to any alarm user or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter or the exercise of any privilege by any alarm user under this chapter, including, but not limited to, any defects in an alarm system, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any city officer, employee or agent. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.270 - Confidentiality of alarm information. 
Information provided to the city pursuant to this chapter is a public record, subject to exemptions from disclosure pursuant to state statutes. The chief of police or designee shall be charged with the responsibility of maintaining all records kept pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.280 - Criminal penalties. 
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
15.56.290 - Application of chapter. 
Any person who, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, possesses, has installed or uses an alarm system which requires a permit under this chapter, shall apply for and receive a permit as provided in this chapter, within three months after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1942, § 1, 5-17-2017)  
Chapter 15.60 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[9] 
Section: 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1829, § 1, adopted Mar. 17, 2010, repealed the former Ch. 15.60, Art. I, §§ 15.60.010—15.60.110, Art. II, §§ 15.60.120, 15.60.130, Art. III, §§ 15.60.140—15.60.180, Art. IV, §§ 15.60.190, 15.60.200, and enacted a new Ch. 15.60 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.60 pertained to flood damage prevention and derived from Ord. 1426 (part), 1988. 
 
Article I. - General Provisions 
 
15.60.010 - Statutory authorization. 
The Legislature of the State of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city of Lodi does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the city of Lodi are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare; and 
B.  These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.030 - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately-owned land within flood prone, mudslide [i.e. mudflow], or flood related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to: 
1.  Protect human life and health; 
2.  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
3.  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
4.  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
5.  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard; 
6.  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage; 
7.  Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and 
8.  Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.040 - Methods of reducing flood losses. 
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to: 
1.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities; 
2.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
3.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters; 
4.  Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; 
5.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.050 - Definitions. 
Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application. 
A.  "A zone" See "Special flood hazard area." 
B.  "Accessory structure" means a structure that is either: 
1.  Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or 
2.  A small, low-cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred twenty square feet. 
C.  "Accessory use" means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located. 
D.  "Alluvial fan" means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan-shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration. 
E.  "Apex" means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur. 
F.  "Appeal" means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
G.  "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow. 
H.  "Area of special flood hazard" See "Special flood hazard area." 
I.  "Base flood" means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "100-year flood"). 
J.  "Base flood elevation" (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
K.  "Basement" means any area of the building having its floor subgrade - i.e., below ground level - on all sides. 
L.  "Building" See "Structure." 
M.  "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation, or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials. 
N.  "Encroachment" means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain. 
O.  "Existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 1, 1978. 
P.  "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Q.  "Flood, flooding, or flood water" means: 
1.  A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and 
2.  The condition resulting from flood-related erosion. 
R.  "Flood boundary and floodway map (FBFM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway. 
S.  "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
T.  "Flood insurance study" means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the flood insurance rate map, the flood boundary and floodway map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
U.  "Floodplain or floodprone area" means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source —See "Flooding." 
V.  "Floodplain administrator" is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations. 
W.  "Floodplain management" means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans. 
X.  "Floodplain management regulations" means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in floodprone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage. 
Y.  "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93. 
Z.  "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as "regulatory floodway." 
AA.  "Floodway fringe" is that area of the floodplain on either side of the "regulatory floodway" where encroachment may be permitted. 
BB.  "Fraud and victimization" as related to Section 15.60.240 and Section 15.60.250 of this chapter, means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of Lodi will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty to one-hundred years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates. 
CC.  "Functionally dependent use" means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities. 
DD.  "Governing body" is the local governing unit, i.e. county or municipality that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
EE.  "Hardship" as related to Section 15.60.240 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of Lodi requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one's neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended. 
FF.  "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure. 
GG.  "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the secretary of the interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the secretary of interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the secretary of the interior or directly by the secretary of the interior in states without approved programs. 
HH.  "Levee" means a man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding. 
II.  "Levee system" means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices. 
JJ.  "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see "Basement" definition). 
1.  An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to: 
a.  The flood openings standard in Section 15.60.180(C)(3); 
b.  The anchoring standards in Section 15.60.180(A); 
c.  The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.60.180(B); 
d.  The standards for utilities in Section 15.60.190. 
KK.  "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle." 
LL.  "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
MM.  "Market value" is defined in the city of Lodi substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.60.130(B)(1). 
NN.  "Mean sea level" means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
OO.  "New construction," for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after April 16, 2010, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
PP.  "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 1, 1978. 
QQ.  "Obstruction" includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation, or other material in, along, across, or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard, or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream. 
RR.  "One-hundred-year flood" or "100-year flood." See "Base flood." 
SS.  "Program deficiency" means a defect in a community's floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations. 
TT.  "Public safety and nuisance" as related to Section 15.60.240 and Section 15.60.250 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin. 
UU.  "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
VV.  "Regulatory floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
WW.  "Remedy a violation" means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damage, implementing the enforcement provisions of the ordinance or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development. 
XX.  "Riverine" means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc. 
YY.  "Sheet flow area." See "Area of shallow flooding." 
ZZ.  "Special flood hazard area (SFHA)" means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH. 
AAA.  "Start of construction" includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
BBB.  "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home. 
CCC.  "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
DDD.  "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or 
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure." 
EEE.  "Variance" means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter. 
FFF.  "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
GGG.  "Water surface elevation" means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas. 
HHH.  "Watercourse" means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of city of Lodi. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the "Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for San Joaquin County, California, and Incorporated Areas" dated October 16, 2009, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps (FIRM's) and flood boundary and floodway maps (FBFM's), dated October 16, 2009, and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city of Lodi by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRM's and FBFM's are on file at the city of Lodi Public Works Department, 221 West Pine Street, Lodi, California, 95240. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.080 - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Lodi from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.090 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.100 - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: 
A.  Considered as minimum requirements; 
B.  Liberally construed in a manner most protective of property and human health and safety; and 
C.  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.110 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city of Lodi, any officer or employee thereof, the State of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
Article II. - Administration 
 
15.60.120 - Designation of the floodplain administrator. 
The public works director is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.130 - Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator. 
The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following: 
A.  Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine: 
1.  Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures; 
2.  All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; 
3.  The site is reasonably safe from flooding; 
4.  The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Lodi; 
5.  All letters of map revision (LOMR's) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
B.  Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures. 
1.  Using FEMA publication FEMA 213, "Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings," develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining "market value." 
2.  Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by city staff. 
C.  Review, Use, and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.60.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Article III, Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction. 
NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from the FEMA publication, FEMA 265, "Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas - A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations" dated July 1995. 
D.  Notification of Other Agencies. 
1.  Alteration or relocation of a watercourse: 
a.  Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation; 
b.  Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; 
c.  Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained. 
2.  Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations: 
a.  Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR). 
b.  All LOMR's for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMR's). Approved CLOMR's allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the "start of construction" definition. 
c.  Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data. 
3.  Changes in corporate boundaries: 
Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits. 
E.  Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following: 
1.  Certification required by Section 15.60.180(C)(1) and Section 15.60.210 (lowest floor elevations); 
2.  Certification required by Section 15.60.180(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures); 
3.  Certification required by Section 15.60.180(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard); 
4.  Certification of elevation required by Section 15.60.200(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards); 
5.  Certification required by Section 15.60.230(B) (floodway encroachments); and 
6.  Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
F.  Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.60.260. 
G.  Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.60.080. 
H.  Biennial Report. Complete and submit biennial report to FEMA. 
I.  Planning. Assure community's general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.140 - Development permit. 
No structure or land shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be located, extended, converted or altered within FP (floodplain) zoned lands without full compliance with the terms of this chapter, and without having first received a development or construction permit in accordance with the provisions of this title and, for developments requiring use permits, with the provisions of this code Sections 17.72.040 through 17.72.110. Development permit applications shall be reviewed by the community development director and the requirements of this chapter enforced in accordance with this code Sections 17.87.060 through 17.87.090. 
A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.60.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Lodi. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information: 
A.  Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
1.  Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location; 
2.  Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities; 
3.  Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities; 
4.  Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable; 
5.  Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.60.070 or Section 15.60.130(C); 
6.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and 
7.  Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.60.180(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93. 
B.  Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.60.180(C)(2). 
C.  For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.60.180(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93. 
D.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. 
E.  All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.60.130(E) of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.150 - Permitted uses—Generally. 
The following uses are permitted without a use permit where modification or removal of native vegetation, including trees, is not required: 
A.  Agriculture; 
B.  Open space agricultural uses not requiring a closed building such as cropland, orchards, and livestock feeding and grazing; 
C.  The storage of farm machinery which is readily removable from the area within the time available after a flood warning; 
D.  Recreational; firmly anchored recreational floating docks; 
E.  Modification of native vegetation: Where modification or removal of native vegetation is required, such modification or removal may be permitted after obtaining a development permit consisting of written approval from the community development director; provided, that such proposed modifications in the floodplain have been found to be consistent with the open space conservation element of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.160 - Permitted uses—Use permit and state approvals. 
The following uses may be permitted after approval of a conditional use permit by the city and after approval by the state department of fish and game and the reclamation board of the state; provided, that as determined by said reclamation board, a combination of such uses within the floodplain does not materially increase the flood height of the intermediate regional floodplain; and provided further, that as determined by the state department of fish and game, full mitigation measures will be used to protect and enhance the trees, native plant materials and wildlife in the floodplain, in accordance with good fish and game practices and in accordance with the general standards listed under Article III "Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction" of this chapter: 
A.  Residential dwellings on existing undeveloped lots in subdivisions approved before January 1, 1977; 
B.  Outdoor recreational facilities: 
Campgrounds 
Boating facilities 
Parks 
Golf courses or driving ranges 
Athletic fields 
Shooting ranges 
C.  Fences, fills, walls, excavations, or other appurtenances which do not constitute an obstruction or debris-catching obstacle to the passage of floodwaters and which are consistent with the open space-conservation element policies; 
D.  Private drives, bridges, and public utility wires and pipelines for transmission and distribution; 
E.  Improvements in stream channel alignment, cross-section and capacity, including modification of riverbank and flood protection levees; 
F.  Structures that are designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow of water and are firmly anchored to prevent the structure from flotation (excepting floating docks); provided, that no structures for human habitation is permitted; 
G.  Other similar uses of a type not appreciably damaged by floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.170 - Prohibited uses. 
In the areas of special flood hazard for residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see "basement" definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
Article III. - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 
 
15.60.180 - Standards of construction. 
In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required: 
A.  Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy. 
B.  Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed: 
1.  With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation; 
2.  Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
3.  With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and 
4.  Within Zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide flood waters around and away from proposed structures. 
C.  Elevation and Floodproofing. 
1.  Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement: 
a.  In AE, AH, A1-30 Zones, elevated to eighteen inches or more above the base flood elevation. 
b.  In an AO Zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified. 
c.  In an A Zone, without BFE's specified on the FIRM [unnumbered A Zone], elevated to eighteen inches or more above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.60.130(C). 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
2.  Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Subsection (C)(1) of this section or: 
a.  Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Subsection (C)(1) of this section, so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water; 
b.  Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and 
c.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Subsection (C)(2)(a) and (b) of this section are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
3.  Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria: 
a.  For non-engineered openings: 
i.  Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and 
iv.  Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or 
b.  Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect. 
4.  Manufactured Homes. See Section 15.60.210. 
5.  Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures. 
a.  Attached Garages. 
i.  A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters. See Subsection (C)(3) of this section. Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood resistant materials. See Subsection (B) of this section. 
ii.  A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6. 
b.  Detached garages and accessory structures. 
1.  "Accessory structures" used solely for parking (2 car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.60.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements: 
i.  Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage; 
ii.  The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials; 
iii.  The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement; 
iv.  Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to eighteen inches or more above the BFE; 
v.  The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.60.230; and 
vi.  The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of flood waters in accordance with Subsection (C)(3) of this section. 
2.  Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.190 - Standards for utilities. 
A.  All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate: 
1.  Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; 
2.  Discharge from the systems into flood waters. 
B.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.200 - Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development. 
A.  All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall: 
1.  Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE). 
2.  Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans. 
3.  If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator: 
a.  Lowest floor elevation. 
b.  Pad elevation. 
c.  Lowest adjacent grade. 
B.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
C.  All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
D.  All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.210 - Standards for manufactured homes. 
A.  All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, shall: 
1.  Within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to eighteen inches or more above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement. 
B.  All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within Zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community's flood insurance rate map that are not subject to the provisions of Subsection (A) of this section will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the: 
1.  Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at eighteen inches or more above the base flood elevation; or 
2.  Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six inches in height above grade. 
Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.220 - Standards for recreational vehicles. 
A.  All recreational vehicles placed in Zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty consecutive days; or 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or 
3.  Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.60.140 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.60.210 (A). 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.230 - Floodways. 
Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply: 
A.  Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within Zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the city of Lodi. 
B.  Within an adopted regulatory floodway, the city of Lodi shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  If Subsections (A) and (B) of this section are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Article III of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
Article IV. - Variance Procedure 
 
15.60.240 - Nature of variances. 
The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance. 
The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners. 
The need to protect citizens from flooding is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. 
Variances may not be granted that would permit fraud and victimization of the public or that would present a threat to public safety or create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.250 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.60.120—15.60.170, and Sections 15.60.180—15.60.230 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases. 
B.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of "historic structures" (as defined in Section 15.60.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
C.  Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
D.  Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the "minimum necessary" considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. "Minimum necessary" means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city of Lodi need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city of Lodi believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance. 
E.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that: 
1.  The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars for one hundred dollars of insurance coverage, and 
2.  Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the Office of the San Joaquin County Recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land. 
F.  The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
15.60.260 - Appeals. 
The city council of the city of Lodi shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1829, § 1, 3-17-2010)  
Chapter 15.64 - DEVELOPMENT IMPACT MITIGATION FEES[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1870, § 6, adopted February 20, 2013, repealed the former Ch. 15.64, §§ 15.64.010—15.64.140, and enacted a new Ch. 15.64 as set out herein. The former Ch. 15.64 pertained to development impact mitigation fees and derived from Ord. No. 1518, 1991; Ord. No. 1526, 1991; Ord. No. 1547, 1992; Ord. No. 1706, 2001; Ord. No. 1768, 2006 and Ord. No. 1832, adopted June 16, 2010. 
 
15.64.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The council finds and declares as follows: 
A.  In order to implement the goals of the city of Lodi's general plan and to mitigate the impacts caused by new development in the city, certain public improvements must be or had to be constructed. The city council determines that development impact mitigation fees are needed to finance these public improvements and to pay for new developments' fair share of the construction costs of these improvements. In establishing the fees described in this chapter, the city council finds the fees to be consistent with its general plan and, pursuant to Government Code Section 65913.2, has considered the effects of the fees with respect to the city's housing needs as established in the housing element of the general plan. 
B.  The purpose of this chapter is to implement the general plan requirements set forth in this subsection and subsection A of this section and to impose mitigation fees to fund the cost of certain facilities, the demand for which is directly or indirectly generated by the type of new development proposed in the general plan, under the authority of: 
1.  The police power of the city granted under Article XI, Section 7, of the California Constitution; 
2.  The provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code, Section 21000 et seq., which in general requires that all developments mitigate environmental impacts; 
3.  The provisions of the California Government Code regarding general plans at Section 65300 et seq. including but not limited to the provisions of Government Code Section 65400. 
C.  It is further the purpose of this chapter to require that adequate provisions are made for developer-financed facilities and services within the city limits as a condition to the approval of a new development. 
D.  Development impact mitigation fees are established on development in the city. Development impact mitigation fees shall consist of separate fees as described in Section 15.64.030 of this chapter. The city council shall, by resolution, set forth the specific amount of the fees; describe the benefit and impact area on which the fee is imposed; refer to the specific improvements to be financed, their estimated cost and reasonable relationship between this fee and the various types of new developments; and set forth time for payment. Adoption of such fee resolutions shall be done in compliance with Government Code Sections 66016 et seq. 
E.  The specific improvements to be financed by the fee are described in the city of Lodi impact mitigation fee program prepared for the city by Harris and Associates, dated August, 2012, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk. The calculation of the fee is based upon the findings in the referenced study. 
F.  New development will generate new demand for facilities which must be accommodated by construction of new or expanded facilities. The amount of demand generated and, therefore, the benefit gained, varies according to kind of use. Therefore, a "dwelling unit equivalent" (DUE) factor that quantifies the facilities demand of different land use types in terms of their equivalence to a low density residential unit. A low density residential unit is assigned a DUE factor of 1.0 and the DUE factor for each of the other land use categories is determined based on the anticipated demand for each land use category relative to the anticipated demand for a low density residential unit. 
G.  The city has previously approved various development projects which have made significant financial expenditures towards completion, including the payment of the then current development impact mitigation fees; but have not obtained a building permit. The city council finds and declares that such projects should be allowed to proceed without the imposition of new development impact mitigation fees imposed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Acreage" means the gross acreage for fee calculation purposes of any property within the city general plan area not including the acreage of dedicated street right-of-way existing prior to development, except that the area of new dedicated street right-of-way in excess of thirty-four feet on one side of a street shall not be included in gross acreage. 
B.  "Building permit" means the permit issued or required for the construction, improvement or remodeling of any structure pursuant to and as defined by the city building code. 
C.  "Costs" means amounts spent, or authorized to be spent, in connection with the planning, financing, acquisition and development of a facility including, without limitation, the costs of land, construction, engineering, administration, and consulting fees. 
D.  "Development" or "project" means any of the following: 
1.  For water, sewer, storm drainage and electric impact fees: Any new connection to the city system or increase in service demand; 
2.  For streets impact fees: Any project that increases traffic; 
3.  For police, fire, parks and recreation, art in public places and general city facilities impact fees: Any project generating new or increased service demand. 
E.  "Facilities" means those public facilities designated in the city of Lodi impact mitigation fee program and as subsequently designated by the city council. 
F.  "Land use" means the planned use as shown on the general plan land use map. 
G.  "Program fee per dwelling unit equivalent" means the total program costs, for a particular category of facility divided by the total number of dwelling unit equivalents and adjusted for price changes up to the year of construction and for the cost of financing, as identified in the city of Lodi development impact fee study or subsequent update for that particular category. 
H.  "Dwelling unit equivalent" (DUE) is the factor that quantifies the facilities demand of different land use types in terms of their equivalence to a low density residential unit. A low density residential unit is assigned a DUE factor of 1.0 and the DUE factor for each of the other land use categories is determined based on the anticipated demand for each land use category relative to the anticipated demand for a low density residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.030 - Development impact funds. 
A.  The city finance director shall create in the city treasury the following special interest-bearing trust funds into which all amounts collected under this chapter shall be deposited: 
1.  Water facilities; 
2.  Sewer facilities; 
3.  Storm drainage facilities; 
4.  Street improvements; 
5.  Police facilities; 
6.  Fire facilities; 
7.  Parks and recreation facilities; 
8.  Electrical utility facilities; 
9.  General city facilities and program administration; 
10.  Art in public places. 
B.  The fees shall be expended solely to pay the costs of facilities (including interest on interfund loans) or to reimburse developers entitled to reimbursement under this chapter. The funds for the categories listed above shall be kept separate. For purposes of this chapter, they are referred to in aggregate as the "development impact mitigation fee fund." 
C.  The city manager shall have the authority to make loans among the development impact fee funds to assure adequate cash flow. Interest shall not be charged on loans within the development impact fee fund. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.040 - Payment of fees. 
A.  The property owner of any development project causing impacts to public facilities shall pay the appropriate development impact mitigation fee as provided in this chapter. The amount shall be calculated in accordance with this chapter and the program fee as established by council resolution. 
B.  When such payment is required by this chapter, no certificate of occupancy shall be approved for property within the city unless the development impact mitigation fees for that property are paid or guaranteed as provided in this chapter. 
C.  The fees shall be paid with the approval of a certificate of occupancy or site development permit, except as provided in subsection E or F of this section. 
D.  The fees may not be prepaid unless specified otherwise in a fee payment agreement or development agreement approved by the city council. 
E.  Notwithstanding the above, city may collect subsequent increases in impact fees or new impact fees, unless the development project is exempt from fee increases under the terms of a fee payment agreement approved by council, a development agreement approved by council or California law. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.050 - Adoption of Study, Capital Improvement Program and Fees. 
A.  The city council adopted the city of Lodi impact mitigation fee program dated August 15, 2012 and establishes a future capital improvement program consisting of projects shown in said study. The city council shall review that study annually, or more often if it deems it appropriate, and may amend it by resolution at its discretion. 
B.  The city council shall include in the city's annual capital improvement program appropriations from the development impact mitigation fee funds for appropriate projects. 
C.  Except for facilities approved by the public works director for construction by a property owner under Section 15.64.080 or as shown in the annual capital improvement program, all facilities shall be constructed in accordance with the schedule required by Government Code Section 66001. 
D.  The program fee per dwelling unit equivalent (DUE) shall be adopted by resolution and shall be automatically adjusted annually beginning in the year 2020 on January 1st. In the first adjustment year, the adjustment shall change the program fee by the same percentage as the change in the Engineering News Record 20 Cities Construction Cost Index between 2012 and 2019. Thereafter the adjustment, change the program fee by the same percentage as the annual change in the Engineering News Record 20 Cities Construction Cost Index. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.060 - Calculation of fees. 
A.  The development impact mitigation fees required under Section 15.64.040 are calculated as follows: 
T = F × DUE x U 
where: 
 T = the total mitigation fee for each category of public facility; 
 F = program fee per dwelling unit equivalent, per one thousand building square feet, or per gross acre for each category as established by resolution; 
 DUE = the factor applicable to the use category as set forth in LMC 15.64.060 (C) and (E); and 
 U = number of residential units; number of one thousand building square foot units; or number of gross acres; computed to the nearest 0.01 unit. 
B.  The calculated fees are subject to adjustment per Section 15.64.120 of this code. 
C.  The DUE factors for water and wastewater are as set forth in the following table: 
Meter Size 	Water DUE Factor 2 	Wastewater DUE Factor 
5/8 " meter 	 0.67 	 0.67 
¾" meter 	 1.00 	 1.00 
1" meter 	 1.67 	 1.67 
1½" meter 	 3.33 	 3.33 
2" meter 	 5.33 	 5.33 
3" meter 	10.00 	10.00 
4" meter 	16.67 	16.67 
6" meter 	33.33 	33.33 
8" meter 	53.33 	53.33 
10" meter 	76.67 	76.67 
 
1 From AWWA Manual M6—Water Meters, 3 rd Edition, American Water Works Association, 1986. 
2 Ratio of rated flow capacity relative to ¾-inch meter. 
D.  Electric fees will be set according to panel size as set forth in the following table: 
Electrical Fees 
Fee/Panel 
Panel Size 	208 Volts 	240 Volts 	480 Volts 
Single Phase Panal (Amps) 
60 	n/a 	$248.00 	n/a 
100 	n/a 	 413.00 	n/a 
125 	n/a 	 516.00 	n/a 
200 	n/a 	 826.00 	n/a 
400 	n/a 	1,652.00 	n/a 
600 	n/a 	2,478.00 	n/a 
 
Panel Size 	208 Volts 	240 Volts 	480 Volts 
Three Phase Panal (Amps) 
200 	$1,178.00 	$1,359.00 	$2,718.00 
400 	2,356.00 	2,718.00 	5,437.00 
600 	3,534.00 	4,077.00 	8,155.00 
800 	4,712.00 	5,437.00 	10,873.00 
1,000 	5,890.00 	n/a 	13,591.00 
1,200 	7,068.00 	n/a 	16,310.00 
1,600 	9,423.00 	n/a 	21,746.00 
2,000 	$11,779.00 	n/a 	27,183.00 
2,500 	14,724.00 	n/a 	33,979.00 
3,000 	$17,669.00 	n/a 	40,774.00 
 
E.  South wastewater trunk, storm, streets, police, fire, parks and recreation, general city facilities and art in public places fees are established as set forth in the following table: 
Land Use Category 	Residential 	Commercial 
	Low Density DUE/Unit 	Medium Density DUE/Unit 	High Density DUE/Unit 	Retail DUE/Unit 1 	Office DUE/Unit 1 	Industrial DUE/Unit 1 
South Wastewater Trunk 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.93 	 0.77 	 0.41 
Storm Zone 1 	1.00 	0.50 	0.40 	10.50 	10.50 	11.25 
Storm Zone 2 	1.00 	0.50 	0.40 	10.50 	10.50 	11.25 
Streets 	1.00 	0.54 	0.54 	 1.69 	 1.22 	 0.62 
Police 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.44 	 0.70 	 0.23 
Fire 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.44 	 0.70 	 0.23 
Parks 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.10 	 0.17 	 0.06 
General City Facilities 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.44 	 0.70 	 0.23 
Art in Public Places 	1.00 	0.84 	0.70 	 0.44 	 0.70 	 0.23 
 
1 Storm units are per gross acre and all others are per one thousand square feet of building space. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.080 - Credit and reimbursement for construction of facilities. 
A.  Construction of Facilities in Advance of City of Lodi Development Impact Mitigation Fee Program (Fee Program). 
1.  The public works director may direct or authorize the owner to construct certain facilities specified in the city of Lodi development impact mitigation fee program (fee program), or portions thereof in advance of the fee program and as designated in the study, in lieu of all, or a portion of, the fee required by this chapter. The owner is entitled to a credit if the owner: (1) constructs the improvements, (2) finances an improvement by cash or other means approved by the council, or (3) a combination of the above. The credit to be provided to the property owner shall be determined by the public works director based on prevailing construction costs plus ten percent for engineering and administration and shall be approved by the council. The construction of a facility authorized by this section must consist of a usable facility or segment and be approved by the city and constructed in accordance with the city's public improvement design standards. The property owner must post a bond or other security in a form acceptable to the director for the complete performance of the construction before credit is given. 
2.  If the amount of credit is less than the amount of the otherwise applicable fee, the property owner shall pay the amount which, when added to the credit received for the construction of facilities, equals the fee obligation. 
3.  If the amount of credit is greater than the amount of the otherwise applicable development impact mitigation fee, the property owner shall be paid the difference only from the appropriate development impact mitigation fee fund, after the project is accepted by the city. 
4.  If the development impact fee funds responsible for the reimbursement do not have adequate balances to fund the credit, the city and the developer shall enter into a reimbursement agreement. In addition to its other terms, the agreement shall provide that: 
a.  The general fund of the city is not liable for payment of any obligations arising from the agreement; 
b.  The credit or taxing power of the city is not pledged for the payment of any obligations arising from the agreement; 
c.  The land owner shall not compel the exercise of the city taxing power or the forfeiture of any of its property to satisfy any obligations arising from the agreement; 
d.  The obligation arising from the agreement is not a debt of the city, nor a legal or equitable pledge, charge, lien, or encumbrance, upon any of its property, or upon any of its income, receipts or revenues, and is payable only from the fees deposited in the appropriate city development impact mitigation fee fund; 
e.  The reimbursable amount shall be increased annually to include an amount attributable to interest. This amount shall be based on the change in the Engineering News Record 20 Cities Construction Cost Index from the January 1st index of the year of construction to the January 1st index of the year of reimbursement. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.090 - Other authority. 
This chapter is intended to establish a supplemental method for funding the cost of certain facilities and services, the demand for which will be generated by the level and type of development proposed in the city general plan. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to limit the power of the city council to impose any other fees or exactions or to continue to impose existing ones on development within the city, but shall be in addition to any other requirements which the city council is authorized to impose, or has previously imposed, as a condition of approving a plan, rezoning or other entitlement within the city. In particular, individual property owners shall remain obligated to fund, construct, and/or dedicate the improvements, public facilities and other exactions required by, but not limited to, the city code, public improvement design standards and other applicable documents. Any credits or reimbursements under Section 15.64.080 shall not include the funding, construction, or dedications described in this section. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.100 - Findings regarding use of fees. 
A.  As required under Government Code Section 66001(d), the city shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put and demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
B.  As required under Government Code Section 66001(e), the city shall refund to the current record owner on a prorated basis the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be established. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.110 - Fee exemptions. 
The following developments are exempt from payment of fees described in this chapter: 
A.  City projects; 
B.  Projects constructed or financed under this chapter; 
C.  Reconstruction of, or residential additions to single-family dwellings, but not including additional dwelling units; 
D.  Property which has paid a master storm drain fee pursuant to Resolution 3618 or Ordinance No. 1440 is exempt from payment of the storm drainage impact fee except for changes in land use as described in the fee resolution. 
E.  Additional exemption for development projects in progress: 
1.  A project on a parcel (or portion of a parcel) which has, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, received the appropriate development approval, but has not obtained a building permit and has paid appropriate mitigation fees under Resolution 3618 or Ordinance 1440, shall be exempt from imposition of the development impact mitigation fees imposed under this chapter except the sewer lift station area fees. 
2.  For purposes of this subsection, "appropriate development approval" shall include: 
a.  An approved or conditionally approved tentative map; 
b.  An approved final subdivision or parcel map; 
c.  An approved use permit when no map was required; 
d.  An approved public improvement agreement. 
3.  The exemption under this subsection shall not apply to changes in land use, pursuant to subsection D of this section for storm drainage impact fees. 
4.  The exemption under this subsection shall apply on projects which include a change in land use to a more intensive use as defined in this chapter only to the extent that the previously approved land use shall be considered an existing use and the project shall be charged the appropriate incremental increase as provided in this chapter and the fee resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.120 - Fee adjustment or waiver. 
A.  The owner of a project subject to a fee under this chapter may apply to the public works director for an adjustment to or waiver of that fee. The waiver of this fee shall be based on the absence of any reasonable relationship between the impact on public facilities of that development and either the amount of fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. 
B.  The application for adjustment or waiver shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten days after formal notification of the fee to be charged. The application shall state in detail the factual basis and legal theory for the claim of adjustment or waiver. 
C.  It is the intent of this chapter that: 
1.  The land use categories are based on general plan designations which are an average of a wide range of specific land uses; thus substantial variation must be shown in order to justify a fee adjustment; 
2.  The public works director may calculate a fee and/or require additional improvements where the service demand of a particular land use exceeds the standards shown in the definitions or used in determining the improvements needed under the fee program; 
3.  The fee categories shall be considered individually; thus it may occur that a fee adjustment or waiver is made in one category and not another; and 
4.  Where improvements providing capacity for the subject parcel have already been constructed, a downward adjustment of the fee is not appropriate. 
D.  The public works director shall consider the application at an informal hearing held within sixty days after the filing of the fee adjustment or waiver application. The decision of the public works director is appealable pursuant to Section 15.64.130. 
E.  The applicant bears the burden of proof in presenting substantial evidence to support the application. The public works director shall consider the following factors in its determination whether or not to approve a fee adjustment or waiver: 
1.  The factors identified in Section 66001: 
a.  The purpose and proposed uses of the fee, 
b.  The type of development, 
c.  The relationship between the fee's use and type of development, 
d.  The need for improvements and the type of development, and 
e.  The amount of the fee and the portion of it attributable to the development; and 
2.  The substance and nature of the evidence including the development impact fee study and the applicant's technical data supporting its request. The applicant must present comparable technical information to show that the fee is inappropriate for the particular development. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.130 - Appeal procedure. 
A.  The public works director is responsible for administering, collecting, crediting, adjusting, and refunding development fees. A decision by the public works director regarding a fee imposed under this chapter is appealable in accordance with this section. A person seeking judicial review shall first seek an appeal under this section. 
B  A person appealing a decision under this chapter shall file a request with the public works director who is responsible for processing the appeal. The appeal shall be in writing, stating the factual and legal grounds, and shall be filed within ten calendar days following the decision of the public works director being appealed. 
C.  The public works director shall notify the city manager of the appeal. The city manager shall set the matter for hearing before the city council and notify the person appealing in writing of the time and place. 
D.  The city council shall conduct the hearing, prepare written findings of fact and a written decision on the matter, and shall preserve the complete administrative record of the proceeding. The council shall consider all relevant evidence presented by the appellant, the public works director or other interested party. 
E.  The decision of the city council is final; it is reviewable by a court under Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5. 
F.  The city adopts the Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.5, for the purposes of judicial review under this section. A petition seeking review of a decision under this chapter shall be filed not later than the ninetieth day following the date on which the decision of the hearing officer becomes final. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
15.64.140 - Severability. 
If any provision or clause of the ordinance codified in this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or to be otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other ordinance provisions or clauses or applications thereof which can be implemented without the invalid provision or clause or application, and to this end the provisions and clauses of the ordinance codified in this chapter are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 1870, § 6, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 15.65 - SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY REGIONAL TRANSPORTATION IMPACT FEE[11] 

Footnotes: 
--- (11) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1907, § 1, adopted August 5, 2015, repealed the former Chapter 15.65, §§ 15.65.010—15.65.070, and enacted a new Chapter 15.65 as set out herein. The former Chapter 15.65 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1767, 2005). 
 
15.65.010 - Purpose, findings, and declaration of intent. 
A.  In order to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan and to mitigate impacts caused by new development with the County of San Joaquin, a regional transportation impact fee program is necessary. The program is needed to finance regional-serving transportation and transit improvements. 
B.  Substantial population and employment growth is expected in San Joaquin County through 2025 and beyond. This growth will cause impacts on the regional transportation network ("regional transportation network" or "RTIF network") including increased congestion and related impacts unless substantial improvements are completed. The regional transportation impact fee program ("RTIF program") is intended to impose a fee to provide funding for transportation and transit improvements that help mitigate these impacts. 
C.  New development throughout the county will be subject to the fee which will be proportional to the impact caused on the regional transportation network by such new development. 
D.  The funding derived from the RTIF program shall be used in combination with other funding available to complete the needed transportation and transit improvements. In the absence of an RTIF program, existing funding sources, including federal, state, and local sources, will be inadequate to construct the regional transportation network required to avoid the unacceptable levels of traffic congestion and related adverse impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.020 - Definitions. 
A.  "Development project" or "project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development including the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate. 
B.  "Industrial project" means any development project that proposes manufacturing, transportation, or logistics, as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
C.  "Measure K" means the San Joaquin County Transportation Authority Local Transportation Improvement Plan: Air Quality, Mandatory Developer Fees and Growth Management Ordinance, which establishes and implements a retail transactions and use tax, as may be extended from time to time. 
D.  "Multi-family residential unit" means a development project that uses a single parcel for two or more dwelling units within one or more buildings, including duplexes, townhouses, condominiums, and apartments as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
E.  "Office project" means any development project that involves business activities associated with professional or administrative services, and typically consists of corporate offices, financial institutions, legal and medical offices, personal and laundry services, or similar uses, and religious centers as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
F.  "Participating agencies" means the County of San Joaquin and each of the cities situated in San Joaquin County if such agencies have (1) adopted the RTIF Program Fee by ordinance and/or resolution and (2) entered into the operating agreement. 
G.  "Regional transportation impact fee program" or "RTIF program" is the regional program established by the operating agreement by the participating agencies and SJCOG to impose, collect, and distribute a RTIF program fee to assist in the funding of transportation improvements to the regional transportation network. 
H.  "Regional transportation impact program fee" or "RTIF program fee" or "RTIF fee" means the fee established by each participating agency consistent with the RTIF program and the operating agreement. 
I.  "Regional transportation network" means the regional network of highways and arterials as identified in the RTIF technical report and which may be amended from time to time by SJCOG. 
J.  "RTIF capital projects" or "capital projects" or "RTIF project list" is the RTIF program improvements and projects as identified in the RTIF technical report and which may be amended from time to time by SJCOG's adoption and amendment of a "RTIF capital projects report." 
K.  "RTIF capital projects report" means the report adopted by SJCOG annually which identifies the RTIF capital projects as amended from time to time by SJCOG consistent with the RTIF program and the operating agreement. 
L.  "RTIF operating agreement" or "operating agreement" is the regional transportation impact fee program operating agreement establishing the administration of the RTIF Program as adopted by each participating agencies and SJCOG which may be amended from time to time by the parties thereto. 
M.  "RTIF technical report" means the San Joaquin County Regional Transportation Impact Fee RTIF Technical Report dated October 27, 2005, and prepared pursuant to California Government Code, Section 66000 et seq., the Mitigation Fee Act. 
N.  "Residential dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof which is designed primarily for residential occupancy by one family including single-family and multi-family dwellings. "Residential dwelling unit" shall not include hotels or motels. 
O.  "Retail project" means any development project that retailing merchandise, generally without transformation, and rendering services incidental to the sale of merchandise at a fixed point of sale as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
P.  "Single-family residential unit" means the use of a parcel for only one residential dwelling unit as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
Q.  "Warehousing project" means any development project that is primarily devoted to the storage of materials. Examples include self-storage facilities, distribution centers used for storage of finished material prior to distribution to retail centers or other storage facilities, as identified in the RTIF land use fee category summary. 
R.  "Non-conforming land use" means any development project not adequately represented in the RTIF land use fee category summary and is typically a non-retail, non-residential development project that has minimal or no building area and yet would generate impacts at a level that is significantly more than represented in the RTIF land use fee category summary. Examples are projects related to mining, intermodal facilities, agriculture, and outdoor recreation. For these non-conforming land use projects the "per trip" calculation in the RTIF land use fee category summary is applied. 
S.  "On-going third party costs" means costs to implement the RTIF program associated with outside professional services secured by SJCOG. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.030 - Authority for adoption. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 of the California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.040 - Collection of RTIF program fees. 
A.  Authority of the Public Works Director. The public works director, or his/her designee, is hereby authorized to levy and collect the RTIF program fee and make all determinations required by this chapter. 
B.  Payment of RTIF Program Fees. Payment of the RTIF program fees shall be as follows: 
1.  The RTIF program fees shall be paid at the time of issuance of a building permit for the development project, or as otherwise required or permitted pursuant to Government Code Section 66007. 
2.  The amount of the RTIF program fees shall be the fee amounts in effect at the time of payment. 
3.  RTIF program fees shall not be waived. 
C.  Payment by all Development Projects. Except as otherwise expressly provided by this chapter, the RTIF program fee required hereunder shall be payable by: 
1.  All development projects within the city for which building permits or other entitlements for development projects are issued on or after the effective date of this chapter, and 
2.  All development projects within the city for which building permits or other entitlements for development projects were issued prior to the effective date of this chapter and which permits or entitlements were issued subject to a condition requiring the developer to pay a RTIF program fee to be imposed upon such development project within the city. 
D.  Exemptions from the RTIF Program Fee. The following development projects shall not be subject to the RTIF program fee: 
1.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any legal, residential structure and/or the replacement of a previously existing legal dwelling unit, including an expansion of an existing dwelling unit that does not create an additional dwelling unit. 
2.  The rehabilitation and/or reconstruction of any non-residential structure where there is no net increase in square footage. Any increase in square footage shall pay the established applicable fee rate for that portion of square footage that is new. 
3.  Development Projects for which an application for a vesting tentative map authorized by Government Code Section 66498.1 was deemed complete on or prior to the effective date of the introduction of this chapter. 
4.  Development Projects which are the subject of a development agreement entered into pursuant to Government Code Section 65864 et seq. prior to the effective date of the initial adoption of this chapter, wherein the imposition of new fees are expressly prohibited by the development agreement, provided, however, that if the term of such a development agreement is extended after the effective date of this chapter, the RTIF program fee shall be imposed. 
E.  Future Development Agreements. All future development agreements entered into after the effective date of this chapter shall require the full payment of the RTIF program fee. 
1.  Payments for Non-residential Projects. For non-residential projects the amount of the fee imposed on the entire development project shall be determined based upon: 
a.  The gross floor area; and 
b.  The predominant use of the building or structure as identified in the building permit. 
2.  Payment for Mixed Use Projects. For mixed land use projects, which are projects that have both residential and non-residential uses, the amount of the fee imposed on the entire development project shall be proportionally determined based on the following: 
a.  The fee associated with the type of residence; and 
b.  The predominant use of the non-residential portion of the project. 
F.  Previously Paid RTIF Program Fees. In the event that RTIF program fees have previously been paid for an existing building which is a new development project with a new or different RTIF Fee category, the previously paid RTIF program fees for that existing building shall be credited against the amount of the RTIF program fee attributable to the new development project, up to the amount of the previously paid RTIF program fee. A rebate will not be granted if the change in land use represents a lower fee. 
G.  Reimbursements and Credits. In the event that RTIF capital projects are constructed by a developer in excess of the development project's RTIF program fee obligation or in lieu of payment of RTIF program fees by a developer pursuant to an agreement between the developer and the city, the developer may be reimbursed or credited for future application for any costs based on the actual costs of construction of the RTIF capital project incurred by the developer in excess of the amount the RTIF program fees that apply to the development project. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.050 - Fee rate and calculation. 
A.  Establishing the RTIF Program Fee. The amount of the RTIF program fee for development projects shall be consistent with the provisions of this chapter and the RTIF technical report and shall be established by a resolution of the city council. 
B.  Annual Adjustment. The RTIF program fee shall be automatically adjusted on an annual basis at the beginning of each fiscal year (July 1) based on the arithmetic average of the annualized percentage change of the Engineering News Record California Construction Cost Index (CCCI) for each of the three most recent years. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.060 - Administration of the RTIF program. 
A.  RTIF account or RTIF funds. All fees collected pursuant to the RTIF program fee shall be deposited in a RTIF account or RTIF fund and shall not be commingled with other funds. The contents of this RTIF fund shall be designated solely for the purpose of contributing to the financing of the RTIF capital projects included in the RTIF capital projects report and for the funding of incidental administrative costs. Any interest income earned on the RTIF fund shall also be deposited therein and shall only be expended for the purposes as set forth in this chapter. 
B.  Prohibition on Interfund Transfers or Loans. Notwithstanding subsection (b)(1)(G) of Section 66006 of the Government Code there shall be no interfund transfer, grant, or loan of the RTIF program fees or RTIF fund or RTIF account to other city accounts, funds, programs, or fees. However, the city may provide loans, grants, or transfers of RTIF program fees to other participating agencies or SJCOG provided that such funds are consistent with the RTIF Program and used for the development or construction of RTIF capital projects. 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
15.65.070 - Existing City of Lodi Development Impact Mitigation Fee Program. 
A.  The City of Lodi Development Impact Mitigation Fee program pursuant to Lodi Municipal Code, Title 15, Chapter 15.64, shall be adjusted on any future projects that are identified in the approved RTIF Project List to ensure continued compliance with the Fee Mitigation Act (Gov. Code § 66000 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1907, § 1, 8-5-2015)  
Chapter 15.66 - COUNTY FACILITIES FEES*[] 

Footnotes: 
--- () --- 
*Note: This chapter is no longer effective as of June 14, 2012, when the Agreement for Property Tax Allocation Upon Annexation between the City of Lodi and the County of San Joaquin expired. 
 
15.66.010 - Purpose, findings, and declaration of intent. 
A.  In order to implement the goals and objectives of the general plan and to mitigate impacts caused by new development within the county of San Joaquin, a county facilities fee program is necessary. The program is needed to finance region-serving capital facilities located throughout the county that are used by the residents and businesses within the city and to assure that new development pays its proportional share for these improvements. 
B.  Fee revenue collected pursuant to this chapter shall be remitted to the county of San Joaquin who shall be responsible for administering the fee funds and constructing the capital facilities. 
C.  Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5, Section 66000 et seq. of the California Government Code provides that capital facilities fees may be enacted and imposed on development projects. The city council finds and determines that: 
1.  New development projects cause the need for construction, expansion, or improvement of capital facilities within the county of San Joaquin. 
2.  Funds for construction, expansion, or improvement of capital facilities are not available to accommodate demand for service caused by development projects; which results in inadequate capital facilities within San Joaquin County. 
D.  The city council finds that the health, safety, peace, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general welfare of the residents and businesses within the city will be promoted by the adoption of county facilities fees for construction, expansion, or improvement of region-serving capital facilities. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.020 - Collection of capital facility fee. 
The capital facility fee enacted pursuant to this chapter is to be collected by the city before the issuance of building permits, or at approval of any discretionary permit if no building permit is required. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.030 - Authority for adoption. 
This chapter is adopted under the authority of Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 of the California Government Code Sections 66000 et seq. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.040 - Definitions. 
Words when used in this chapter, and in resolutions adopted thereto, shall have the following meanings: 
A.  "Board of supervisors" means the board of supervisors of the county of San Joaquin. 
B.  "Capital facility" and "capital facilities" includes region-serving public improvements and community amenities normally provided by the county of San Joaquin. 
C.  "City" means the city of Lodi, a general law city organized and existing under the Constitution and laws of the state Of California. 
D.  "City council" means the city council of the city of Lodi. 
E.  "County" means the county of San Joaquin, a political subdivision of the state of California. 
F.  "Development project" means any project undertaken for the purpose of development. "Development project" includes a project involving the issuance of a permit for construction or reconstruction, but not a permit to operate. 
G.  "Fee" means a monetary exaction, other than a tax or special assessment, which is charged by a local agency to the applicant in connection with approval of a development project for the purpose of defraying all or a portion of the cost of capital facilities related to the development project. 
H.  "Nexus report" means the San Joaquin County Facility Fee Nexus Report originally prepared in September 2003, as may be amended from time-to-time. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.050 - Conditions for collection. 
A.  In establishing and imposing a fee as a condition of approval of a development project, the following shall be done: 
1.  Identify the purpose of the fee; 
2.  Identify the use to which the fee is to be put; 
3.  Determine how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the type of development project on which the fee is imposed; and 
4.  Determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the capital facility and the impacts caused by the type of development project on which the fee is imposed. 
B.  The city, before establishing a capital facility fee as a condition of approval of development projects, shall determine that there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the capital facility or portion of the capital facility attributable to the development on which the fee is imposed as documented in the nexus report. 
C.  Upon receipt of funds from the city, derived through this chapter, the county shall deposit, invest, account for, and expend the funds pursuant to California Government Code Section 66006. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.060 - Conditions for reimbursement. 
A.  The county shall report to the city council once each fiscal year concerning the fees and accounts, including any portions of fees remaining unexpended or uncommitted five or more years after deposit. The board of supervisors shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of the fee remaining unexpended or uncommitted in its account five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is put, and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
B.  A refund of unexpended or uncommitted fee revenue for which a need cannot be demonstrated, along with accrued interest may be made to the current owner(s) of the development project(s) on a prorated basis. The county may refund unexpended and uncommitted fee revenue that have been found by the board of supervisors to be no longer needed, by direct payment or by off-setting other obligations owed to the county by the current owner(s) of the development projects(s). 
C.  If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended and uncommitted revenues collected pursuant to this chapter exceed the amount to be refunded, the county, after a public hearing, for which notice has been published pursuant to Government Code Section 6061 and posted in three prominent places within the area of the development project, may determine that the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fee is collected subject to this chapter that serves the project on which the fee was originally imposed. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.070 - Fee payment. 
A.  Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the applicant shall pay to the city the fee as established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  The fee shall be determined by the fee schedule in effect on the date the vesting tentative map or vesting parcel map is approved, or the date a permit is issued. 
C.  If a development has multiple types of uses, the fee will be collected proportionately on each use. 
D.  When application is made for a new building permit following the expiration of a previously issued building permit for which the fee was paid, the fee payment shall not be required, unless the fee schedule has been amended during the interim, in this event, the appropriate increase or decrease shall be imposed. 
E.  In the event that subsequent development occurs with respect to property for which the fee has been paid, an additional fee shall be required only for additional square footage of development that was not included in computing the prior fee. 
F.  When a fee is paid for a development project and that project is subsequently reduced so that it is entitled to a lower fee, the county shall issue a partial refund of the fee. 
G.  When a fee is paid for a development project and the project is subsequently abandoned without any further action beyond the obtaining of a building permit the payor shall be entitled to a refund of the fee paid, less the administrative portion of the fee. 
H.  If a development is converted to a more intense use, a fee shall be required which shall be the difference between the current fee for the original use and the current fee for the more intense use. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.080 - County facilities fee accounts. 
A.  The city shall hold fee revenues collected under this chapter in a separate county facility fee account. Fee revenues accruing in this account shall be remitted quarterly to the county of San Joaquin to be expended for the purpose for which they were collected. 
B.  The county shall account for all fee revenues, including interest accrued, and allocate them for the purposes for which the original fee was imposed. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.090 - Natural disaster fee exemption. 
No fee may be applied by a local agency to the reconstruction of any residential, commercial, or industrial development project that is damaged or destroyed as a result of a natural disaster as declared by the governor. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.100 - County facilities fee program. 
A.  The county has adopted a county facilities fee nexus report that indicates the approximate location, size, time of availability, and estimates of costs for region-serving capital facilities or improvements to be financed with county facilities fee funds. 
B.  The county shall annually submit a report to the city council regarding the proposed uses of county facilities fee funding. 
C.  The county facilities fee schedule established by resolution of the city council shall annually be automatically adjusted by an amount determined by the increase in the Engineering Construction Cost Index for the previous year, as published by the Engineering News Record. The county shall provide the city with notice and documentation of the fee adjustments required, if any. 
D.  The county facilities fee schedule adopted by the city council shall be annually reviewed by the city for consistency with the county facilities fee nexus report, as it may be updated from time-to-time. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.110 - Ordinance—Public hearing. 
The adoption of county facilities fees is a legislative act and shall be enacted by resolution after a noticed public hearing before the city council. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.120 - Construction. 
The chapter and any subsequent amendment to the county facilities fee program shall be read together. With respect to any county facilities fee enacted by resolution under this chapter, any provision of such a county facilities fee which is in conflict with this chapter shall be void. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.130 - Severability clause. 
Should any provision of this chapter or a subsequent amendment to the county facilities fee program be held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, void, or unenforceable, the remaining provisions of this chapter and the county facilities fee program shall remain in full force and effect. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.140 - Fee adjustments or waiver. 
A developer of any project subject to the fee described in this chapter may apply to the city council for reduction or adjustment to that fee, or a waiver of that fee, based upon the absence of any reasonable relationship or nexus between the impacts of the development and either the amount of the fee charged or the type of facilities to be financed. The application shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk: (1) ten days prior to the public hearing on the development permit application for the project, or (2) if no development permit is required, at the time of the filing of the request for a building permit. The application shall state in detail the factual basis for the claim of waiver, reduction, or adjustment. The city council shall consider the application at a public hearing held within sixty days after the filling of the fee adjustment application. The city shall prepare a staff report and recommendation for city council consideration. The decision of the city council shall be final. If a reduction, adjustment, or waiver is granted, any change in use within the project shall invalidate the waiver, adjustment, or reduction of the fee. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.150 - Environmental exemption. 
Pursuant to Title 14 California Code of Regulations sections 15061 and 15273(4), this chapter is exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005)  
15.66.160 - Sunset provision. 
This chapter shall no longer be effective or apply and shall be repealed in its entirety upon termination of the "Agreement for Property Tax Allocation Upon Annexation (A-05-_____*)" between the city of Lodi and the county of San Joaquin, unless otherwise extended by resolution of the Lodi City Council. 
(Ord. 1758 § 1 (part), 2005) 
* To be completed by staff upon the county's adoption of the agreement.  
Chapter 15.68 - SAN JOAQUIN COUNTY MULTI-SPECIES HABITAT CONSERVATION AND OPEN SPACE PLAN (SJMSCP) DEVELOPMENT FEES 
Sections: 
 
15.68.010 - Purpose and intent. 
A.  In order to implement the goals and objectives of the San Joaquin County Multi-Species Habitat Conservation and Open Space Plan (SJMSCP), and to mitigate the cumulative impacts of new development on undeveloped lands within the city of Lodi and in San Joaquin County, the establishment of preserve lands will be necessary to compensate for impacts to threatened, endangered, rare and unlisted SJMSCP covered species and other wildlife, and compensation for some non-wildlife related impacts to recreation, agriculture, scenic values and other beneficial open space uses. 
B.  In accordance with Sections 7.3, 7.4.1, 7.4.1.1, 7.4.1.3, and 7.4.1.4 of the SJMSCP, new development will pay approximately sixty percent of total SJMSCP costs with the exception of vernal pool conversions that will pay one hundred percent of total SJMSCP costs. While those undertaking new development pursuant to the SJMSCP may opt to dedicate lands consistent with the SJMSCP preserve designs or to purchase credits from mitigation banks, most of the sixty percent contribution to the SJMSCP costs from new development will be in the form of development fees. 
C.  The Lodi city council is required to establish a fee ordinance in accordance with Section 5.1.1.(b) of the SJMSCP Implementation Agreement for the purpose of collecting fee monies to finance the SJMSCP. In establishing the fee described in the following sections, the Lodi city council has found the fee to be consistent with the SJMSCP Funding Plan as provided in Chapter 7 of the SJMSCP. 
(Ord. 1707 § 1 (part), 2001)  
15.68.020 - SJMSCP development fee. 
A.  Establishment of Fee. The SJMSCP development fee (hereinafter, the fee) is hereby established for new development pursuant to the SJMSCP in the city of Lodi to pay for preserve lands to mitigate the cumulative impacts related to new development, including but not limited to acquisition, enhancement, restoration, maintenance and/or operation of habitat/open space conservation lands. The fee shall not be collected until the city of Lodi, in a council resolution: 
1.  Sets forth the purpose of the fee; 
2.  Identifies the specific use(s) to be financed; 
3.  Describes how there is a reasonable relationship between the fee's use and the type of development project; 
4.  Determines how there is a reasonable relationship between the need for use(s) and type(s) of development project(s); 
5.  Determines the amount of the fee and how there is a reasonable relationship between the amount of the fee and the cost of the preserve lands or portion thereof attributable to the development; and 
6.  Establishes a separate development fee account into which the fees shall be placed, provides for the appropriation of the fees, and references the proposed transfer of fees to SJCOG, Inc. (a.k.a. JPA as per the SJMSCP). 
B.  Annual Adjustment. The fee established pursuant to a resolution shall be adjusted each year by an amount consistent with the California Construction Cost Index (CCCI) as published by the Engineering News Record and/or in conformance with Section 7.5.2.2. of the SJMSCP, and as approved by SJCOG, Inc. 
The proposed fee adjustments shall be adopted by the city council in order to be effective by January 1 of each year. 
C.  Interest. The fees collected shall earn interest while in possession of the city of Lodi. The interest earned shall be credited to the account in which the fee was deposited and shall be retained by the city of Lodi until transferred to the SJCOG, Inc. account. 
D.  Payment of Fees. The fee shall be collected in accordance with Chapter 5.3.2.3 of the SJMSCP. 
E.  Use of Fee or Refund. The chief financial officer of SJCOG, Inc. shall make findings once each fiscal year with respect to any portion of any moneys, excluding letters of credit or other security instruments, that is remaining unexpended or uncommitted in the SJCOG, Inc. account for five or more years after deposit of the fee, to identify the purpose to which the fee is to be put, and to demonstrate a reasonable relationship between the fee and the purpose for which it was charged. 
There shall be refunded to the then current record owner or owners of the parcels of the development project or projects on a prorated basis the unexpended or uncommitted portion of the fee, and any interest accrued thereon, for which need cannot be demonstrated pursuant to this subdivision. The refund shall be made from the unexpended or uncommitted revenues by direct payment, or by any other means consistent with the intent of this section. If the administrative costs of refunding unexpended or uncommitted revenues pursuant to this section exceed the amount to be refunded, the SJCOG, Inc. board of directors, after a public hearing, may determine the revenues shall be allocated for some other purpose for which the fees are collected subject to this chapter and which serves the project on which the fee was originally imposed. 
(Ord. 1707 § 1 (part), 2001) 
(Ord. No. 1825, § 1, 11-4-2009)  
15.68.030 - Use of fees. 
A.  The fees paid shall be placed in a separate fee account to avoid commingling of the fees with other funds of the city of Lodi. The fees may be temporarily invested. Such fees, along with any interest earnings, shall be used solely to pay for those uses(s) described in the Resolution enacted pursuant to Section 15.68.020, which shall include the following: 
1.  To pay for acquisition of preserve lands (and associated transaction costs); 
2.  To pay for monitoring and restoration and/or enhancement of preserve lands; 
3.  To pay for endowment for long-term management of preserve lands; and 
4.  To pay for initial and on-going administration of the SJMSCP. 
B.  No less frequently than quarterly, and pursuant to Section 5.1.1(d) of the Implementation Agreement, the city of Lodi shall transfer fees in the city of Lodi SJMSCP development fee account to SJCOG, Inc. All proceeds in the SJCOG, Inc. account not immediately necessary for expenditure shall be invested in an interest bearing account. 
(Ord. 1707 § 1 (part), 2001)  
15.68.040 - Protest. 
Any protest as to the imposition of a fee may be filed with the SJCOG, Inc. 
(Ord. 1707 § 1 (part), 2001)  
Chapter 15.72 - THE HOMEOWNER AND PROPERTY PROTECTION ORDINANCE—EMINENT DOMAIN 
Sections: 
 
15.72.010 - The Homeowner and Property Protection Ordinance—Eminent domain. 
Whereas, this chapter shall be known as "The Homeowner and Property Protection Ordinance"; 
Whereas, eminent domain has been subject to abuse in California, whereby local governmental entities have condemned property and transferred it, by sale, lease, or otherwise, to the control, management, or exploitation of private entities for private use and profit on the theory that generalized public benefits will flow therefrom; 
Whereas, the United States Supreme Court, in Kelo v. City of New London, _____ U.S. _____ (2005), has held that the United States Constitution does not prevent the transfer of property, seized through eminent domain, to private entities for private profit; 
Whereas, it is the intent of the Lodi city council that private property shall not be taken or damaged for the use, exploitation, or management of any private party, including, but not limited to, the use, exploitation, or management of property taken or damaged by a corporation or other business entity for private profit, as is currently permitted under the United States Constitution under Kelo v. City of New London, _____ U.S. _____ (2005); 
Whereas, it is not the intent of this chapter to prevent the rental of space in a government building or any other government-owned property for incidental commercial enterprises, including, but not limited to, gift shops, newsstands, and private nonprofit entities such as churches and other religious and civic organizations; and 
Whereas, this chapter shall apply only to condemnation actions that are completed after this chapter goes into effect. 
A.  Property taken by eminent domain by the city shall be owned and occupied by the condemnor or another governmental agency utilizing the property for the stated public use by agreement with the condemnor, or may be leased only to entities that are regulated by the Public Utilities Commission or to private nonprofit entities. All property that is taken by eminent domain shall be used only for a public use or as set forth above. 
B.  If any property taken through eminent domain after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter ceases to be used for the stated public use, within ten years of its original acquisition, the former owner of the property or a beneficiary or an heir, if a beneficiary or heir has been designated for this purpose, shall have the right to reacquire the property at the original purchase price or fair market value of the property, whichever is lesser, before the property may be otherwise sold or transferred. 
(Ord. 1775 § 1, 2006)  
Title 17 - DEVELOPMENT CODE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1869, § 2, adopted February 20, 2013, repealed the former Chapters 17.03—17.88, and enacted a new Title 17 as set out herein. The former Title 17 pertained to zoning. See the prior code table, ordinance list and the code comparative table for the title's history. 
 
ARTICLE 1. - PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT CODE  
Chapter 17.01 - ENACTMENT AND APPLICABILITY OF DEVELOPMENT CODE 
 
17.01.010 - Purpose of the development code. 
The purpose of the Lodi development code is to implement the policies of the general plan by classifying and regulating the uses of land and structures within the city of Lodi in a manner consistent with the general plan. To achieve this purpose, it is the intent of these regulations to: 
A.  Provide standards for the orderly development of the city, and continue a stable pattern of land uses; 
B.  Preserve the historical integrity and character of the city's neighborhoods and commercial areas; 
C.  Encourage a pedestrian-friendly community by promoting a mix of land uses and pedestrian oriented design in residential and commercial areas; and 
D.  Conserve and protect the natural resources of the city, including surrounding agricultural lands. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.01.020 - Authority. 
These regulations are enacted based on the authority vested in the city of Lodi by the state of California, including but not limited to: The State Constitution; the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.); the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.); and the California Health and Safety Code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.01.030 - Applicability of regulations. 
This development code, hereafter referred to as "this code," applies to all land uses, structures, subdivisions, and development within the city of Lodi, as follows: 
A.  New land uses or structures, changes to land uses or structures. Compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.12 (Development and Land Use Approval Requirements) or, where applicable, Chapter 17.68 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels), is necessary for any person or public agency to lawfully establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace any use of land or structure. 
B.  Issuance of Building Permits. The city may issue building or other construction permits only when: 
1.  The proposed land use and/or structure satisfy the requirements of subsection A above, and all other applicable statutes, codes and regulations; and 
2.  The director determines that the site was subdivided in compliance with Article 5 (Subdivisions). 
C.  Subdivisions. Any subdivision of land proposed within the city after the effective date of this code shall be consistent with: the minimum lot size requirements of Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), and all other applicable requirements of this code, including the land use and development permit procedures as outlined in Article 4. 
D.  Effect of Regulations on Existing Uses and Structures. An existing land use or structure is lawful only when it was legally established, and is operated and maintained, in compliance with all applicable provisions of this code, including Chapter 17.68 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Parcels). 
Existing land uses or structures that were in violation of city zoning regulations applicable before the effective date of this code are in violation of these regulations, and shall continue to be in violation unless they comply with the current requirements. 
E.  Effect of Regulations Changes on Projects in Progress. A land use permit application that has been accepted by the department as complete prior to the effective date of this code or any amendment shall be processed according to the requirements in effect when the application was accepted as complete. 
F.  Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this code shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. When this code provides for discretion on the part of a city official or body, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than set forth in this code as may be necessary to promote orderly land use development and the purposes of this code. 
G.  Other Requirements May Apply. Nothing in this code eliminates the need for: obtaining any permit, approval, or entitlement required by the regulations of the county, or any regional, state, or federal agency. 
H.  Conflicting Requirements. Any conflict between different requirements of this code, or between this code and other city regulations, shall be resolved in compliance with Section 17.02.020(D) (Conflicting Requirements). 
I.  Severability. Invalidity or enforceability of one or more provisions of this code shall not affect other provisions of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.01.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
This development code shall be administered by the city council, planning commission, site plan and architectural review committee (SPARC), community development director, and the community development department in compliance with Chapter 17.66 (Administrative Responsibility). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.02 - INTERPRETATION OF CODE PROVISIONS 
 
17.02.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides rules for resolving questions about the meaning or applicability of any part of this code. The provisions of this chapter are intended to ensure the consistent interpretation and application of the requirements of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.02.020 - Rules of interpretation. 
A.  Authority. The director shall have the responsibility and authority to interpret the meaning and applicability of all provisions and requirements of this code. 
B.  Language. 
1.  Abbreviated Titles and Phrases. For the purpose of brevity, the following phrases, personnel and document titles are shortened in this code. The city of Lodi is referred to as the "city." The city of Lodi zoning and subdivision code is referred to as "this code." The community development director is referred to as "director," the city council is referred to as the "council," the planning commission is referred to as the "commission." The community development department is referred to as the "department." "Buildings and structures" are referred to as "structures." 
2.  Terminology. When used in this code, the words "shall," "will," "is to," and "are to" are always mandatory. "Should" is not mandatory but is strongly recommended; and "may" is permissive. The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future tense includes the present. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the word indicates otherwise. The words "include," "includes," and "including" mean "including but not limited to... 
3.  Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this code, or in any permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided in this code, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits will extend to the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the city is not open for business, except as otherwise provided for by the Map Act. 
4.  State Law Requirements. Where this code references applicable provisions of state law (e.g., the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the reference shall be construed to be to the applicable state law provisions as they may be amended from time to time. 
C.  Calculations—Rounding. Where any provisions of this code require calculations to determine applicable requirements, any fractional/decimal results of the calculations shall be rounded as provided by this subsection. 
1.  Residential Density, Minimum Lot Area and Number of Lots. The fractional/decimal results of calculations of the number of dwelling units allowed on a parcel based on maximum density requirements, and the number of parcels allowed through subdivision based on a minimum lot area requirement, shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number. 
2.  All Other Calculations. For all calculations other than those described in subsection (C)(1) above, the fractional/decimal results of calculations shall be rounded to the next highest whole number when the fraction/decimal is 0.5 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.5. 
D.  Conflicting Requirements. Any conflicts between different requirements of this code, or between this code and other regulations, shall be resolved as follows: 
1.  Zoning and Subdivision Ordinance Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this code, the most restrictive requirement shall control, except in case of any conflict between the zoning district regulations of Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards) and the provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards), the provisions of Article 3 shall control. 
2.  Development Agreements, Specific Plans, Planned Developments. In the event of any conflict between the requirements of this code and standards adopted as part of any development agreement, specific plan, or planned development approval, the requirements of the development agreement or specific plan shall control. 
3.  Municipal Code Provisions. In the event of any conflict between requirements of this code and other regulations of the city, the community development director shall determine which provision shall control. 
4.  Private Agreements. It is not intended that the requirements of this code shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul any easement, covenant, or other agreement that existed when this zoning code became effective. This code applies to all land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than an applicable private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of any agreement or restriction. The city shall not enforce any private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement. 
E.  Zoning Map Boundaries. See Chapter 17.10 (Zoning Districts and Map). 
F.  Allowable Uses of Land. See Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.02.030 - Procedures for interpretations. 
Whenever the community development director determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this code are subject to interpretation generally, or as applied to a specific case, the director may issue an official interpretation or refer the question to the planning commission for determination. 
A.  Request for Interpretation. The request for an interpretation or determination shall be filed with the department and shall include specific provisions in question, and any other information necessary to assist the Department in their review. 
B.  Appeals. Any interpretation of this code by the director or commission may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 2. - ZONING DISTRICTS LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
Chapter 17.10 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND MAP 
 
17.10.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes the zoning districts applied to property within the city, determines how the zoning districts are applied on the zoning map, and establishes general permit requirements for development and new land uses. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.10.020 - Zoning districts established. 
The city of Lodi shall be divided into zoning districts which implement the Lodi general plan. The zoning districts shown in Table 2-1 are hereby established, and shall be shown on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.10.030 - Zoning map adopted. 
The council hereby adopts the city of Lodi zoning map (hereafter referred to as the "zoning map"), which is on file with the department. The zoning map is hereby incorporated into this development code by reference as though it were fully included here. The boundaries of the zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established) shall be shown upon the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.10.040 - Zoning district boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of any district on the district map, the following rules shall govern: 
A.  Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following street or alley lines, such lines shall be construed to be such boundaries. 
B.  In the case of unsubdivided property and where a district boundary divides a parcel of property in one ownership, the locations of such boundaries shall be determined from the scale appearing on the map. 
C.  Where a public street or alley is officially vacated, the regulations of abutting properties shall apply to such vacated street or alley after being added to such properties. 
D.  In case of further uncertainty, the director shall determine the location of such boundaries. 
TABLE 2-1 ZONING DISTRICTS 
Zoning 
District 
Symbol 	Zoning District Name 	General Plan Land Use 
Classification Implemented 
by Zoning District 
Residential Districts 
RLD 	Low Density Family Residential 	Low Density Residential 
RMD 	Medium Density Residential 	Medium Density Residential 
RHD 	High Density Residential 	High Density Residential 
Commercial Districts 
CC 	Community Commercial 	General Commercial 
GC 	General Commercial 	General Commercial 
O 	Office 	Office 
Mixed Use Districts 
DMU 	Downtown Mixed Use District 	Downtown Mixed Commercial 
MCO 	Mixed Use Corridor 	Mixed Use Corridor 
MCE 	Mixed Use Center 	Mixed Use Center 
Industrial Districts 
BP 	Business Park 	Business Park 
M 	Industrial 	Industrial 
Public and Open Space Districts 
PF 	Public and Community Facility 	Public/Quasi-Public 
		Detention Basins and Parks 
Overlay Districts 
-F 	Floodplain Overlay 	Various 
-PD 	Planned Development Overlay 	Various 
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.12 - DEVELOPMENT AND LAND USE APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.12.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides general requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses in the city. The land use permit requirements established by this development code for specific land uses are in Chapters 17.14 through 17.28, and in Article 3. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.020 - General requirements for development and new land uses. 
All uses of land and/or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or replaced, in compliance with the following requirements: 
A.  Allowable Use. The use of land shall be identified by Chapters 17.18 (Residential Zoning Districts), 17.20 (Commercial Zoning Districts), 17.22 (Mixed Use Zoning Districts), 17.24 (Industrial Zoning Districts), 17.26 (Special Purpose Zoning Districts), or 17.28 (Overlay Zoning Districts) as being allowable in the zoning districts applied to the site. The director may determine whether a particular land use is allowable, in compliance with Section 17.12.030. 
B.  Permit/Approval Requirements. Any land use permit or other approval required by Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements) shall be obtained before the proposed use is constructed, otherwise established or put into operation, unless the proposed use is listed in Section 17.12.040 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements). 
C.  Development Standards. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with all applicable requirements of this development code, including the zoning district standards of this article, and the provisions of Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
D.  Conditions of Approval. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with any applicable conditions imposed by any previously granted land use permit or other approval. 
E.  Legal Parcel. The use of land and/or structures shall only be established on a parcel of land which has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act and Article 5 (Subdivisions), as applicable at the time the parcel was created. 
F.  Development Agreements. The use and/or structures shall comply with any applicable development agreement approved by the city in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Development Agreements). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.030 - Allowable land uses and permit requirements. 
The uses of land allowed by this development code in each zoning district are identified in Chapters 17.18, 17.20, 17.22, 17.24, 17.26, and 17.28 together with the type of land use permit required for each use. 
A.  Permit Requirements. Tables 2-4, 2-6, 2-8, 2-10, and 2-12 provide for land uses that are: 
1.  Allowed uses subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code, subject to first obtaining a building permit or other permit required by the municipal code. These are shown as "A" uses in the tables; and 
2.  Allowed subject to the approval of a use permit (Section 17.40.040), and shown as "UP" uses in the tables. 
3.  Allowed subject to the approval of a minor use permit, and as shown as "MUP" uses in the tables. 
4.  Not allowed in particular zones and shown as "—" uses in the tables. 
Note: Design review may also be required for certain uses and types of development. Design review requirements are established by Section 17.40.020. 
B.  Multiple Uses on a Single Site. Where a proposed project includes multiple land uses, and Tables 2-4, 2-6, 2-8, 2-10, and 2-12 require different land use permits for some of the uses, each use shall be authorized through the approval of the permit required for the specific use. 
C.  Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in Tables 2-4, 2-6, 2-8, 2-10 or 2-12, or are not shown in a particular zoning district are not allowed, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.02.020 (Rules of Interpretation), or Section 17.12.040 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.040 - Exemptions from land use permit requirements. 
The land use permit requirements of this development code do not apply to the activities, uses of land and/or structures identified by this section. However, nothing in this section shall eliminate the requirements of the municipal code for obtaining grading, building, and/or other construction permits prior to starting any work. 
A.  Governmental Facilities. Facilities of the city; the Lodi unified school district (LUSD); and facilities of the county, state, or the federal government on land owned or leased by a governmental agency, for governmental operations, to the extent that exemption is required by state or federal law. 
B.  Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure, or change the approved use of the structure. 
C.  Reconstruction of Destroyed Uses and Structures. A use of land and/or structure destroyed by fire or natural disaster may be re-established as it existed, provided that: 
1.  It was legally established and in compliance with this development code before destruction; and 
2.  Reconstruction occurs in compliance with all applicable building, electrical, mechanical, and plumbing code requirements. 
See Section 17.68.020 regarding repairs to nonconforming structures. 
D.  Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and maintenance, if: 
1.  The work does not result in any change in the approved land use of the site or structure, addition to, or enlargement/expansion of the land use and/or structure; and 
2.  The exterior repairs employ the same materials and design as the original construction. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.050 - Requirements for sites divided by zoning boundary. 
Where a site is divided by one or more zoning district boundaries, the site shall be developed in compliance with the requirements of each district, as applicable. For example, if a site is zoned both commercial and residential, the portion of the site zoned commercial shall be developed in compliance with the commercial zoning regulations, and the portion zoned residential shall be developed in compliance with the requirements of the applicable residential district. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.060 - Temporary uses. 
Requirements for establishing a temporary use (e.g., construction yards, seasonal sales lots, special events, temporary office trailers, etc.) are in Section 17.40.030 (Temporary Use Permits). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.12.070 - Additional permits and approvals may be required. 
An allowed land use that has been granted a land use permit, or is exempt from a land use approval, may still be required to obtain city permits or approvals before the use is constructed, or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this division shall eliminate the need to obtain any permits or approvals required by: 
A.  Other municipal code provisions, including: building, grading or other construction permits or a business license if required by municipal code; or 
B.  Any applicable county, or any regional, state or federal agency regulations. All necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing new uses. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.14 - GENERAL PROPERTY DEVELOPMENT AND USE STANDARDS 
 
17.14.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter expands upon the standards of Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards) by addressing the details of site planning and project design. These standards are intended to ensure that all development produces an environment of desirable character that is compatible with existing and future development and protects the use and enjoyment of neighboring properties, consistent with the General Plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.020 - Applicability. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to all proposed development and new land uses. 
A.  These standards shall be considered in combination with the standards for each zoning district in Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). If there is a conflict, the standards applicable to the zoning district shall take precedence over these general standards, except where these standards provide otherwise. 
B.  All new or modified structures and uses shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, except as specified in Chapter 17.68 (Nonconforming Uses, Structures, and Parcels). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.030 - Development across property lines. 
Where an existing structure is located on two or more lots and crosses one or more of the property lines between the lots, the approval of any addition to the structure shall require that the property owner merge the parcels prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.040 - General performance standards. 
All land uses activities, and processes shall be operated and maintained so as to not be injurious to public health, safety or welfare, and to comply with the following standards: 
A.  Air Emissions. No visible dust, gasses, or smoke shall be emitted, except as necessary for the heating or cooling of structures, and the operation of motor vehicles on the site. 
B.  Combustibles and Explosives. The use, handling, storage, and transportation of combustibles and explosives shall comply with the Uniform Fire Code. 
C.  Ground Vibration. No ground vibration shall be generated that is perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property lines of the site, except for motor vehicle operations. 
D.  Light and Glare. See Section 17.14.070 (Lighting). 
E.  Liquid Waste. No liquid shall be discharged into a public or private body of water, sewage system, watercourse, or into the ground, except in compliance with applicable regulations of the California Regional Water Quality Control Board. 
F.  Noise. No use, activity, or process shall exceed the maximum allowable noise standards identified by the general plan. 
G.  Odor. No obnoxious odor or fumes shall be emitted that are perceptible without instruments by a reasonable person at the property line of the site. 
H.  Radioactivity, Electrical Disturbance or Electromagnetic Interference. None of the following shall be emitted: 
1.  Radioactivity, in a manner that does not comply with all applicable state and federal regulations; or 
2.  Electrical disturbance or electromagnetic interference that interferes with normal radio or television reception, or with the function of other electronic equipment beyond the property line of the site; or that does not comply with all applicable Federal Communications Commission (FCC) and other applicable state and federal regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.050 - Height limits and exceptions. 
All structures shall comply with the height limits of this section, except for fences and walls, which are instead subject to the provisions of Section 17.14.100 (Walls, Fences, and Hedges). 
A.  Maximum Height of Structures. The height of structures shall not exceed the limit for the applicable zoning district in Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). 
B.  Height Measurement. The maximum allowable height shall be measured as the vertical distance from finished grade at the base of the structure to the top of structure. See Figure 2-1. Finished grade shall be established in a manner consistent with parcels in the immediate vicinity as determined by the director, and shall not be artificially raised to gain additional building height. 
  
Figure 2-1 - Height Measurement 
C.  Exceptions to Height Limits. The following structures and structural features may exceed the height limits of this development code provided that the additional building area is not used as habitable space. 
1.  Towers, spires, cupolas, domes, flag poles, gables, monuments, penthouses, theater scenery lofts, water tanks, similar structures, and necessary mechanical appurtenances may exceed the height limit established for the applicable zoning district to a maximum of twenty percent of the height limit. 
2.  Public and semi-public structures including hospitals may be up to seventy-five feet, provided that the front, side and rear setbacks are increased by one foot for each foot of building height above the height limit. 
3.  Telecommunications facilities, including antennas, poles, towers, and necessary mechanical appurtenances, may be authorized to exceed the height limit established for the applicable zoning district, in compliance with Section 17.36.140 (Telecommunications Facilities). 
D.  Height Limit at Street Corners. No structure or landscape element shall exceed forty-two inches in height within a street corner sight visibility area, except: 
1.  Within the downtown area; 
2.  Trees with their canopy trimmed to a minimum of eight feet above grade; and 
3.  Where otherwise approved by the director on the basis of a determination that a structure and/or landscaping with greater height will not create a safety hazard for pedestrians or motorists. 
The required sight visibility area is defined by a line between two points on the street property lines of a corner parcel, each thirty-five feet from the intersection of the two property lines forming the corner at the street right of way. See Figure 2-2. 
  
Figure 2-2 - Sight Visibility Area 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.060 - Setback measurement and exceptions. 
This section provides standards for the use and minimum size of required setbacks. These standards are intended to provide open areas around structures for: Visibility and traffic safety; access to and around structures; access to natural light, ventilation and direct sunlight; separation of incompatible land uses; and space for privacy, landscaping, and recreation. 
A.  Setback Requirements. 
1.  All structures shall comply with the setback requirements of the applicable zoning districts established by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), and with any special setbacks established for specific uses by this development code. 
2.  No portion of a structure, including eaves or roof overhangs, or other architectural features shall extend into a yard more than twenty-four inches, and they must be at least thirty-six inches away from any property line. 
3.  Each required setback shall be open and unobstructed from the ground upward. 
B.  Exemptions from Setback Requirements. The minimum setback requirements of this development code apply to all uses and structures except the following: 
1.  Fences, walls, and hedges forty-two inches or less in height above the natural grade of the parcel; except as otherwise provided in Section 17.14.100; 
2.  Decks, earthworks, pavement, steps, terraces, and other site design elements placed directly upon the finish grade, and that do not exceed a height of eighteen inches above the surrounding finish grade at any point; and 
3.  Pools, ponds, and spas, except as required by the California Building Code. 
C.  Measurement of Setbacks. Setbacks shall be measured from the exterior wall of structures, as follows: See Figure 2-3. 
  
Figure 2-3 - Location and Measurement of Setbacks 
1.  Front Yard Setbacks. The front yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the front property line of the parcel to the nearest portion of the structure, except as provided in following subsections (C)(1)(a) through (C)(1)(b). Garages and carports shall be setback at least twenty feet from the street right-of-way. 
a.  Corner Parcels. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest line of the structure to the nearest point of the property line adjoining the street which is opposite the rear yard. 
b.  Flag Lots. The measurement shall be taken from the nearest point of the wall of the structure facing the street to the point where the access strip meets the bulk of the parcel; establishing a building line parallel to the lot line nearest to the public street or right-of-way. See Figure 2-4. 
  
Figure 2-4 - Flag Lot Setbacks 
2.  Side Yard and Street Side Yard Setbacks. Side yard and street side yard setbacks shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the side property line of the parcel to the nearest portion of the structure; establishing a setback line parallel to the side property line, which extends between the front and rear yards. 
3.  Rear Yard Setbacks. The rear yard setback shall be measured at right angles from the nearest point on the rear property line of the parcel to the nearest portion of the structure, establishing a setback line parallel to the rear property line, except: 
The rear yard setback on the street side of a through lot shall be measured from the nearest point of the rear property line adjoining the street and shall be setback a minimum of forty feet. 
If a parcel abuts an alley, the rear yard setback shall be five feet. 
D.  Allowed Projections into Setbacks. Attached architectural features may extend from the wall of the structure into a front, side, or rear setback, in compliance with Table 2-2. See Figure 2-5. 
TABLE 2-2 ALLOWED PROJECTIONS INTO RESIDENTIAL SETBACKS 
Projecting Feature 	Allowed Projection into Specified Setback 
	Front Setback 	Side Setback 	Rear Setback 
Projections such as a chimney/fireplace, cornice, buttress, eave/roof, overhang, sill 	2 ft., but no closer than 3 ft. to any property line 
Deck or porch, which may be roofed but is otherwise unenclosed 	5 ft. 	0 ft. 	0 ft. 
Stairway, fire escape, balcony 	3 ft. from any property line 
Architectural features 	Projection shall not exceed 30% of building wall 
 
  
Figure 2-5 - Examples of Allowed Projections into Residential 
E.  Limitations on the Use of Setbacks. Required setback areas shall only be used in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Storage. No required setback visible from the public right-of-way shall be used for the storage of inoperable vehicles, scrap, junk, building materials, or similar material. 
2.  Parking. Residential parking is allowable within required setback areas only on a paved surface, in compliance with Section 17.32.070 (Parking Design Standards). 
3.  Swimming Pool Equipment. Swimming pool equipment (e.g., pumps and filters) shall be located a minimum of five feet from side and rear property lines. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.070 - Lighting. 
Exterior lighting on private property within the city shall comply with the requirements of this section. 
A.  Exterior lighting fixtures shall not exceed a height of twenty feet or the height of the nearest building, whichever is less. 
B.  Lighting shall be energy-efficient, and shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within the boundaries of the site, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. 
C.  No permanently installed lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness, as determined by the director. 
D.  All lighting fixtures shall be appropriate in scale, intensity, and height to the use they are serving. 
E.  All lighting shall be properly maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.080 - Screening. 
This section establishes standards for the screening and separation of adjoining residential and nonresidential land uses, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas. 
A.  Screening Between Different Land Uses. An opaque screen consisting of a solid, decorative masonry wall a minimum of six feet in height, shall be installed along parcel boundaries whenever a non-residential use adjoins a residential zoning district. The maximum height of the wall shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.14.100 (Walls, Fences, and Hedges). The wall shall be architecturally treated on both sides, subject to the approval of the Director. 
B.  Mechanical Equipment, Loading Docks, and Refuse Areas. 
1.  Roof or ground mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts, and exhaust, etc.), loading docks, refuse storage areas, and utility services (e.g. electrical transformers, gas meters, etc.) shall be screened from public view from adjoining public streets and rights-of-way and adjoining area(s) zoned for residential uses. 
2.  The colors, materials, and architectural style of screening features shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development. 
3.  Landscaping shall be installed adjacent to screen walls, at the discretion of the director. 
C.  Outdoor Storage and Work Yards. Where allowed by Article 2, areas for the outdoor storage of materials, recycling facility-processing centers, waste resource and waste recycling operations, and similar uses shall comply with the following requirements, in addition to those of subsection A of this section, where applicable. 
1.  Within commercial zoning districts, outdoor storage and work areas shall be screened on all sides with a solid sight-obscuring masonry wall, a minimum of six feet and a maximum of eight feet in height or as otherwise determined to reduce noise. Points of entry through the wall shall have sight-obscuring gates. The wall and gates shall be continuously maintained in good repair. Within industrial zoning districts, this screening requirement shall apply only on property lines adjacent to streets. 
2.  Site operations in conjunction with outdoor uses, including the loading and unloading of equipment and materials, shall be screened to minimize the visibility of operations from abutting streets and residential zoning districts. 
D.  Outdoor Building Materials and Garden Supply Storage and Sales Areas. Outdoor building materials and garden supply storage areas shall be screened with fencing, landscaping, meshing, walls, or similar material to minimize visibility of the storage area. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.090 - Solid waste collection and storage areas. 
The following regulations shall apply to garbage, refuse and recycling facilities on residential and commercial properties. Placement of these facilities within the public right-of-way is governed by Municipal Code Chapter 12.04: 
A.  Roll-away and Portable Containers. All roll-away and other portable containers must be kept out-of-view from the public right-of-ways, excluding alleys, and may not be stored within the front yard setback. 
B.  Dumpster Bins. All dumpster bin storage and refuse collection areas shall be screened from public view by a concrete block or masonry wall or in such a manner so that it is not visible from abutting public right-of-ways, excluding alleys. All storage and collection areas and enclosures shall be maintained in a sanitary condition and walls, roof coverings and doors to enclosures must be maintained in good condition and must be in working order. 
C.  Exceptions. The following exceptions pertain to both commercial and residential garbage, refuse and recycling facilities: 
1.  Garbage, refuse and recycling storage containers can be placed out for collection, from 5:00 p.m. the day before garbage collection to 8:00 p.m. the day of garbage collection, in accordance with the requirements of the garbage collector. 
2.  Rented containers and dumpster bins can be placed in public view on private property for the duration of the special project, remodeling or construction project, or special event for which they are being used, but must be maintained in a sanitary condition and removed when filled to prevent overflow and blight. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.14.100 - Walls, fences and hedges. 
A.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter apply to all walls, fences, and hedges, unless otherwise stated. 
B.  Exemptions. These regulations do not apply to fences or walls required by regulations of a state or federal agency, or by the city for reasons of public safety, or to retaining walls. 
C.  Height limitations. Fences, walls, and hedges shall comply with the height limitations shown in Table 2-3. 
TABLE 2-3 MAXIMUM HEIGHT OF FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES 
Location 	Maximum 
Height 
Within front yard setback 	48 in. (1) 
At a side or rear lot line or outside of a required setback 	6 ft. 
Nonresidential district adjacent to a residential district 	8 ft. 
 
(1)  Except in visibility triangle when the maximum height is forty-two inches. 
D.  Measurement of Fence or Wall Height. Fence and wall height shall be measured from finished grade at the base of the fence to the uppermost part of the fence. Where there is a difference in the ground level between two adjoining parcels of less than two feet, the height of a fence or wall constructed along the common property line shall be determined by using the finished grade of the highest contiguous parcel. See Figure 2-6. 
  
Figure 2-6 - Fence Height Measurement 
E.  Swimming Pools, Spas, and Similar Features. Swimming pools/spas and other similar water features shall be fenced in compliance with the California Building Code and State law. 
F.  Outdoor Equipment, Storage, and Work Areas. Screening of outdoor uses and equipment shall be provided in compliance with Section 17.14.080 (Screening). 
G.  Temporary Fencing. Temporary fencing may be necessary during site preparation and construction. Temporary fencing for these purposes shall be subject to approval by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.16 - APPLICABILITY AND GENERAL DESIGN GUIDELINES 
 
17.16.010 - Purpose of design guidelines. 
The design guidelines in this article are intended as a guide to assist property owners and project designers in understanding the city's goals for attaining high quality development that is sensitive to the city's unique character. The guidelines will be used by staff and the site plan and architectural review committee (SPARC) during the design review process, and by the commission in the review of land use permit applications. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.16.020 - Applicability. 
A.  The design guidelines in this article apply to all development within the city. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, signs, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. 
B.  The review authority may interpret these design guidelines with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the review authority to be more important in the particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.16.030 - General design guidelines. 
This section provides general design guidelines and principles that are applicable to all development within the city. 
A.  Consider Adjacent Development. Each development proposal should demonstrate consideration for the context of the proposed project on and off the site including the following: 
1.  Land uses and site organization of neighboring properties; 
2.  The architectural style and building forms of neighboring structures; 
3.  Existing natural features (i.e., mature trees, etc.); 
4.  Privacy on the site and neighboring properties; and 
5.  Links to adjacent development using sidewalks and shared access drives and parking. 
B.  Landscaping. 
1.  Landscaped areas should be planned as an integral part of the overall project and not simply located in "left over" areas of the site. 
2.  Landscaping should be used to help define outdoor spaces, soften a structure's appearance, and to screen parking, loading, storage, and equipment areas. 
3.  The use of on-site pedestrian amenities (e.g., benches, shelters, drinking fountains, lighting, and trash receptacles) is encouraged. These elements should be provided in conjunction with on-site open spaces and be integrated into the site plan as primary features. 
C.  Exterior Lighting. Exterior lighting should be designed to be compatible with the architectural and landscape design of the project. 
1.  An appropriate hierarchy of lighting fixtures/structures and intensity should be considered when designing the lighting for the various elements of a project (i.e., building and site entrances, walkways, parking areas, or other areas of the site). 
2.  The use of exterior lighting to accent a building's architecture is encouraged. All lighting fixtures should be properly shielded to eliminate light and glare from impacting adjacent properties, and passing vehicles or pedestrians. If neon tubing is used to illuminate portions of a building it should be concealed from view through the use of parapets, cornices or ledges. Small portions of exposed neon tubing may be used to add a special effect to a building's architecture but this must be well thought out and integrated into the overall design of the project. 
3.  To achieve the desired lighting level for parking and pedestrian areas, the use of more short, low intensity fixtures is encouraged over the use of a few tall fixtures that illuminate large areas. 
D.  Screening. 
1.  Screening is a technique used to protect and separate uses and site functions from one another for the purpose of decreasing adverse noise, wind, or visual impacts and to provide privacy. The need for screening should be considered early in the design process so that screening elements (e.g., walls, fences, berms, landscaping) can be effectively integrated into the overall project design and not added later as an afterthought. 
2.  The method of screening should be compatible with the adjacent structure in terms of overall design, materials, and color. 
3.  Where screening is required at the ground level, a combination of elements should be considered including solid masonry walls, wood fences, berms, and landscaping. 
E.  Refuse, Storage, and Equipment Areas. 
1.  Refuse containers, service areas, loading docks, and similar facilities should be located in areas out of view from the general public and so that their use does not interfere with on-site parking or circulation areas, and adjacent uses, especially residential uses. 
  
Figure 2-7 - Trash Enclosure Location 
2.  Trash bins shall be fully enclosed. Enclosures should be screened with landscaping on their most visible sides. Recommended locations include inside parking courts or at the end of parking bays. Locations should be conveniently accessible for trash collection and maintenance and should not block access driveway during loading operations. 
3.  Trash storage areas that are visible from the upper stories of adjacent structures should have an opaque or semi-opaque horizontal cover/screen to mitigate unsightly views. The covering structure should be compatible with the site's architectural style. 
4.  All screening facilities should be of adequate size for their intended purpose without dominating the site, blocking sight distances, or creating unnecessary barriers. 
F.  General Building Design Guidelines. 
1.  Compatibility With Context. New buildings should be in proportion to surrounding buildings, except in those cases where current buildings are oversize. Harmony in mass, lines, and materials is important but monotony should be avoided. Buildings should be designed so that adverse impacts on adjacent buildings and properties are minimized. Loss of natural lighting, shade trees, noise pollution, and exhaust fumes and heat from venting should be addressed during project review, and all possible efforts should be made to avoid these effects. 
2.  Facade Design. Building facades should be designed to provide visual interest and relief. Continuous street facades, as near the street as possible with predominantly retail uses at grade and office/professional uses above, are encouraged. Buildings should not be overpowering or monotonous. A change in the planes of walls or variety in the roof form provides diversity and visual interest. 
3.  Building Materials. 
a.  Artificial or decorative facade treatments, where one or more unrelated materials appear to be simply applied to the surface of a building rather than an integral part of its design, should be avoided. Materials should be used honestly. Artificial products that attempt to imitate real materials (for example, wood, stone, brick, etc.) are discouraged. 
b.  The composition of materials should avoid creating the impression of thinness and artificiality. Veneers should turn corners, avoiding exposed edges. 
  
Figure 2-8 - Building Material at Wall Edges 
c.  Natural building materials (e.g., wood, stone, and brick) that blend with the natural surroundings should be used. Other materials should be reviewed on a case-by-case basis. Buildings should minimize the use of large expanses of reflective glazing, aluminum panels, and other materials not normally found in Lodi. Synthetic materials that attempt to simulate the textures or patterns of other materials (e.g., vinyl siding that attempts to simulate the pattern of woodgrain) should not be used. 
4.  Colors. 
a.  Colors should be compatible with the existing colors of the surrounding area but need not duplicate existing colors. The use of muted tones for the structure's base color is recommended. Color should not be used as an attention getting device. 
b.  Accent colors should be used carefully and be complementary to the base color or a variation of its hue, either weaker or stronger. 
c.  The transition between base and accent colors should relate to changes in building materials or the change of building surface planes. Colors should generally not meet or change without some physical change or definition to the surface plane. 
d.  In most cases, only one or two accent colors should be used in addition to the base color. 
G.  Subdivisions. Subdivisions of commercial, industrial, and multi-family residential properties should be designed to allow coordinated development of the parcels, facilitate shared parking and common driveways, reduce encroachments onto public and private streets, and promote pedestrian activity. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.18 - RESIDENTIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.18.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the residential zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established). It also determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides general standards for site development. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.18.020 - Purposes of residential zoning districts. 
The residential zoning districts are intended to provide for a range of housing types and densities for all economic segments of the community while emphasizing high quality development and home ownership (general plan, housing element). The purposes of the individual residential zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  RLD (Low-Density Residential) District. The RLD zoning district is intended for areas appropriate for the development of single-family detached, two-family, and three-family homes. All interior lots are restricted to single-family homes. Corner lots can have one-, two-, or three-family homes. The maximum allowable residential density is 8.0 dwelling units per acre. The RLD zoning district is consistent with the low-density residential land use designation of the general plan. 
B.  RMD (Medium Density Residential) District. The RMD zoning district is intended for areas appropriate for a mix of housing types. Typical residential land uses include single- and multi-family dwelling units, either attached or detached. The maximum allowable residential density ranges from 8.1 to twenty dwelling units per acre. The RMD zoning district is consistent with the medium density residential land use designation of the general plan. 
C.  RHD (High Density Residential) District. The RHD zoning district is intended for areas appropriate for high density multi-family dwelling units. The maximum allowable residential density ranges from fifteen to thirty-five units per acre. The RHD zoning district is consistent with the high density residential land use designation of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.18.030 - Residential zoning district land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 2-4 identifies the uses of land allowed by this development code in each residential zoning district, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Users and Permit Requirements). 
Note: Where the last column in the tables ("Specific Use Regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply. 
TABLE 2-4 
Residential Zones—Allowed Uses 	A 	Allowed Use 
	UP 	Use Permit Required 
	MUP 	Minor Use Permit Required 
	— 	Use Not Allowed 
LAND USE 	PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	RLD 	RMD 	RHD 	
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE 
Production of crops 	A 	A 	A 	
RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES 
Community centers 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Health/fitness facility 	— 	— 	UP 	
Libraries, museums, galleries 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Parks and playgrounds 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Religious facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Schools—Private 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Accessory uses (residential) 	A 	A 	A 	17.36.120 
Caretaker quarters 	— 	A 	A 	
Home occupations 	MUP 	MUP 	MUP 	17.36.060 
Live/work projects 	— 	UP 	UP 	
Mobile home/RV park 	— 	— 	UP 	17.36.070 
Multi-family dwellings (3 or more units) 	— 	A 	A 	
Seasonal farmworker housing 	— 	A 	A 	
Second dwelling units 	A 	A 	A 	17.36.130 
Single family dwellings 	A 	UP 	UP 	
Transitional and Supportive Housing 	A 	A 	A 	
Two family dwellings 	— 	A 	A 	
RETAIL TRADE 
Animal keeping 	A 	A 	A 	Municipal Code Chapter 6 
SERVICES 
Community Care Facilities 				
 Residential care facility (6 or fewer) 	A 	A 	A 	17.36.040 
 Residential care facility (7 or more) 	— 	UP 	UP 	17.36.040 
 Small family day care home (up to 8) 	A 	A 	A 	17.36.030 
 Large family day care home (9 to 14) 	MUP 	MUP 	MUP 	17.36.030 
 Day care center 	— 	— 	UP 	17.36.030 
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. No. 1914, § 1, 9-2-2015)  
17.18.040 - Residential zoning district general development standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-5, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
TABLE 2-5 RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS 
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zoning District 
	RLD 	RMD 	RHD 
Minimum lot size 	Minimum area, width, and depth required for new parcels. 
 Area—Single-Family 	5,000 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 	4,000 sq. ft. 
 Area—2-Family 	6,000 sq. ft. (2) 	5,000 sq. ft. 	4,000 sq. ft. 
 Area—Multi-Family 		8,000 sq. ft. 	8,000 sq. ft. 
Minimum lot area per unit 	Minimum lot area per unit determines the maximum number of dwellings that may be allowed on a parcel where this chapter allows more than one dwelling unit per parcel. 
 Single-Family 	5,000 sq. ft. 	5,000 sq. ft. 	4,000 sq. ft. 
 2-Family 	3,000 sq. ft. (2) 	3,000 sq. ft. 	2,000 sq. ft. 
 Multi-Family 		4,000 sq. ft. for 1 st unit plus 2,000 sq. ft. for each additional unit 	5,000 sq. ft. for 1 st unit plus 1,000 sq. ft. for each additional unit 
Density (1) 	Up to 8 du/ac 	8.1 to 20 du/ac 	15 to 35 du/ac 
Lot Street Frontage Width 	50' 	50' for one 
dwelling 
60' for two 
dwellings 	50' for one 
dwelling 
60' for two 
dwellings 
Setbacks 	Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required. See Section 17.14.060 for exceptions to these requirements. 
 Front 	15 ft. 
 Sides (each) 	5 ft. (3) 
 Street side 	10 ft. 
 Rear 	10 ft. 
 Garage 	20 ft. from any property line abutting a street, 5 ft. from alley 
Site coverage 	45% 	50% 	60% 
Height limit 	2 stories; not to exceed 35 ft. 	4 stories, not to exceed 60 ft. 
Landscaping 	As required by Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping) 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading) 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Maximum number of dwellings allowed per gross acre in a residential development. Where a density range is shown, development may be allowed at any density within the range, provided that the project complies with all applicable development code provisions, and any applicable objectives, policies, and programs of the general plan. The actual number of units allowed is determined through the applicable subdivision or land use permit process, and there is no guarantee that the maximum density may be achieved. 
(2)  Corner lots only. 
(3)  Five feet for porch. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.18.050 - Residential design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose of Chapter. The design character of Lodi's residential neighborhoods is as diverse as the different time periods during which they were developed. The guidelines provided here are intended to assist project designers and property owners in understanding and implementing the city's goals for attaining high quality residential development. They are also intended to help preserve the traditional character of the city's older neighborhoods. 
These guidelines are intended to encourage well designed residential neighborhoods that people enjoy living in, which: reduce the visual dominance of the automobile; promote pedestrian activity; create variety and interest in the appearance of residential streets; provide community open space; and protect significant features of the natural environment. 
B.  Applicability. These guidelines apply to the design of new residential subdivisions and to multi-family and clustered residential projects. Guidelines are also provided for vacant infill parcels and single-family homes that are proposed as replacement structures within established neighborhoods. See also Section 17.16.020 (Applicability). 
C.  Subdivision Design and General Residential Project Principles. The following guidelines apply to new residential subdivisions, and address how new residential subdivisions should relate to their surroundings: 
1.  Develop "Neighborhoods." Each new residential project should be designed to integrate with the surrounding neighborhood to ensure that it maintains the established character. Subdivisions in city expansion areas should be designed so that individual, separately developed projects work together to create distinct neighborhoods, instead of disjointed or isolated enclaves. 
2.  Integrate Open Space. New subdivisions adjacent to planned or existing parks or other public open spaces (e.g., creeks, riparian areas), or the landscaped grounds of schools or other public facilities should maximize visibility and pedestrian access to these areas. Where these facilities are not already planned, the subdivision should be designed to provide usable public open spaces in the form of parks, linear bicycle and pedestrian trails, squares, and greens, as appropriate. 
3.  Edges. "Gated communities," and other residential developments designed to appear as continuous walled-off areas, disconnected and isolated from the rest of the community, are strongly discouraged. While walls and fences may be useful for security, sound attenuation and privacy, these objectives can often be met by creative design that controls the height and length of walls, develops breaks and variations in relief, and uses landscaping for screening. 
4.  Scale. New residential subdivisions, and groups of subdivisions that, in effect, collectively create a new neighborhood, should be designed to provide a "walkable" scale, that places all homes within one-quarter mile of neighborhood shopping opportunities, a neighborhood park, or a public facility that can serve as a "center" for the neighborhood. Ideally, each neighborhood should have a center that includes all three facilities. 
5.  Site planning. Residential subdivision and multi-family project site planning should emphasize the needs of pedestrians and cyclists rather than cars 
a.  Street Layout. New public streets and sidewalks should be aligned with, and be connected to those of adjacent developments to interconnect the community. 
i.  Pedestrian orientation. Subdivision design should emphasize pedestrian connectivity within each project, to adjacent neighborhoods, nearby schools and parks, and to transit stops within one-quarter-mile of planned residential areas. All streets and walkways should be designed to provide safe and pleasant conditions for pedestrians, including the disabled, and cyclists. 
ii.  Block Length. The length of block faces between intersecting streets should be as short as possible, ideally no more than four hundred feet, to provide pedestrian connectivity. 
iii.  Street Width and Design Speed. Streets within neighborhoods should be no wider than needed to accommodate parking and two low-speed travel lanes. Streets in new subdivisions should be designed to accommodate traffic speeds of twenty-five miles per hour or less, with most streets in a subdivision designed for lower speeds. 
iv.  Parkway/Planting Strips. Sidewalks should be separated from curbs by parkway strips of at least five feet in width. The parkways should be planted with canopy trees at a twenty-foot interval, or as appropriate to the species of the selected street tree, to produce a continuously shaded sidewalk. The parkways should also be planted with ground covers and other plant materials that will withstand pedestrian traffic. 
v.  Access to Open Areas. Single-loaded streets (those with residential development on one side and open space on the other) should be used to provide public access to, and visibility of natural open spaces, public parks, and neighborhood schools, as well as a means for buffering homes from parks and schools. 
Where single-loaded streets are not feasible or desirable, other methods that provide similar access and visibility may be used, including private streets, bike and pedestrian paths, or the placement of private common open space or recreation facilities adjacent to the public open space. 
vi.  Cul-de-sac Streets. The use of cul-de-sac streets should be avoided wherever possible. If cul-de-sacs are necessary, the end of each cul-de-sac should provide a pedestrian walkway and bikeway between private parcels to link with an adjacent cul-de-sac, street, and/or park, school, or open space area. 
vii.  Alleys. Alleys may be provided for garage access, otherwise individual lots should be wide enough to accommodate a side yard driveway to a detached garage at the rear of the lot, so that appearance of the street frontage is not dominated by garages and pavement. 
b.  Open Space and Natural Features. Providing open space and integrating natural features into a residential project can significantly increase the appreciation of residents in their neighborhoods, provide safe places for children and families to play, and maintain a strong sense of connection with the surrounding natural environment in the city as a whole. 
i.  Natural amenities (such as views, mature trees, creeks, riparian corridors, and similar features) should be preserved and incorporated into proposed development to the greatest extent feasible. 
ii.  Development adjacent to parks or other public open spaces should be designed to provide maximum visibility of these areas. 
6.  Exterior Finish Materials. Exterior finish materials should be durable and require low maintenance. The use of combined materials (such as stucco and wood siding) can provide visual interest and texture; however, all sides of each single-family dwelling or multi-family structure should employ the same materials, design details, and window treatment. Each residential structure should have a carefully designed and detailed facade facing the street, and should not use bland, featureless stucco or other simple materials on the other exterior building walls. Each residential structure should look like the same building from all sides. 
7.  Windows. Where one or more windows are proposed ten feet or less from a side lot line, or within ten feet of another dwelling, the windows should be located and/or screened to provide privacy for the residents of both structures. In some cases, glass block or translucent glass may be appropriate to provide light, but also provide privacy between buildings. 
8.  Garages and Carports. Accommodating vehicle storage in both single-family dwellings and multi-family projects should avoid the common problem of creating streets that appear garage- and driveway-dominated. 
a.  In the limited instances where an exception is granted for a setback to a garage of less than twenty feet from a property line or internal driveway, the garage shall be equipped with a roll-up door. This requirement is intended to discourage vehicles from parking in front of garages and blocking the adjacent driveway or sidewalk. 
b.  Where carports are provided, they may be bordered by patio walls, or used to define public and private open space, but should not be located adjacent to perimeter streets. Each carport end should be screened by a low wall, berm, and/or landscaping. 
c.  Where multiple garages are located together, landscaped tree wells should be placed between every two garage doors. Each tree well should be a minimum of twenty-five square feet. 
d.  Carports and detached garages should be designed as an integral part of a project. Their materials, color, and details should be the same as the principal structures. Carports may have flat roofs but should not project above the exterior walls of any buildings adjacent to streets. Prefabricated metal or canvas tent-like carports are not acceptable. Where garages are utilized, doors should appear set into walls rather than flush with the exterior wall. 
e.  The use of quality materials, windows, and features with horizontal and vertical relief are encouraged to add interest and character to the design of garage doors and to coordinate their design with the architecture of the primary residence. 
D.  Infill Development. The following guidelines apply to "infill development." That is, multi-family structures or individual houses that entirely replace existing units or are constructed on vacant parcels between existing units. The guidelines are intended to provide for infill projects of high architectural quality that are compatible with existing development. They are also intended to promote the conservation and reuse of existing older houses, and to preserve the historical character of the city's older neighborhoods. Preservation and rehabilitation efforts in the older neighborhoods should protect the architectural features of a home that identify its individual style and contribute to the character of the area: 
1.  General Principles. Infill residential development should: 
a.  Be compatible in scale, siting, detailing, and overall character with adjacent buildings and those in the immediate neighborhood. This is crucial when a new or remodeled house is proposed to be larger than others in the neighborhood. When new homes are developed adjacent to older ones, the height and bulk of the new construction can have a negative impact on adjacent, smaller scale buildings. 
b.  Continue existing neighborhood patterns. For example, patterns such as front porches and entries facing the street, finished floor height, and garages located at the rear of lots. 
2.  Building Design. An infill residential structure should incorporate the traditional architectural characteristics of existing houses in the neighborhood, including window and door spacing, exterior materials, roof style and pitch, ornamentation and other details. 
3.  Visual Impacts from Building Height. The height of infill projects should be consistent with surrounding residential structures. Where greater height is desired, an infill structure should set back upper floors from the edge of the first story to reduce impacts on adjacent smaller homes, and to protect solar access. See Figure 2-9. 
  
Figure 2-9 - Appropriate Infill Building Massing 
4.  Outdoor Living Areas. The use of balconies, verandas, porches, and courtyards within the building form of infill structures is strongly encouraged. 
5.  Exterior Finish Materials. The thoughtful selection of building materials can enhance desired neighborhood qualities such as compatibility, continuity, and harmony. The design of infill residential structures should incorporate an appropriate mixture of the predominant materials found in the neighborhood. Common materials in Lodi are smooth, troweled, or sand-finished stucco, wood, horizontal clapboard siding, brick, and stone. 
6.  Exterior Colors. Color schemes for infill residential structures should consider the colors of existing houses in the neighborhood, to maintain compatibility. 
E.  Single-Family Housing Design (Including Additions/Renovations). 
1.  Houses in New Subdivisions. The site planning of lots and the design of houses constructed in new subdivisions should help create neighborhoods that are oriented more toward pedestrians than automobiles. Subdivisions of new homes should comply with the following guidelines: 
a.  Subdivisions should provide variety in the architectural detailing, size, and massing of houses on each block. 
b.  Houses should be located no further from the street than the minimum setback allowed by the applicable zoning district, except to provide variations in the alignment of houses along a block. 
c.  All houses should have their primary entrance facing and clearly visible from the street, with a front porch or verandah encouraged to provide a transition between the public space of the streetscape and the indoor private space of the house. 
d.  When viewed from the street, a garage should be visually subordinate to the living space within the house that addresses the street. Ideally, a garage should be detached from the house, located at the rear of the lot, and accessed by an alley, or a shared driveway from the street fronting the lot. Where this arrangement is not appropriate, the front of an attached garage should be set back from the front of the house (at least fifteen feet is recommended where the lot area permits). 
2.  Infill Development. New single-family homes proposed on infill lots should comply with the guidelines for infill residential development in Section 17.18.050(D) (Infill Development). 
3.  Additions and Alterations in Older Neighborhoods. The following guidelines apply to additions and the rehabilitation, remodeling, or alteration of existing single-family houses in Lodi's older neighborhoods. While these guidelines apply to all houses, those that are designated as cultural resources may be subject to more strict standards. 
a.  Additions. Additions to residential structures built before 1950 should respect the architectural style, detailing, scale, and composition of the original building so that they look integrated with the original structure, rather than a tacked-on afterthought. Modifications (e.g., additions, seismic strengthening, replacement of windows or siding material, and new entrances) should not compromise the integrity of historically authentic features, materials, or finishes. Additions should also be designed with consideration for the design and massing of adjacent residences, to promote neighborhood compatibility. See Figure 2-10. 
  
Figure 2-10 - Additions to Existing Homes 
i.  Roof Changes. The roof features of a residential structure, especially its style, materials and pitch, are important architectural elements that must be considered when planning an addition. The roof style, pitch and materials on the addition should match the original. 
ii.  Additional Floors. Adding a story to an existing house will change the building proportions and should be carefully designed to follow similar multi-story examples of the particular architectural style found in the neighborhood. In some cases, integrating the new story addition may require that it be set back or "stepped" back from the front facade so that it is less noticeable from the street. 
b.  Alterations—Restoration and Remodeling. The rehabilitation of older buildings should aim to retain and restore their original elements. If damage or deterioration is too severe, the element should be recreated using original materials to match the design, color, texture and any other important design features. See Figure 2-11. 
  
Figure 2-11 - Remodeling Features 
When replacement is necessary and materials similar to or consistent with original materials cannot be obtained, substitute materials should incorporate design, colors and textures that convey the traditional appearance of the original material. 
c.  Exterior Materials. Original exterior building materials should be retained whenever possible. Mismatched materials of different sizes, shapes, textures, or finishes should be avoided. 
i.  Wood Siding. Residential buildings with original wood clapboard siding should not be stuccoed in an attempt to "modernize" their appearance. 
ii.  Brick Surfaces. Brick surfaces should not be sandblasted to remove old paint, nor should they be covered with stucco or other siding materials. Sandblasting will damage the natural fired surface of the brick and cause it to lose its water repellent qualities. Paint should be removed by chemical stripping. Brick that was not intended to be painted as part of a building's original design should not be painted over. 
d.  Windows. Most older residential structures have wood-framed windows that are either fixed, double hung, or casement. Window replacements or additions should also use the original type of window. It is strongly recommended that aluminum frame windows not be used as replacements in any residential structure unless they were part of the original design. See Figure 2-12. 
  
Figure 2-12 - Window Types and Treatments 
e.  Doors. Many of Lodi's older homes have solid wood doors consistent with the particular architectural style of the building. The front door is typically the most ornate, with secondary doors usually more utilitarian in appearance. The size, shape and style of doors is an important feature of all historical architectural styles, and the original type and design should continue to be used. See Figure 2-13. 
  
Figure 2-13 - Door Features 
If the original door is missing, an appropriate design should be selected through the study of the doors of similar residential structures in the neighborhood, or by consulting books on architectural styles. Some older-style panel doors can be obtained from material suppliers, and may closely match original doors. 
f.  Porches and Stairs. During rehabilitation efforts, the design integrity of the front porch should be maintained. The installation of wrought iron or aluminum railings should be avoided, as a change in the structural or decorative elements of the front porch will usually compromise the architectural integrity of the entire building. Restoring an older building's architectural integrity may require "undoing" previous porch alterations. See Figures 2-14 and 2-15. 
  
Figure 2-14 - Appropriate Porch Stairway Designs 
  
Figure 2-15 - Inappropriate Porch Stairway Designs 
g.  Ornamentation and Trim. The authentic decoration and trim of a residential structure lends character and identifies the building with a particular architectural style. Care should be taken in handling these materials during renovation because they are critical components. 
h.  Roofs. Care should be taken to ensure that roofing materials are compatible with the original style of the structure. 
F.  Multi-Family and Clustered Housing Design. Multi-family and clustered housing projects are generally more dense than single-family developments, and tend to generate larger parking areas and provide less private open space. If not properly designed, parking can dominate a site, and open space may only be provided as "left over" areas, unrelated to other project features, not usable for outdoor activities, and that expose residents to uncomfortable noise levels. Multi-family projects surrounded by high walls, parking lots and/or rows of carports along streets are inappropriate in Lodi and should be avoided. These guidelines address higher density developments through appropriate guidelines for site planning, parking and circulation layout, building design, and landscaping. 
1.  Site Planning. Site planning for a multi-family or clustered housing project should create a pleasant, comfortable, safe, and distinct place for residents, without the project "turning its back" on the surrounding neighborhood 
a.  The placement of new units should consider the existing character of the surrounding residential area. New development should respect the privacy of adjacent residential uses through appropriate building orientation and structure height, so that windows do not overlook and impair the privacy of the indoor or outdoor living space of adjacent units. 
b.  Multi-family units should be clustered. A project of more than ten units outside the Downtown should separate the units into structures of six or fewer units. See Figure 2-16. 
  
Figure 2-16 - Clustered Multi-Family Units 
c.  Multi-family structures should be set back from adjacent public streets consistent with the prevailing setback pattern of the immediate neighborhood. 
d.  Multi-family projects with densities less than thirty units per acre should be comprised of "walk-up" rather than "stacked" units, with each unit adjacent to a street having its primary pedestrian entrance from the street sidewalk. Higher density projects should be designed either with ground floor units having individual sidewalk entrances, or as courtyard projects with at least one significant pedestrian entrance from the street sidewalk. Where individual units have access to the street sidewalk, private "front yard" outdoor space may be differentiated from the public right-of-way by a porch, or small yard enclosed by a low fence. See Figures 2-17 and 2-18. 
  
Figure 2-17 - Most Ground Floor Units Should Have Entrances Facing the Street 
e.  Residential units and activity areas not adjacent to a street should be accessible via pedestrian walkways and bikeways separate from vehicle parking areas and driveways. See Figure 2-18. 
  
Figure 2-18 - Walkways Separate From Vehicle Access 
2.  Parking and Driveways. Individual closeable garages are the preferred method for providing parking for residents in multi-family projects. If garages within the residential structures are not provided, dispersed parking courts are acceptable. 
a.  Long, monotonous parking drives and large, undivided parking lots are discouraged. 
b.  The main vehicle access into a multi-family site should be through an attractive entry drive. Colored and textured paving treatment is encouraged outside of the public street right-of-way, and within the project. 
c.  Parking areas should be visible from the residential units to the extent possible. 
d.  Safe and protected bicycle parking should be located convenient to each dwelling unit. 
e.  Parking courts, with or without carports, should not consist of more than two double-loaded parking aisles (bays) adjacent to each other. The length of a parking court should not exceed the width of eight adjoining stalls. 
f.  Parking courts should be separated from each other by buildings within the project or by landscape or natural open space areas at least thirty feet wide. 
g.  Large scale multi-family projects (i.e., more than twenty units) with internal streets should have the streets designed as if they were pleasant public streets, with comprehensive streetscapes including sidewalks, and planting strips between curb and sidewalk with canopy trees. 
h.  Private storage cabinets shall be provided in all car ports. 
3.  Multi-Family Project Architecture. The exterior design of multi-family projects should be derived from architectural styles in the surrounding neighborhood. Often, these types of projects are adjacent to single family neighborhoods, and care in design should ensure that the height and bulk of the higher density projects do not impact adjacent lower density residential areas. 
a.  Facade and Roof Articulation. A structure with three or more attached units should incorporate significant wall and roof articulation to reduce apparent scale. Changes in wall planes and roof heights, and the inclusion of elements such as balconies, porches, arcades, dormers, and cross gables can avoid the barracks-like quality of long flat walls and roofs. Secondary hipped or gabled roofs covering the entire mass of a building are preferable to mansard roofs or segments of pitched roof applied at the structure's edge. Structures (including garages and carports) exceeding one hundred fifty feet in length are discouraged. See Figures 2-17 and 2-19. 
b.  Scale. Because multi-family projects are usually taller than one story, their bulk can impose on surrounding uses. The larger scale of these projects should be considered within the context of their surroundings. Structures with greater height may require additional setbacks at the ground floor level and/or upper levels (stepped-down) along the street frontage so they do not shade adjacent properties or visually dominate the neighborhood. Large projects should be broken up into groups of structures, and large single structures should be avoided. See Figure 2-19. 
c.  Balconies, Porches, and Patios. The use of balconies, porches, and patios as part of multi-family structures is encouraged for both practical and aesthetic value. These elements should be used to break up large wall masses, offset floor setbacks, and add human scale to structures. Multi-family units with individual access to the street sidewalk should have individual covered porches. See Figure 2-19. 
  
Figure 2-19 
d.  Dwelling Unit Access. The use of balconies and corridors to provide access to five or more units should be avoided. Access points to units should instead be clustered in groups of four or less. To the extent possible, main entrances to individual units should be from adjoining streets. Distinctive architectural elements and materials should be used to highlight primary entrances. 
e.  Exterior Stairways. Stairways providing access to the upper levels of multi-family structures should be located mostly within the buildings themselves. Where exterior stairways are necessary, they should provide residents and visitors protection from weather, and should be of stucco, plaster or wood, with accent trim to match the main structure. Thin-looking, open metal, prefabricated stairs that are not integrated with the design of the structure are discouraged. 
f.  Accessory Structures. Accessory structures should be designed as an integral part of a project. Their materials, color, and details should be the same as the principal structures on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.20 - COMMERCIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.20.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the commercial zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established), determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site development. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.20.020 - Purposes of commercial zoning districts. 
The commercial zoning districts are intended to provide for a range of local-serving and regional-serving commercial uses, emphasizing high quality development, and to encourage revitalization of existing commercial land uses. The purpose of the individual commercial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  CC (Community Commercial) District. The CC zoning district is applied to areas suitable for a full range of retail, wholesale, and service uses including retail stores, apparel stores, specialty shops, shopping centers and home furnishings. The maximum floor area ratio (FAR) is 0.4. The CC zoning district is consistent with the neighborhood/community commercial land use designation of the general plan. 
B.  GC (General Commercial) District. The GC zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a range of community serving commercial, regional retail, and service land uses. The FAR is 0.6. The GC zoning district is consistent with the general commercial land use designation of the general plan. 
C.  O (Office). The O zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for administrative, financial, business, professional, and medical offices. Support commercial uses are also permitted, subject to limitations. The maximum FAR is 0.6. The O zoning district is consistent with the office land use designation of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.20.030 - Commercial zoning district land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 2-6 identifies the uses of land allowed by this development code in the commercial zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements). 
Note: Where the last column in the tables ("specific use regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply. 
TABLE 2-6 
Commercial Zones—Allowed Land Uses and Permit Requirements 	A 	Allowed Use 
	UP 	Use Permit Required 
	MUP 	Minor Use Permit Required 
	— 	Use Not Allowed 
LAND USE 	PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	CC 	GC 	O 	
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE 
Production of Crops 	A 	A 	A 	
RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES 
Clubs, lodges, and membership halls 	— 	A 	UP 	
Community centers 	— 	A 	UP 	
Health/fitness facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities 	UP 	UP 	— 	
Indoor sports facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Libraries, museums, galleries 	A 	A 	A 	
Outdoor recreation facilities 	UP 	UP 	— 	
Religious facilities 	— 	UP 	— 	
Schools—Private 	— 	UP 	UP 	
Schools—Specialized education and training 	UP 	A 	A 	
Studios—Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc. 	UP 	A 	UP 	
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Caretaker quarters 	— 	— 	UP 	
Residential shelters 	— 	A 	— 	
RETAIL TRADE 
Accessory retail uses 	A 	A 	A 	
Alcoholic beverage sales, off-site 	UP 	UP 	— 	
Alcoholic beverage sales, on-site 	UP 	UP 	— 	
Animal sales and grooming 	A 	A 	— 	
Art, antique, collectible, and gift stores 	A 	A 	— 	
Auto parts sales 	A 	A 	— 	
Auto sales and rental 	— 	A 	— 	
Building material stores 	A 	A 	— 	
Construction/heavy equipment sales and rental 	— 	A 	— 	
Convenience stores 	A 	A 	A 	
Drive-in and drive-through sales and services 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Furniture, furnishings and appliance stores 	A 	A 	— 	
Gas stations 	UP 	UP 	— 	
General retail sales 	A 	A 	— 	
Grocery stores 	A 	A 	— 	
Mobile home and RV sales 	— 	A 	— 	
Night clubs, bars, and cardrooms 	— 	UP 	— 	
Plant nurseries and garden supply stores 	A 	A 	— 	
Restaurants 	A 	A 	A 	
Warehouse retail 	A 	A 	— 	
SERVICES—BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, PROFESSIONAL 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	A 	A 	A 	
Banks and financial services 	A 	A 	A 	
Business support services 	A 	A 	A 	
Medical—Clinics, offices, and laboratories 	A 	A 	A 	
Medical—Extended care 	— 	A 	A 	
Medical—Hospitals 	— 	— 	A 	
Offices 	A 	A 	A 	
Professional services 	A 	A 	A 	
SERVICES 
Audio and video rental 	A 	A 	— 	
Auto repair and maintenance 	— 	UP 	— 	
Car wash 	— 	UP 	— 	
Community care facilities 				
 Residential care facility (6 or fewer) 	— 	— 	— 	17.36.040 
 Residential care facility (7 or more) 	— 	— 	— 	17.36.040 
 Small Family day care home (up to 8) 	— 	— 	— 	17.36.030 
 Large family day care home (9 to 14) 	— 	— 	— 	17.36.030 
 Day care center 	UP 	UP 	UP 	17.36.030 
Hotels and motels 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Mortuaries and funeral homes 	— 	A 	UP 	
Personal services 	A 	A 	A 	
Pharmacies 	A 	A 	— 	
Research and development 	— 	— 	A 	
Storage—Indoor 	— 	UP 	— 	
Upholstering shops 	— 	UP 	— 	
Veterinary clinics, outpatient treatment only 	A 	A 	A 	
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, kennels 	— 	UP 	— 	
INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING 
Recycling facilities 				
Small collection facility 	MUP 	MUP 	— 	17.36.110 
Large collection facility 	— 	— 	— 	17.36.110 
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES 
Broadcast studios 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Parking facilities/vehicle storage 	— 	UP 	— 	
Telecommunications facilities 	UP 	UP 	— 	17.36.140 
Utility facility 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.20.040 - Commercial district general development standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-7, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 3, (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
TABLE 2-7 
Commercial District General Development Standards 
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zoning District 
	CC 	GC 	O 
Minimum lot size 	Minimum area, width and depth required for new parcels. 
 Area 	2.0 acres 	8,000 sq. ft. 	8,000 sq. ft. 
 Width 	— 	75 ft. 	75 ft. 
 Depth 	— 	100 ft. 	100 ft. 
Setbacks 	Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required. See Section 17.30.070 for exceptions to these requirements. 
 Front 	25 ft. 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 Sides (each) 	25 ft. 	None 	None 
 Street side 	25 ft. 	None (1) 	10 ft. 
 Rear 	25 ft. 	None (1) 	10 ft. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) 	0.60 
Height limit 	2 stories, not to exceed 35 ft. 
Landscaping 	As required by Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping) 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading) 
Enclosure requirement 	All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building unless the specific use and zone permit otherwise. Uses allowed in an applicable zone that are determined by the director to require outdoor storage or activities (for example, vehicle sales lots, service stations, etc.) may be exempted from this requirement. 
 
Notes: 
(1)  No setback is required unless adjacent to a residential use or zone where the setback shall be ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.20.050 - Commercial design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose. The commercial design guidelines in this chapter are intended to assist in preserving and rehabilitating the commercial areas of Lodi. The guidelines are also intended to provide for infill commercial development of high architectural quality that is compatible with existing architecturally superior development, to promote the conservation and reuse of existing buildings of high quality design. While these guidelines are primarily oriented toward the downtown area, they are also designed to enhance and preserve the small town character of the city's other commercial areas. 
B.  Applicability. See Section 17.16.020 (Applicability of Design Guidelines). 
C.  Site Planning Outside of the Downtown. 
1.  Building and Parking Location. 
a.  General Placement Principles. Buildings should generally be oriented parallel to streets and placed as close to the street as required setbacks permit. Buildings may be angled to create interesting juxtapositions if there is a specific design goal to be achieved. However, definition of the street edge is an important role for buildings that should be considered in design. Exceptions may occur for wider setbacks from the street if a compatible use is proposed (for example, outdoor dining or pedestrian rest area) or to maintain continuity with landscaped areas on adjacent properties. 
  
Figure 2-20 - Building Placement of Street 
b.  Pedestrian Orientation. The orientation of buildings should establish and maintain pedestrian-oriented street frontages. Buildings with high pedestrian use should face, and be directly accessible from the public sidewalk. 
c.  Vehicle-Oriented Areas. Buildings in areas of the city that rely more on the use of the automobile for access should be oriented to major open space and streetscape elements, and as much as possible should not be located behind parking lots located between the building and the street. 
d.  Corner Buildings. Corner buildings should have a strong tie to the setback lines of each street. The primary mass of the building should not be placed at an angle to the corner. This does not preclude angled building corners or an open plaza at the corner which are strongly encouraged. 
e.  Projects with Multiple Structures. Multiple buildings in a single project should create a positive functional relationship with one another and the street. The first priority for multiple-building projects is to address the street with features that provide pedestrian interest and facilitate access to the project. Second, buildings should be clustered to achieve a "village" scale. This creates opportunities for internal plazas and pedestrian areas. When clustering is impractical, a visual link should be established between buildings. This link can be accomplished through the use of an arcade system, trellis, colonnade, and through enhanced paving. 
  
Figure 2-21 - Location of Parking and Buildings 
f.  Open Space Areas. Open space areas should be accessible from the majority of structures, and should be oriented to take advantage of sun or shade as appropriate. 
g.  Pedestrian Walkways. Projects should connect the on-site pedestrian circulation system to the off-site public sidewalk at intervals of at least one connection for each two hundred linear feet (or fraction thereof). Parking areas should be connected to building entrances by means of enhanced paving (patterned or stamped). 
2.  Building Orientation. The organization and orientation of commercial buildings and spaces is crucial in creating streets that are welcoming and friendly to pedestrians. Active public spaces and city streets that are heavily used by pedestrians contribute to the character and economic vitality of the city. High levels of pedestrian activity — shopping, eating, "people watching," exercising, strolling, relaxing, walking from place to place — are valued and encouraged throughout the city's commercial areas. These activities create interest, provide a sense of safety on the street, and add to community image and identity. The following guidelines provide a framework for site organization and orientation of commercial land uses. 
a.  Street Orientation. 
i.  Building facades, including storefronts, should be designed to orient to the major street frontage, with the primary building entry also oriented toward the major street. 
ii.  Buildings on corners should include storefront design features for at least fifty percent of the wall area on the side street elevation. 
iii.  Long, blank, unarticulated street wall facades are strongly discouraged unless unavoidable because of specific site circumstances. Monolithic street wall facades should be "broken" by vertical and horizontal articulation, characterized by: 
(A)  Sculpted, carved or penetrated wall surfaces defined by recesses and reveals); 
(B)  Breaks (reveals, recesses); 
(C)  Window and door openings; or 
(D)  Balconies, awnings and canopies. 
  
Figure 2-22 - Storefront Proportions 
iv.  Large unbroken facade surfaces should be avoided at the storefront level. This can be achieved in a number of ways including: 
(A)  Dividing the facade into a series of display windows with smaller panes of glass; 
(B)  Constructing the facade with small human scale materials such as brick or decorative tile along bulkheads; 
(C)  Providing traditional recessed entries; 
(D)  Careful sizing, placement and overall design of signage; and 
(E)  Providing consistent door and window reveals. 
b.  Street Edge. 
i.  The first floor of any infill commercial building should be built directly at the front property line C abutting the sidewalk C unless minor variations are permitted by the city for plazas, public art or other pedestrian-oriented purpose. 
  
Figure 2-23 - Placement of Infill Buildings 
ii.  Awnings, trellises and other accessory structures that are relatively open and do not restrict pedestrian or vehicular movement may project over the right-of-way with city approval. 
  
Figure 2-24 - Awnings Provide Pedestrian Scale and Comfort 
iii.  Any building located at a corner intersection should incorporate architectural features at the ground floor which emphasize the importance of pedestrian movement. These features may include building cut-offs, walk-through covered arcades, trellis structures and other elements which focus visual interest on the corners. 
  
Figure 2-25 - Desirable Design Features for Street Corner Buildings 
c.  Public Spaces. Public space associated with commercial buildings should serve as a transition from the outside to the inside of buildings, and should be supportive of pedestrian activity. Public areas should be designed so that all members of the public fee that they may enter, and should be designed as extensions of the public space of the sidewalk (e.g., by providing pedestrian amenities such as benches and fountains, and by continuing the hardscape of the sidewalk). 
i.  Plazas. 
(A)  Plazas should be designed to supplement, rather than replace on-street activity areas. Paving and furniture used in private plazas should complement streetscape elements used in the public right-of-way. 
(B)  Retail shops, restaurants, offices or other activity-generating uses should be located at the edges of plazas; blank walls should be minimized adjacent to pedestrian spaces. 
(C)  Plazas should be designed with unimpeded lines-of-sight to and from the public sidewalk. Security fences, walls, and entry gates shall not block the sidewalk edge of the plaza or views into the plaza. At least fifteen feet of building frontage should be transparent or visually penetrable to provide entry to and views into the plaza. 
(D)  Entries to a plaza, and storefront entries within the plaza, should be designed and lit so they do not create hiding places. 
(E)  Visual features, such as public art or a fountain, should be incorporated in plazas to attract pedestrians. 
(F)  Seating should be provided at a ratio of at least one seating area for each one hundred square feet of plaza, in addition to any outdoor dining areas. 
(G)  Plazas, including all entrances and exits, should be fully illuminated one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise to facilitate natural surveillance opportunities and to discourage illegitimate activities. Lighting should be designed to help define, order and further develop the design concept of the space in a manner that appears welcoming to pedestrians. 
(H)  Signs or other mechanisms should identify that the plaza is available for public use during business hours. 
(I)  Security gates and security fencing may not be used in plazas, except as may be permitted by the review authority when granting the land use permit for the project, based on a determination that unusual circumstances justify their use. 
ii.  Entry courtyards. Where used, courtyards should: 
(A)  Include focal elements of sculpture, water, plantings and seating niches. 
(B)  Be provided trees that are drought tolerant, and planted in symmetric patterns. 
(C)  Be designed to provide both visibility and separation from the street. 
D.  Building Design and Architecture. The visual relationships between individual commercial buildings contribute to community identity, levels of pedestrian activity, and economic vitality. When the architectural features (for example, entry spacing, window lines, and signs) of commercial buildings are complementary, the larger district image becomes more positive and unified. Building facades, in particular, influence cohesiveness, legibility and aesthetic pride. Likewise, storefront design can encourage shopping, increase a sense of security, and generate pedestrian activity. Where commercial buildings are neighbors to residential buildings, consideration of scale, detail, and materials are even more important. 
1.  Mass and Scale. Building scale and massing contributes to the unique character and pedestrian-orientation of the downtown and some of the other commercial areas of Lodi. Smaller-scale buildings, or buildings perceived to be of small-scale, are most suitable to creating the atmosphere desired in the city. Human-scale buildings are comfortable and create a friendly atmosphere that enhances the marketability of commercial areas. To this end, buildings and their parts should impart a sense of human scale and assume a reinforcing relationship with the sidewalk, street, and pedestrian activity. The relationship of the building elements to the overall building should create a clear set of meaningful relationships between the building and the elements and the elements to each other. The elements of the building should not appear as random or unrelated to each other. 
The height and scale of infill development and alterations to existing development within commercial areas should complement existing structures while providing a sense of human scale and proportion. Infill structures should be designed to provide storefront windows, doors, entries, transoms, awnings, cornice treatments and other architectural features designed to complement existing structures without duplicating a particular architectural style. Specific guidelines related to the mass and scale of building architecture are as follows: 
a.  General Design Principles. 
i.  The characteristic proportion (relationship of height to width) of existing facades should be considered in relation to infill development, alterations and additions. 
  
Figure 2-26 - Infill Facade Proportions 
ii.  Whenever an infill building is proposed which is much "wider" than the existing characteristic facades on the street, the infill facades should be broken down into a series of appropriately proportioned "structural bays" or components typically segmented by a series of columns or masonry piers which frame window, door and bulkhead components. Creating and reinforcing a facade rhythm helps tie the commercial street together visually and provides the pedestrian with a standard measurement of his or her progress. 
  
Figure 2-27 - Infill Structure Facade Divided into Bays 
iii.  The commercial buildings in Lodi are generally in the one- to three-story range. Infill buildings or upper story additions to existing buildings should not be much higher or lower than the height of surrounding structures. 
  
Figure 2-28 - Infill Consistent with Context 
b.  Building Proportions. 
i.  Maintain a clear visual distinction between upper story openings and street level storefront openings (windows and doors). There should usually be more window area at the storefront level to provide greater interior visibility for pedestrians, as opposed to upper stories with smaller window openings. 
  
Figure 2-29 - New Storefront Proportions Consistent with Context 
ii.  Whenever an infill building is proposed between two adjacent commercial structures, the characteristic rhythm, proportion and spacing of existing door and window openings should be maintained. 
c.  Horizontal Rhythms/Alignment of Architectural Elements. 
i.  When an infill building is proposed, the common horizontal elements (e.g. cornice line, window height/width and spacing) of neighboring structures should be identified and the infill should have similar rhythm or alignment. 
ii.  If maintaining a horizontal rhythm or alignment in an infill building is very difficult or otherwise impossible, the use of fabric canopies or awnings is encouraged to establish a shared horizontal storefront rhythm. 
d.  Architectural Features. 
i.  Features such as balconies, open and enclosed turrets, finials and bay windows that help give human scale and interest to buildings are encouraged. 
ii.  Decorative ornamentation, the decorative use of color and integral color materials, and architectural composition that employs abstract or representational ornament to help order the facade or emphasize the relative importance of different building elements are encouraged. 
2.  Architectural Elements/Materials. The types of materials and architectural elements incorporated into commercial buildings contribute to visual interest, community image, business identity and architectural quality. The following guidelines provide a framework for creating a cohesive commercial character while providing flexibility and promoting unique architectural features. 
a.  Entries and Doorways. 
i.  Main building entries should emphasize the point of arrival in one or more of the following ways: 
(A)  Placement of art or decorative detailing; 
(B)  A turret or balcony over the entrance; 
(C)  Change of material or detailing; 
(D)  Greater concentration of ornaments; 
(E)  Flanked columns, decorative fixtures or other details; 
(F)  Recesses within a larger arched or cased decorative opening; 
(G)  A portico (formal porch) projecting from or set into the building face; 
(H)  Changes in roofline, a tower, or a break in the surface of the subject wall; 
(I)  Architectural features above it. 
ii.  Street corner commercial buildings should provide a prominent entrance to street level shops or lobby space at or near the corner. 
  
Figure 2-30 - Prominent Corner Entrance 
b.  Doors and Windows. 
i.  Retail store doorways should contain a high percentage of glass to allow pedestrians to see the retail contents and activities in stores. 
  
Figure 2-31 - Maintain Extensive Storefront Glass Area 
ii.  When windows are added or changed, it is important that the design be compatible with the facade theme of the block (streetscape). 
iii.  Use clear glass (at least eighty-eight percent light transmission) in first floor windows. 
iv.  Storefront windows should be as large as possible and no closer than eighteen inches from the ground (bulkhead height). By limiting the bulkhead height, the visibility to the storefront displays and retail interior is maximized. Maximum bulkhead heights for infill construction should be seventeen inches. 
  
Figure 2-32 - Storefront Components 
v.  Introducing or changing the location or size of windows or other openings that alter the architectural rhythm or character of the original building is discouraged. 
vi.  Permanent, fixed security grates or grilles in front of windows are not permitted. Any necessary security grilles should be placed inside, behind the window display area. 
vii.  Traditional storefront transom windows should be retained whenever feasible. If the ceiling inside the structure has been lowered, the ceiling should be stepped up to meet the transom so that light will penetrate the interior of the building. 
  
Figure 2-33 - Transom Windows 
c.  Awnings and Canopies. 
i.  Where the facade of a commercial building is divided into distinct structural bays (sections defined by vertical architectural elements, such as masonry piers), awnings should be placed within the vertical elements rather than overlapping them. The awning design should respond to the scale, proportion and rhythm created by these structural bay elements and nestle into the space created by the structural bay. 
  
  
Figure 2-34 - Appropriate and Inappropriate Awning Forms 
ii.  Awning shape should relate to the window or door opening. Barrel-shaped awnings should be used to complement arched windows while square awnings should be used on rectangular windows. 
iii.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. 
d.  Grillwork/Metalwork and Other Details. There are a number of details, often thought of as mundane, which may be incorporated into the design to add a degree of visual richness and interest while meeting functional needs. These details include the following: 
i.  Light fixtures, wall mounted or hung with decorative metal brackets. 
ii.  Metal grillwork, at vent openings or as decorative features at windows, doorways or gates. 
iii.  Decorative scuppers, catches and down-spouts, preferably of copper. 
iv.  Balconies, rails, finials, corbels, plaques, etc. 
v.  Flag or banner pole brackets. 
  
Figure 2-35 - Metalwork Design Elements 
e.  Exterior Walls and Materials. The exterior wall design elements of commercial buildings involve two aspects C color and texture. Materials with integral color such as hard smooth troweled plaster, tile and stone is encouraged. If the building's exterior design is complicated, with many design features, the wall texture should be simple and subdued. However, if the building design is simple (perhaps more monolithic), a finely textured material, such as patterned masonry, can greatly enrich the building's overall character. 
Storefront materials should complement the materials used on significant adjacent buildings. The following materials are considered appropriate for commercial buildings within Lodi. The number of different wall materials used on any one building should be kept to a minimum, ideally two or less. 
•  Clear glass; 
•  Glass block (transom); 
•  Exterior plaster (smooth trowelled preferred); 
•  New or used face-brick; 
•  Cut stone, rusticated block (cast stone); 
•  Ceramic tiles (bulkhead); 
•  Clapboard (where appropriate); 
The following exterior building materials are considered inappropriate in Lodi commercial areas and are discouraged: 
•  Mirror glass and heavily tinted glass; 
•  Windows with false divisions (i.e., a window where the glass continues uninterrupted behind a surface mounted mullion); 
•  Vinyl and aluminum siding; 
•  Painted or baked enamel metal awnings; 
•  Rough "Spanish lace" stucco finish; 
•  Unpainted plywood; 
•  False stone veneer; 
•  Bulky cast stone window and door surrounds; 
•  Corrugated sheet metal; 
•  Corrugated fiberglass; 
•  Split face concrete block; 
•  Exposed concrete block without integral color. 
f.  Lighting. 
i.  Lighting should be designed as an integral part of the overall site and building design. It should contribute to and help define the character and the spaces created by the building and its site development. Lighting design should have a conscious purpose of helping to strengthen the constituent elements of the site through means such as highlighting areas that are more important, or by picking out areas of the site that have a different character from the rest of the site. Lighting should complement architectural elements, changes in material of the ground plane and landscaping. The intensity, color, placement of the light and the placement and design of the light fixtures should be part of this effort. 
ii.  Lighting should provide illumination for the security and safety of on-site areas such as entrances, exits, parking, loading, pathways, and working areas. 
iii.  Lighting should be provided for the pedestrian to create a sense of welcoming on the public sidewalk, that the pedestrian is literally being accompanied by light. Providing a greater number of softer light sources is strongly encouraged over having only a few very bright lights. 
iv.  The design of light fixtures and their structural supports should be architecturally compatible with the main buildings on the site. Fixtures should be integrated within the architectural design for the buildings. 
v.  As a security device, lighting should be adequate but not overly bright. Building entrances should be well lighted. The lighting should be designed so that the lighting is an attractive element in its own right, acting as a public amenity. 
vi.  All lighting should be shielded to confine light spread within the site boundaries and not spill onto adjacent properties. Lighting should be provided from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour before sunrise at all exits, entrances, loading areas, parking lots, plazas, and alleys. An average of one foot candle evenly distributed across the site is a suggested minimum; with up to two-foot candles at entrances, exits and loading areas. 
vii.  The following lighting fixtures and lamps are considered inappropriate in Lodi commercial areas and are discouraged: 
•  Mercury vapor lights (metal halide or high-pressure sodium lamps are preferable for most applications); 
•  Fluorescent light tubes that are exposed without filtering lenses; 
•  Fluorescent lamps without non-color corrected bulbs (color correction may also be accomplished by a color-correcting lens); 
•  The development code prohibits flashing or blinking lights. 
viii.  Focus light downward. A good rule of thumb is to make sure that direct light shines a minimum of twenty degrees below a horizontal plane and in no case above the horizontal plane. 
ix.  Test installations for glare. After installation, check to make sure that glare will not be a problem for neighbors, pedestrians, or motorists. 
x.  Illuminate signs and billboards from above, not below. 
xi.  Avoid reflective surfaces beneath down-lit signs. 
xii.  All lighting shall be maintained in working order and in appearance. 
g.  Rear Entrances. Rear entrance design should consider a number of issues. In general, the rear entrance must respond to the same needs as the storefront, but at a reduced scale. It must also meet the functional service needs of the business, including providing a loading area. Since these two functions are often in conflict, the design of the rear entrance must be carefully planned. A particular concern is the storage and disposal of refuse. All trash cans, dumpsters, and other containers must be hidden and screened from public view as required by the development code. Exterior utilities must be screened. Regular maintenance is of paramount importance. 
The design of a rear entrance should be appropriate to its surroundings. The visual character of rear facades, alleys, and parking lots is relatively casual and utilitarian, especially when compared to formal street facades. In this context, a refined or grand design can look out of place. The design should instead be pleasantly inviting, and architecturally compatible with the front, but very simple in detail. 
  
Figure 2-36 - Rear Entrances Should be Aesthetically Simple and Utilitarian 
i.  An awning can soften a rear facade and provide a pleasant protected space. 
ii.  The rear entry door should be wood and glass similar to the front door. Special security glass (i.e. wire imbedded) is allowed. 
iii.  Security lighting should be modest and should focus on the rear entry door. 
iv.  Selective use of tree plantings, potted plants and other landscaping can subtly improve a rear facade. 
v.  Refuse containers and service facilities must be screened from view by solid walls. The use of landscaping (shrubs and vines) to screen walls can help deter graffiti. 
3.  Alterations—Restoration and Remodeling. Renovating or remodeling commercial structures provides an excellent means of maintaining and reinforcing the character and image desired in Lodi. Renovation and expansion not only increases property values in the area but also serves as an inspiration to other property owners and designers to make similar efforts. 
When an existing structure is to be renovated or added to, the work should respect the original design character of the structure. The following design guidelines apply where appropriate and whenever a structure is to be renovated or expanded. 
a.  Traditional Features and Decoration. 
i.  Sensitive response to existing materials, details, proportions, as well as patterns of materials and openings is required when any such work will affect the appearance of an existing building's exterior. 
ii.  Storefront remodeling often retains original decorative details only as visual "leftovers" or simply covers them. If a building is to be refurbished, these forgotten details should not be wasted. If enough of them remain, they can be restored as part of the original design. If only a few remain, they can be incorporated as design features in a new storefront. In either case, the design of any improvements should grow out of the remaining traditional details and create a harmonious background which emphasizes them. 
b.  Removal of Elements Inconsistent with Original Facade. Existing building elements incompatible with the original facade design should be removed. These include: excessive use of exterior embellishments and "modernized" elements (metal grilles, oversized molding cornices or rusticated materials, etc.). Buildings are often altered over time by owners or shopkeepers to "keep up with changing times" or to "remake a tired image." Unfortunately, such changes are often done in a "tacked-on" manner and result in gradual but severe erosion of original character and cohesion of the commercial area. 
c.  Storefront Renovation. 
i.  Where the original storefront remains (little or no remodeling has occurred), it should be preserved and repaired with as little alteration as possible. 
ii.  Where only part of the original storefront remains (limited remodeling has occurred), the storefront should be repaired, maintaining historic materials where possible, including the replacement of extensively deteriorated or missing parts with new parts based upon surviving examples of transoms, bulkheads, pilasters, signs, etc. 
  
Figure 2-37 
iii.  Where the original storefront is completely missing (extensive remodeling has occurred), the first priority is to reconstruct the storefront based upon historical, pictorial and physical documentation. If that is not practical, the design of the new storefront should be compatible with the size, scale, proportion, material and color of the existing structure. 
d.  Window Replacement. 
i.  The impact of windows on the facade is determined by the size, shape, pattern of openings, spacing and placement within the facade. When altering or reconstructing windows, consideration of these elements is crucial to retaining the structure's original architectural balance and integrity. 
ii.  Wherever possible retain original window openings. If the existing ceiling has been lowered, pull the dropped ceiling back from the original window. 
iii.  If possible, save and restore original windows and frames. Replace missing, rotting or broken sash, frames, mullions and muntins with similar material. 
iv.  If original window openings have been altered, restore the openings to their original configuration and detail. Avoid blocking or filling window openings that contribute to the overall facade design. 
v.  When replacing windows, consideration should be given to the original size and shape detailing and framing materials. Replacement windows should be the same operating type as the original window. 
  
  
Figure 2-38 - Window Replacement 
e.  Door Replacement. 
i.  Original doors and door hardware should be retained, repaired and refinished provided they can comply with the requirements of the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). 
ii.  If replacement doors are necessary, they should be compatible with the historical character and design of the structure. 
f.  Additions to Existing Structures. 
i.  The design of a proposed addition should follow the general scale, proportion, massing and detailing of the original structure and should result in a harmonious—rather than stark-contrast. 
ii.  Additions should be interpretations of the existing buildings, with the main characteristics of the existing structure incorporated using modern construction methods. This may include: the extension of architectural lines from the existing structure to the addition; repetition of window and entrance spacing; use of harmonizing colors and materials; and the inclusion of similar, yet distinct, architectural details (i.e., window and door trim, lighting fixtures, tile or brick decoration, etc.). 
iii.  Additions should be designed so that if the addition were to be removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the original structure would be unimpaired. 
g.  Seismic Retrofitting. Where structural improvements for seismic retrofitting affect the building exterior, such improvements should be done with care and consideration for the impact on appearance of the building. Where possible, such work should be concealed. Where this is not possible, the improvements should be planned to carefully integrate into the existing building design. 
4.  Equipment and Utilities. 
a.  All mechanical or utility equipment, whether on the roof, ground or side of building must be screened from view, above or below. The method of screening should be architecturally integrated with the structure in terms of materials, color, shape and size. The design of the screening should be done in concert with and as a part of the design of the building, rather than as an afterthought. 
b.  Roof mounted mechanical or utility equipment must be screened. The method of screening should be architecturally integrated with the structure in terms of materials, color, shape and size. It is preferable to screen equipment with solid building elements (e.g. parapet wall) instead of after-the-fact add-on screening (e.g. wood or metal slats). 
c.  Air conditioning units placed in individual windows and window transom areas are strongly discouraged. 
  
  
Figure 2-38 - Equipment Screening 
E.  Security. Safety in commercial areas is important to business owners, workers and visitors, and to the overall economic well-being of businesses. Design strategies incorporating safety should be based on the practice called Crime Prevention Through Environmental Design or CPTED (pronounced "sep-ted"). CPTED focuses on the proper design and use of the built environment to enhance opportunities for positive, constructive activities while minimizing opportunities for illegitimate or undesirable activities. CPTED is a measure for proactive and retrofit crime prevention planning one that can help reduce the incidence and fear of crime, and improve overall quality of life. By no means is CPTED a panacea in the efforts to rid communities of crime; however, it is one strategy among others that should be considered in commercial development. There are five principles used in the application of CPTED: Natural Surveillance, Natural Access Control, Territorial Reinforcement, and Management and Maintenance. 
1.  Natural Surveillance. The organization of physical features, activities and people in such a way as to maximize visibility. That is, a space should be designed so that users feel that they will be seen or observed if they do something illegitimate. The placement of windows, doors, and plazas, the alignment of sidewalks and paths, the minimization of large areas of blank walls, the locations and levels of lighting, and the proper design and size of open spaces can contribute to natural surveillance opportunities. 
2.  Natural Access Control. The physical guidance of people coming and going from a space by the judicial placement of entrances, exits, signs, fencing, landscaping and lighting. A space should be designed so that it is conducive to the activities undertaken by legitimate, law-abiding users but discouraging to those carrying out undesirable activities. 
3.  Territorial Reinforcement. The use of physical attributes that express ownership, such as fences, pavement treatments, art, signage and landscaping. CPTED stresses the importance of clearly designing a hierarchy of spaces: public (i.e. intended for all to use), semi-private (i.e. intended for specific users or uses), private (i.e. intended for private use by businesses). 
4.  Management and Maintenance. The continued use of a space for its intended purpose, which serves as an additional expression of ownership (e.g., complying with landscape maintenance and lighting standards to ensure that visibility is not reduced). Although the physical dimensions of CPTED are important, no effort is sustained unless it is properly maintained and operated. 
5.  Design Considerations. The following design considerations, as well as many of the preceding guidelines, incorporate CPTED principles and should be considered for new commercial development in Lodi. 
a.  Window Materials. Storefront security may be enhanced with shatter-resistant laminated vigil pane security glass (or glass-clad polycarbonate windows). 
b.  Security Screens. The use of exterior scissors-style security screens is strongly discouraged. Any use of interior scissors screens shall be concealed from public view when not in use by retracting the screen into casings which are in proportion and scale with the building architecture. However, although they are allowed, the use of interior scissors screens is strongly discouraged since they communicate a message of high crime and cannot be integrated visually into the overall design of a building or storefront. 
  
Figure 2-39 - Security Screen Placement 
c.  Security Bars. Permanent security bars (those clearly visible and fixed to windows or the facade) and exterior roll-up metal security doors are strongly discouraged. 
d.  Lighting Placement. Exterior lights that are a part of streetscape improvements should provide adequate lighting levels. However, in the case of a deep threshold to a building, a light applied to the ceiling of this area is strongly recommended to illuminate building entrances. 
e.  Lighting Design. Lighting should be designed to satisfy both functional and decorative needs. Storefront lighting should complement the architectural style of the building while providing illumination of building facades and entrances. 
f.  Rear Security Lighting. Rear security lighting should be provided and maintained at twelve-foot candles per square foot. The level of lighting should be measured at ground level. All security lighting should be designed as part of an overall lighting plan rather than as single stand-alone elements. 
g.  Window Signs. Any window signs should be placed to provide a clear and unobstructed view of the interior of the business establishment from the sidewalk (and are not permitted by this development code to exceed twenty percent of the window area). 
h.  Street Addresses. Street addresses should be identified by posting numbers so they are clearly visible from the public right-of-way wherever possible. 
  
Figure 2-40 - Street Addresses Should Help Easy Identification 
i.  Safety Behind Buildings. Safety behind buildings should be ensured through use of: 
i.  Adequate security lighting for parking areas and pedestrian ways; 
ii.  Limited access (walls, fences, gates, shrubs); 
iii.  Signage; 
iv.  Introduction of activities (e.g., rear entrances for commercial activities) that increase surveillance; 
v.  Surveillance through windows or with cameras; and 
vi.  Ongoing maintenance of storage areas and alleys. 
F.  Walls and Fences. If walls or fences are not required for a specific screening or security purpose they should not be used. Any necessary walls or fences should be as low as possible while still performing their screening and security functions. 
1.  Materials and Colors. Fences and walls should be designed with materials and colors that complement project architecture. When selecting wood as a material, it is important to consider its increased maintenance demands. Landscaping should be used in combination with walls whenever possible. 
2.  Design. Long expanses of wall or fence surfaces should be offset and architecturally designed to prevent monotony. Landscape pockets should be provided along the wall. 
3.  Security Fencing. When required, security fencing should be a combination of solid pillars, or short solid wall segments, and wrought iron grille work. 
  
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.22 - MIXED USE ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.22.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the mixed use zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established), determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site development. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.22.020 - Purposes of mixed use zoning districts. 
The mixed use zoning districts are intended to provide for a range of uses, emphasizing high quality development, and to encourage revitalization of existing land uses. The purpose of the individual mixed use zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  DMU (Downtown Mixed Use) District. The DMU zoning district is applied to the downtown area, and is intended to allow for a broad range of commercial land uses primarily located on the ground floor. Residential uses may also be allowed in this district. The maximum FAR is 3.00. The DMU zoning district is consistent with the downtown mixed use land use designation of the general plan. 
B.  MCE (Mixed Use Center) District. The MCE zoning district is applied to the new mixed-use neighborhood centers in the new growth areas of the general plan. This category provides for a variety of residential, office, neighborhood commercial and public uses. The maximum FAR is 1.0. The MCE zoning district is consistent with the mixed use center land use designation of the general plan. 
C.  MCO (Mixed Use Corridor) District. The MCO zoning district is applied along the city's major corridors: Kettleman and Cherokee lanes and Lodi Avenue. This category provides for a variety of office and general commercial uses, as well a low-, medium-, and high-density residential. The maximum FAR is 1.2. The MCO zoning district is consistent with the mixed use corridor land use designation of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.22.030 - Mixed use zoning districts land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 2-8 identifies the uses of land allowed by this development code in the mixed use zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements). 
Note: Where the last column in the tables ("specific use regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply. 
TABLE 2-8 
Mixed Use—Allowed Uses and Permit 
Requirements 	A 	Allowed Use 
	UP 	Use Permit Required 
	MUP 	Minor Use Permit Required 
	— 	Use Not Allowed 
LAND USE 	PERMIT REQUIRED BY DISTRICT 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	DMU 	MCE 	MCO 	
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE 
Production of Crops 	— 	— 	A 	
RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES 
Clubs, lodges, and membership halls 	UP 	UP 	— 	
Community centers 	A 	A 	A 	
Health/fitness facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Indoor sports facilities 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Libraries, museums, galleries 	A 	A 	A 	
Parks and playgrounds 	— 	UP 	— 	
Religious facilities 	— 	— 	UP 	
Schools—Private 	— 	UP 	UP 	
Schools—Specialized education and training 	A 	A 	A 	
Studios—Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc. 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Theaters and auditoriums 	UP 	— 	— 	
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Accessory uses (Residential) 	A 	A 	A 	17.36.120 
Home occupations 	MUP 	MUP 	MUP 	17.36.060 
Live/work projects 	A 	A 	A 	
Multi-family dwellings (3 or more units) 	A 	A 	A 	
Single family dwellings 	— 	— 	UP 	
Transitional and Supportive Housing 	A 	A 	A 	
Two family dwellings (Duplex) 	— 	— 	A 	
RETAIL TRADE 
Accessory retail uses 	A 	A 	A 	
Alcoholic beverage sales, off-site 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Alcoholic beverage sales, on-site 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Animal sales and grooming 	A 	A 	A 	
Art, antique, collectible, and gift stores 	A 	A 	A 	
Auto parts sales 	A 	A 	A 	
Auto sales and rental 	— 	— 	A 	
Building material stores 	A 	A 	A 	
Construction/heavy equipment sales and rental 	— 	— 	A 	
Convenience stores 	UP 	UP 	A 	
Drive-in and drive-through sales and services 	— 	— 	UP 	
Furniture, furnishings and appliance stores 	A 	A 	A 	
Gas stations 	— 	— 	UP 	
General retail sales 	A 	A 	A 	
Grocery stores 	A 	A 	A 	
Mobile home and RV sales 	— 	— 	A 	
Night clubs, bars, and cardrooms 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Plant nurseries and garden supply stores 	— 	— 	A 	
Restaurants 	A 	A 	A 	
Warehouse retail 	— 	— 	A 	
SERVICES—BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, PROFESSIONAL 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	A 	A 	A 	
Banks and financial services 	A 	A 	A 	
Business support services 	A 	A 	A 	
Medical—Clinics, offices, and laboratories 	A 	A 	A 	
Medical—Extended care 	— 	— 	A 	
Medical—Hospitals 	— 	— 	A 	
Offices 	A 	A 	A 	
Professional Services 	A 	A 	A 	
SERVICES 
Audio and video rental 	A 	A 	A 	
Auto repair and maintenance 	— 	— 	UP 	
Car wash 	— 	— 	UP 	
Community care facilities 				
 Residential care facility (6 or fewer) 	— 	— 	UP 	17.36.040 
 Day care center 	UP 	UP 	UP 	17.36.030 
Hotels and motels 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Mortuaries and funeral homes 	UP 	— 	A 	
Personal services 	A 	A 	A 	
Pharmacies 	A 	A 	A 	
Storage—Indoor 	— 	— 	UP 	
Upholstering shops 	— 	— 	UP 	
Veterinary clinics, outpatient treatment only 	— 	— 	A 	
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, kennels 	— 	— 	UP 	
INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING 
Recycling facilities 				
 Small collection facility 	— 	— 	MUP 	17.36.110 
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES 
Broadcast studios 	UP 	UP 	UP 	
Parking facilities/vehicle storage 	— 	— 	UP 	
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. No. 1914, § 1, 9-2-2015)  
17.22.040 - Mixed use zoning districts general development standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-9, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 3, (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
TABLE 2-9 
Mixed Use Zoning Districts General Development Standards 
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zoning District 
	DMU 	MCE 	MCO 
Minimum lot size 	Minimum area, width, and depth required for new parcels. 
 Area 	None 	None 	8,000 sq. ft. 
 Width and depth 	None 	None 	50 ft. wide/100 ft. deep 
Setback s 	Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required. See Section 17.14.060 for exceptions to these requirements. 
 Front 	None 	None 	10 ft. 
 Street side 	None 	None 	10 ft. 
 Sides (each) 	None 	None 	5 ft. 
 Rear 	None (1) 	None (1) 	10 ft. 
Floor area ratio (FAR) 	3.0 	1.0 	1.2 
Height limit 	Min. 20 ft. 
Max. 6 stories/75 ft. 	Min. 20 ft. 
Max. 6 stories/75 ft. 	Min. 15 ft. 
Max. 4 stories/60 ft. 
Landscaping 	Landscaping shall be provided as required by Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping) 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading) 
Enclosure requirement 	All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building unless the specific use and zone permit otherwise. Uses allowed in an applicable zone that are determined by the director to require outdoor storage or activities (for example, vehicle sales lots, service stations, etc.) may be exempted from this requirement. 
 
Notes: 
(1)  None required except: When adjacent to a res. zone boundary where a min. of ten feet is required. For buildings over two stories, twenty feet is required. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.22.050 - Downtown mixed use design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose. A vital component to the revitalization strategy adopted for the downtown area was to create and establish land use policies and design guidelines that build on the existing palette of architectural forms and building materials. A primary purpose of the downtown mixed use design guidelines is to ensure that high quality design is maintained for all new construction and rehabilitation projects within the district. The guidelines are intended to encourage individual creativity of project designers while respecting the needs of the individual owner and user. The guidelines are intended to: create a distinctive and cohesive image for downtown Lodi; assure that all new development, rehabilitation and improvements give consideration to quality design in architecture and site planning; protect and enhance property values and investment; and provide consistency and compatibility within the downtown. The development standards and design guidelines promote buildings and renovations that strengthen the existing "Main Street" character of the downtown area and enhance a pedestrian-oriented retail and entertainment niche. Among other things, they require buildings to help shape the street as a pedestrian space. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The downtown mixed use design guidelines shall apply to all of the properties designated as downtown mixed use in the general plan. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, signs, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. 
2.  The downtown mixed use guidelines augment other sections of the development code. When an issue, condition or situation occurs which is not covered or provided for in the design guidelines, the regulations of the development code that are most applicable to the issue, conditions or situation shall apply. In the event that the provisions of the design guidelines are in conflict with other sections of the development codes, the provisions of the design guidelines shall prevail. 
C.  Development Standards. Development standards address those aspects that are essential to achieve the goals of the concept plan. They are specifications for building design and site development such as height, setbacks, and permitted uses. Standards are required minimums or benchmarks that all projects must adhere to. 
1.  Land Use. Successful downtowns involve uses that generate activity. These uses can populate the streets, create excitement, increase safety and reinforce downtown as an important destination. Among the uses that contribute to this activity are specialty retail shops, eating and drinking establishments, and entertainment facilities. 
The importance of the downtown can also be enhanced by emphasizing the mixture and intensity of uses that occur, including housing and office uses. This is particularity true for vertical mixture with residential and offices above the first floor. 
a.  Permitted Ground Level Uses—School Street Frontage. 
i.  Retail: All uses except drive-up or drive-in services. 
ii.  Eating and Drinking Establishments: Including those serving alcoholic beverages, provided this service is clearly ancillary to food service; drive-up or drive-in restaurants not permitted. 
iii.  Personal Services: Hair and nail salons, shoe repair, laundromats, dry cleaners, and similar businesses. 
iv.  Business Services: Are storefront businesses that generate foot traffic, such as photocopy shops, photo-finishers, video rental and sales, travel agencies, appliance repair, print shops, insurance agencies, or real estate agencies, financial institutions, and public utilities. 
v.  Nightclubs: Including establishments providing entertainment or permitting dancing, and establishments serving alcoholic beverages not ancillary to food service. (Above uses may require a conditional use permit as required by the Lodi Municipal Code). 
vi.  Other Business or Service Establishments: If determined by the community development department staff to be of the same general character as those uses listed herein and above. 
b.  Permitted Uses: All Other street Frontages and Upper Level School Street Frontage. 
i.  All permitted uses listed above. 
ii.  Drive-through establishments. 
iii.  Professional offices. 
c.  Upper Level Uses Subject to a Conditional Use Permit. 
i.  Clubs and lodges. 
ii.  Residences. 
iii.  Other service establishments if determined by the city to be of the same general character as listed therein and above. 
2.  Building Height and Setbacks. 
a.  Height: As measured from sidewalk to top of cornice, parapet, or to eave line of peaked roof shall be as follows: 
i.  Maximum Building Height: Six floors and seventy-five feet. 
ii.  Minimum Height: Twenty feet top of parapet or eave. 
iii.  Accessory Buildings: May be twelve feet in height if set back ten feet or more from side and rear property lines. 
b.  Front Setbacks: The first and second floors of all building shall be built-to and parallel with the front property line, with the following exceptions: 
i.  Mid-Block Buildings: Between existing adjacent structures shall be no closer to the street than the adjacent building closest to the street, and no farther than the adjacent building farthest back from the street. 
ii.  Corner Buildings: Shall be built to both right-of-way lines in order to frame the intersection. Exceptions are: 
•  The corner may be "cut back" up to six feet to create a diagonal at the ground level and/or at upper levels. 
iii.  Special Architectural Features: Bay windows, turrets, decorative roofs, and miscellaneous entry features excluding awnings or canopies: 
(A)  May project no more than three feet over property lines, and must be no less than twelve feet above the highest point in the sidewalk over which they project; 
(B)  The maximum width of a recessed entry shall be one-third the length of the building's street frontage. 
c.  Side Setbacks: New buildings may be built to both side property lines, and must be built to at least one side property line. Should a side of the building be set back from a side property line: 
i.  Minimum: At least four feet shall be provided for an access passage. 
ii.  Street Exposure: Side setback areas must be screened from the street and sidewalk by a decorative gateway, fence, wall, or row of piers (see design guidelines). 
d.  Rear Setbacks: New commercial buildings may be built to the rear property line, except when: 
i.  Adjacent to Single Family Residential Areas. 
(A)  First and second floors shall be set back a minimum of ten feet from the rear property line; 
(B)  Third floors must be set back a minimum of twenty feet from the rear property line; 
3.  Parking, Access and Landscaping. 
a.  Parking: Off-street parking shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of the Lodi Municipal Code. In consideration of shared parking, location and demand, parking in the downtown may be reduced or waived at the discretion of the community development director. 
b.  Site Access. 
i.  Pedestrian access to storefronts shall be provided from the street and/or side street to the main building entrance; i.e. pedestrian access to building entrances shall not be restricted to parking lots. 
ii.  Vehicular Access: No new curb cuts shall be installed on School Street. Shared parking arrangements are encouraged to reduce the need for new curb cuts. Where curb cuts are necessary: 
(A)  Location shall be on side streets where accessible: 
(B)  Maximum width shall be sixteen feet for a one-way driveway and twenty-five feet for a two-way driveway. 
iii.  Service access from rear alleys or side streets shall be preserved and enhanced wherever possible. Trash and loading areas shall not be visible from the street and shall be screened from view from side streets and from properties to the rear. 
c.  Landscaping and Screening. 
i.  Parking areas shall be planted with shade trees at a ratio of one tree for every three spaces. A minimum of five feet of landscaping shall be provided between the parking area and street right-of-way. 
ii.  The perimeter of parking areas and driveways adjacent to streets and sidewalks shall be screened with an attractive landscape hedge, berm, low wall, fence, or line of bollards a minimum of thirty inches and a maximum of thirty-six inches in height. 
iii.  Adjacent to Designated Residential Areas: Attractive screen fencing or decorative masonry or walls shall be provided along the property line to screen buildings, service areas, and parking areas. 
(A)  A six-foot wide planting area shall be established on the commercial side of the fence or wall with shade tree planting at a minimum spacing of twenty feet on center. 
(B)  Fences and walls not adjacent to streets or sidewalks shall be a minimum of six feet in height and a maximum of eight feet in height. 
iv.  Trash and Service Equipment: Including satellite receiving dishes, shall be located away from streets and enclosed or screened by landscaping, fencing or other architectural means. 
D.  Design Guidelines. Design Guidelines are Discretionary. They are intended to illustrate and simplify the appropriate development and renovation concepts in terms of more subjective considerations, such as character or design details. The guidelines are not intended to be an exhaustive list of strict standards, but rather, statements to encourage improvement which is sensitive to the downtown. They also serve as criteria for design review by city staff and the site plan and architectural review committee (SPARC). No particular architectural style is prescribed. 
1.  Building Composition: Every building should have a base, a clear pattern of openings and surface features, a recognizable entry, and an interesting roofline. 
2.  Storefronts: Are like small buildings with their own base, "roofline", and pattern of window and door openings 
a.  Base: Panel of tile or other special material is recommended below display windows. Materials recommended for walls are generally suitable. Base materials should be the same or visually "heavier" materials than walls. 
i.  Brick should be used as the main wall surface. 
ii.  Ceramic tile is frequently used as a storefront base. Dark tile with light stucco is an effective combination. Different colors and sizes of tile may be used for a decorative effect. 
b.  Display Windows. Large pane windows encompassing a minimum of sixty percent of the storefront surface area are recommended. Where privacy is desired for restaurants, professional service, etc., windows should be divided into smaller panes. Tinted windows may be used. (Refer to glazing section). 
c.  Transom windows are horizontal panels of glass between the storefront and second floor. They are a traditional element of "main street" buildings, and are recommended for all new or renovated storefronts. Transom windows can be good locations for neon, painted-window, and other relatively non-obtrusive types of signs. 
d.  Recessed entries are recommended as another traditional element of the main street storefront. Recommended treatments include: 
i.  Special paving materials such as ceramic tile; 
ii.  Ornamental ceiling treatments, such as coffering; 
iii.  Decorative light fixtures. 
e.  Doors should be substantial and well-detailed. They are the one part of the storefront that patrons will invariably touch and feel. They should match the materials, design and character of the display window framing. Door styles six inches or less are not recommended. 
f.  Cornices should be provided at the second floor (or roofline for a one-story building) to differentiate the storefront from upper levels of the building to add visual interest, and to allow the storefront to function as the base for the rest of the building. 
g.  New or renovated storefronts within existing buildings should emulate or re-create a previous store front (from historic photos or drawings) in order to harmonize with the overall building architecture. 
3.  Building increments storefronts and/or building bays should be approximately twenty-five feet in width. Buildings with a longer frontage should have a vertical architectural feature-column, pilaster, etc. every twenty-five feet. 
a.  Pattern of features windows, wall, panels, pilaster, building bays, and storefronts should be based on a module derived from the building's structural bay spacing. Features based on this module should be carried across windowless walls to relieve blank, uninteresting surfaces. 
b.  Building entrances should be prominent and easy to identify. 
i.  Spacing entries to shops or lobbies should be spaced a maximum of fifty feet apart. 
ii.  Main building entrance should be easily identifiable and distinguishable from storefronts: 
(A)  Marked by a taller mass above, such as a tower, or within a volume that protrudes from the rest of building surface; 
(B)  Located in the center of the facade, as part of a symmetrical overall composition; 
(C)  Accented by architectural elements, such as columns, overhanging roofs, awnings, ornamental light fixtures. 
iii.  Prominent corner entrances for shops or other active uses should be provided by corner buildings. 
c.  Roofs and rooflines should provide visual interest and complement the overall facade composition. 
i.  Parapet walls are recommended; they should have a distinct shape or profile, e.g. a gable, arc, raised center. 
ii.  Accent elements such as flags, cut-out openings, grilles and latticework, ornamental medallions or building numbers are also recommended. 
iii.  Mechanical equipment on rooftops should be screened, preferably behind a parapet roof. Latticework, louvered panels, and other treatments that are compatible with the building's architecture may also be appropriate. 
4.  Special architectural features such as gables and tower elements, should be used to accent buildings at major street corners and other highly-visible locations. A cut into the building mass, such as a diagonal at a corner building, or a notch for a grand building entry, can also be effective. 
5.  Side and rear building facades should have a level of trim and finish compatible with the front facade or an architectural mural, particularly if they are visible from streets, adjacent parking areas or residential buildings. 
6.  Wall Treatments: If the building mass and pattern of windows and doors is complex, simple wall surfaces are preferable (e.g. stucco). If the building volume and the pattern of wall openings is simple, additional wall texture and articulation should be employed (e.g. bricks or blocks). In both cases, pilasters, columns, and cornices should be used to add visual interest and pedestrian scale. 
The selection and placement of materials on the exterior of a building is important in providing an attractive design. Material change should occur on different planes in order to appear more substantial and integral to the design of the elevation. Change should occur where architectural elements intersect, such as a pilaster or projection. The number of materials on the exterior elevation should be limited to prevent visual overload. Materials should have a traditional or logical application. Heavy materials should appear to hold up lighter materials. 
a.  Brick: Full size brick veneer is preferable to brick tile. Brick veneers should be mortared to give the appearance of structural brick. Brick tile applications should use wrap-around corner and bullnose pieces to minimize a veneer appearance. 
b.  Brick Veneers: Are appropriate as a special material for wall panels or sills in combination with other materials, such as brick or concrete. 
c.  Poured-In-Place Concrete: Options in terms of formwork, pigments, and aggregates should be explored to create rich surfaces. Accents such as ceramic tile are recommended for decorative effect. 
d.  Concrete Block: Concrete block is available in various sizes, surface textures, and colors. Decorative treatments, such as alternating, courses of differing heights, should be used. Stack bond, plain gray concrete block is not recommended 
e.  Ceramic tile is recommended as an accent material. 
f.  Stucco integral coloring should be used for lower maintenance and wear. 
g.  Not Recommended: 
i.  Simulated finishes such as artificial stone or metal cladding. 
ii.  Wood shingles and shakes: Vertical board and batten, shingles, shakes, are not recommended; they have a rural/residential character. 
iii.  Plywood siding. (Includes T-111 siding) 
7.  Windows are an important element of building composition and an indicator of overall building quality. 
a.  Window/Wall Proportion: In general, upper stories should have a window to wall area proportion (typically thirty to fifty percent) that is smaller than that of ground floor storefronts. 
b.  Window openings should generally be vertical or square in shape; if square, windows and/or window panes should be vertical in shape. 
c.  Window inset glass should be inset a minimum of three inches from the exterior wall surface to add relief to the wall surface; this is especially important for stucco buildings. 
d.  Shaped frames, sills and/or lentils should be used to enhance openings and add additional relief. They should be proportional to the glass area framed; e.g. a larger window should have thicker framing members. 
e.  Muntins "true divided light" windows or sectional windows are recommend where a divided window design is desired; where "snap-in" muntins are used, they must be both sides of the glass. 
f.  Glazing: Clear glazing is strongly recommended. Reflective glazing should not be used. If tinted glazing is used, the tint should be kept as light as possible; green, gray, and blue are recommended. 
g.  Replacement/renovation: Wood windows should be replaced with wood windows of the same operating type (e.g. double-hung, casement, etc.). Vinyl covered wood windows are available for lower maintenance. If aluminum replacement windows or doors are used, they should be: 
i.  Same operating type and orientation as the original windows (e.g. do not replace a double-hung window with a horizontal sliding window). 
ii.  Factory painted or fluorocoated to match the original; color anodized is also acceptable. 
iii.  Similar in size and thickness to the original frame and muntins. 
8.  Roofs should match the principal building in terms of style, detailing and materials. They should also contribute expressive and interesting forms that add to the overall character of the district. Recommended types are: 
a.  Tar and gravel, composition, or elastomeric roofs should be screened by parapets or false-front sections of sloping roofs. 
b.  Clay, ceramic or concrete tile: Colorful glazed ceramic tiles are recommended for decorative roof shapes, such as parapets, domes, and turrets. 
c.  Metal seam roofing should be anodized, fluorocoated or painted. Copper and lead roofs should be natural or oxidized. 
9.  Canopies, Awnings, and Other Building-Mounted Accessories. 
a.  Awnings are Recommended. They should be a colorful fabric mounted over a metal structural that is framed and attractive in design. Fabric awnings are generally preferable to permanent canopies. Internally illuminated vinyl awnings are not acceptable. 
b.  Trellises and canopies materials, colors, and form should be derived from the building architecture. 
c.  Height and projection trellises, canopies and awnings should be a minimum of eight feet above the sidewalk. They should project no more than two feet from the face of curb, depending upon the width of the sidewalk. 
d.  Placement of trellises, canopies and awnings should be above the display windows and below the storefront cornice or sign panel. They should not cover pipes, pilasters, clerestory windows or other architectural features. Individual awnings accents and complements the building more effectively than one continuous awning. 
e.  Accessories colorful banners should be used to add variety to the street. Ornamental brackets and poles add further interest. Hanging flower or plant baskets suspended from ornamental brackets of metal or wood are recommended for storefronts. 
10.  Color: In general, drab earthtones should not be used. Building wall color should contrast trim colors; for example, neutral or light walls with dark colors and saturated hues for accent and ornamental colors; white or light window and door trim on a medium or dark building wall. Colors of adjacent buildings should be taken into consideration. 
a.  Secondary color (like a wainscot), pilasters, cornices, capitals, and bands. 
b.  Bright colors should be used sparingly. Typical applications are fabric awnings and banners. A restrained use of bright colors also allows display windows and merchandise to catch the eye and stand out in the visual field. 
E.  Additions, Renovations and Restorations. Changes to the commercial environment will most likely take place in the form of renovation or restoration. As uses change and remodeling projects are proposed, owners are encouraged to upgrade their property in a manner consistent with the character of the downtown. One of the most effective ways to attract attention and encourage shopping is to create an attractive, well designed storefront and building entry. Many buildings in Downtown Lodi have distinctive architectural qualities that make important contributions to the visual character. These qualities could be improved or emphasized to the benefit of the entire area. 
Sensitive alteration or restoration of existing buildings enhances their historic value. To ensure proper work, the services of an architect specializing in restoration and preservation work are highly recommended. 
1.  Additions and alterations should be sensitive to the scale and character of storefront areas in general, of adjacent buildings, and of the building itself. Generally, they should reflect one of the following conditions: 
a.  Identical to the architecture of the original building, as if the same architect or builder built more of the same building. This is usually most successful and feasible where the addition is smaller than the original building. 
b.  Interpretation of the older building (and/or other adjacent buildings). The older building is not imitated exactly, but certain characteristics are copied using contemporary materials and construction practices. This is most successful where the addition is larger than the older building. Some of their "contextual" strategies are: 
i.  Architectural lines and rhythms of older buildings are extended to the new building; such as floor and cornice heights, window and bay spacing, 
ii.  Colors and materials are selected to coordinate and harmonize between the old and new structures. 
iii.  Small elements may be identical on both buildings to link them; window and door trim, paint colors, signs, light fixtures, etc. 
2.  Restorations: Restoring the original form and appearance of old buildings is recommended. Many "modernization's" of 19th and early 20th century storefront buildings cover fine facades and other architectural features that can be restored. Paint, covered, or blocked-in clerestory windows are common, as are upper stories that have been plastered over or covered with metal fascia or awnings. 
3.  Repair and Cleaning: Care should be taken to avoid damaging the value of historic buildings. In particular: 
a.  Masonry materials such as concrete and brick should not be sandblasted, as this damages the surface of the material; low-pressure water cleaning should be used instead. Sealers for waterproofing should be used after cleaning and repair. 
4.  Replacement of Unavailable Components: When historic construction materials cannot be replaced or matched, care should be taken to match the original pattern, thickness, color, and texture as closely as possible with available materials. In general, simulated replacement materials (artificial stone, simulated "aged" brick) are discouraged. The restoration architect and various specialty building supply businesses can assist in the selection of proper materials. 
F.  Lighting. Building and accent lighting in the downtown is an effective mechanism to attract attention to a structures details and the business as well. Further, lighting shall be used for parking areas, passageways and sidewalks. 
1.  Area lighting sources for illuminating sidewalks passageways, parking, and rear and side yard areas: 
a.  Shall be shielded from casting light onto adjacent properties. They shall not cast light directly into adjacent residential windows. A translucent or optical lens diffuser globe or shield is recommended. 
b.  Maximum mounting height of light sources for ground level illumination shall be sixteen feet, measured from the finished grade of the area to be lit; height must be eighteen feet at minimum if extending over a roadway surface. 
2.  Ornamental fixtures not used as primary area lighting and mounted with visible light sources: 
a.  With clear or no diffuser individual lamp wattage should not exceed sixty watts incandescent, twenty watts fluorescent, or forty watts high intensity discharge (H.I.D., such as metal halide, high pressure sodium, or mercury vapor lamps). 
b.  With frosted or optical (fresnel type) light fixture diffuser individual lamp wattage may not exceed one hundred watts incandescent, forty watts fluorescent, or seventy watts H.I.D. 
3.  Commercial Areas. The following recommendations are intended to promote an attractive nighttime pedestrian environment. They apply to lighting installations by either the private or public sector: 
a.  Specialized Professional Assistance. A good lighting design can make both tenant businesses and buildings highly recognizable and attractive by night, and contribute to the district's distinctiveness. The services of a lighting designer are highly recommended, as such a specialist can demonstrate and provide the best effect within a specified budget. 
b.  Lighting Design. 
i.  Use the minimum brightness for illumination of large areas. 
ii.  Use brighter light to punctuate and accent important areas such as entries and special architectural features. 
c.  Recommended lamp color/types. Color corrected ("white") high pressure sodium (HPS); color corrected (three thousand degrees K); incandescent. 
d.  Lamps not recommended. Standard ("peach") high pressure sodium, low. 
e.  Metalwork. Portions of lighting should be architecturally related to the building architecture. The color and finish of lighting metalwork should match the building's metalwork, if any. 
f.  Recommended globes. Clear borosilicate glass globes; clear acrylic or polycarbonate globes with optical diffusing (fresnel) patterns; translucent clear (frosted) or white acrylic or polycarbonate globes. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.22.060 - Mixed use center design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose. The mixed use center design guidelines are intended to provide clear and useful recommendations for the design, construction, review, and approval of mixed use center development in the city of Lodi. Mixed use center development will play a vital role in creating neighborhoods centers where people can walk between home, work, shopping, and recreation. This chapter will help ensure that new projects will be well designed, uphold the city's vision, and contribute to the quality of the public realm. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The design guidelines in this chapter apply to the three sites designated as mixed use center in the general plan. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, signs, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. 
2.  The review authority may interpret these design guidelines with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the review authority to be more important in the particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed. 
C.  Site Planning. 
1.  Require all development at sites designated mixed use center to provide a mix of commercial uses, while allowing residential uses, to create a "node," typically centered around a plaza, or "a central street," with a minimum of ten percent of the land area devoted to non-residential land uses, to create pedestrian vitality in the core area. Allow a range of other supportive commercial uses, such as medical, dental, and real-estate offices, as well as community facilities. 
2.  Require each core (minimum parcel size of fifteen acres) to have at least one plaza or other satisfactory gathering space along the central street that enables gathering and promotes a sense of neighborhood identity. 
3.  Block lengths within mixed use center areas shall not exceed four hundred feet. 
D.  Building Placement. 
1.  Buildings shall be constructed near or along the front property line(s). A "zero setback" from the front property line(s) is encouraged. 
2.  Variations in the zero setback from the property line(s) may be appropriate when the resulting setback provides greater accommodation for pedestrian circulation, sidewalk dining areas, enhanced entries, and improves the pedestrian realm. 
3.  When a front setback is necessary, a majority of the setback shall be hardscaped with limited landscaping to accommodate uses that keep the public realm active, such as outdoor dining and seating. 
4.  Require that any office uses in mixed use center front along the street edge with minimal setbacks. 
E.  Building Orientation. 
1.  The main pedestrian access point to the building shall be located along the facade that is oriented to the primary street. 
2.  Buildings on corner lots shall have the primary entry facing the intersection. Corner entries help create an active public realm and reinforce significant street and sidewalk intersections. 
3.  Entries that face the primary street shall be directly connected to the street's sidewalks. Secondary and residential entrances can be connected to interior courtyards and parking lots. 
4.  The most active ground floor uses such as storefronts, lobbies, and restaurant dining areas shall front the public sidewalk. Private amenities, such as courtyards, that are not accessible to the public shall be located within the project site or on upper floors and not along the street. 
5.  For buildings sited on less significant intersections, such as a major arterial and a collector, at least fifty percent of the side street ground floor elevation shall include storefront design features. 
F.  Building Design and Architecture. 
1.  Building Organization and Frontage. 
a.  In mixed use centers the development of a complex of buildings is preferable to a single large structure because the varied massing provides visual interest and human scale. Additionally, the spaces created between the various buildings provide opportunities for pedestrian plazas, courtyards and other outdoor gathering areas. 
b.  Building plans, facades, and architectural details shall create visual interest at the street level (e.g., staggering the frontage of the building, recessing doors and windows, providing awnings and canopies for weather protection and scale, and visually extending interior spaces outside through paving and glazing to create the concept of an indoor/outdoor room, etc.). 
c.  Projects located at intersections shall ensure the design treatments are continued around the corner. 
d.  Development located at signalized intersections of major streets shall be encouraged to include pedestrian-oriented, community serving commercial uses such as a bookstore, coffee shop, or local market. 
2.  Articulation. 
a.  Buildings shall be articulated to reflect a small-scale street frontage rhythm, with building bay widths of approximately twenty-five to fifty feet. 
b.  Where multiple-tenant spaces are incorporated into a building, individual tenant spaces shall be located within the building bays. This can be achieved by any of the following: 
i.  Placing a column, pier or pilaster between facade elements. 
ii.  Applying vertical slot or recess between facade elements. 
iii.  Providing variation in plane along the building wall. 
iv.  Varying the building wall by recessing the storefront entrance or creating a niche for landscaping or pedestrian area. 
c.  Primary building entries shall be accented with strong architectural definition. 
d.  Mixed use buildings shall be designed with a distinct "base", "middle", and "top" to create a human-scaled public realm. Elements that are recommended to articulate a building's facade include: 
i.  Design details for the top of a building, including cornice lines, parapets, eaves, brackets and other detailing. 
ii.  Design details for the body, or middle, of the building including windows, awnings, trellises, canopies, alcoves, balconies, pilasters, columns, decorative lighting and window boxes. 
iii.  Design details for the base of a building, including recessed entry areas, covered outdoor areas and alcoves. 
e.  The proportion and placement of windows on upper floors shall be designed to look different from the windows on the ground floor. 
f.  Awnings are encouraged, and if used, should be provided over each storefront of buildings with multiple storefronts. These awnings should be located within the individual structural bays and should not hide architectural detailing. 
g.  Awnings on multi-tenant buildings should be the same color and style and should be consistent with the character and design of the building. 
h.  In order to promote active, pedestrian-friendly streets, each individual tenant or business establishment and residential lobbies shall be oriented to and accessible from the major street frontage and directly accessible from the public sidewalk. 
i.  Rear walls and elevations visible from the public right-of-way shall be designed to maximize visual appeal by using vertical and horizontal wall plane breaks. 
3.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs should be compatible with the architectural style of the building. 
b.  The roof shape should reflect the configuration of the building's mass and volume, and should be consistent in its character from all vantage points. 
c.  Sloping roof forms are encouraged. 
d.  The visible portion of sloped roofs shall be sheathed with a roofing material complementary to the architectural style of the building. 
e.  All buildings shall provide cornice or parapet detailing in order to delineate a strong roofline along the primary facades. 
f.  Cornices and horizontal bands of genuine materials, such as wood trim rather than foam are strongly encouraged. 
g.  False fronts, applied mansard forms and other artificial rooflines that are not an integral component of the architectural design should be avoided. 
4.  Building Materials. 
a.  A well-defined building "base" (i.e., ground floor) provides scale and articulation at the pedestrian level. The "base" shall consist of traditional thicker walls along with high quality, durable, and easy to clean materials and finishes. Special materials (e.g., granite, marble, polished stone, and other metal panels) shall be utilized as accent materials on the building's "base." 
b.  Upper floors that are less prone to potential vandalism shall utilize high quality finish materials of traditional mixed-use projects (e.g., brick veneer, smooth troweled stucco, etc.). 
c.  Materials and colors shall be selected to unify the building appearance and fit into the pedestrian context. Avoid overly vibrant colors and/or monochromatic color palettes. 
d.  Awning materials should be compatible with the overall design and character of the building. The use of fabric awnings is encouraged. The use of vinyl and plastic awnings is discouraged. 
5.  Windows. 
a.  Windows shall be large glazed panels, possibly with small upper transoms. Window patterns shall have a slight inset and not appear flat. Glass shall be clear (eighty-eight percent light transmission) and not heavily tinted so as to provide views into active spaces or window displays. 
b.  A minimum of sixty percent of linear store frontage at the street facade should be used for the display windows and evenly distributed. False fronts or windows should not be included that are not integral components of the building. 
c.  Windows on the upper floors shall be smaller in size than storefront windows on the first floor and shall encompass a smaller proportion of facade surface area. 
d.  Upper story windows shall be detailed with architectural elements, such as projecting sills, molded surrounds and/or lintels. 
e.  Where unique use or occupancy requirements preclude the addition of windows, such as theaters or parking structures, exterior walls shall be designed to provide architectural relief or shall be screened by landscaping and pedestrian amenities, such as trellises, benches or shade structures. 
f.  To ensure and protect the privacy of residents in adjacent single-family homes, windows in mixed-use projects facing single family residences within fifteen feet of the property line, shall be carefully arranged. Examples of privacy options include translucent or louvered windows, offset window patterns, and locating windows five-feet above the floor level. 
G.  Plazas. 
1.  Plazas shall incorporate high quality paving materials, such as stone, concrete or tile. The paving shall complement the adjacent public streetscape elements. 
2.  Plazas should be visible from public streets and the pedestrian network and accessible from the building as well as the street and pedestrian network. 
3.  Focal elements such as sculptures, art, or water features shall be incorporated into courtyard and plaza design. 
4.  Site furniture shall be carefully placed to not create pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. All outdoor seating areas shall leave at least five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
5.  Graffiti resistant material and/or coating and skateboard deterrents shall be required to retain the furniture's attractiveness. 
6.  All outdoor dining furniture and umbrellas in the public right-of-way shall be removed and stored inside during hours of non-operation. 
H.  Parking and Circulation. 
1.  Customer and tenant parking shall be provided at the rear of buildings, in facilities, in off-street parking lots, or adjacent parking lots. Whenever possible, parking structures shall be placed behind the mixed use buildings. 
2.  Mixed-use projects must provide secure separate parking spaces for the residential units. The secure residential spaces shall be accessed via a gate code or other security mechanism. 
3.  Vehicular access shall be provided from side streets, adjacent alleys, and parallel streets whenever possible. 
4.  Where possible, rear parking lots shall be designed and located contiguously so vehicles can travel from one private parking lot to another without having to enter the street. This may be achieved with reciprocal access agreements. 
5.  The number of curb cuts for vehicular entry into the site shall be minimized so that pedestrian and bicycle areas are safe, secure, and passable. 
6.  Where possible, require abutting new developments to share a single access point from the road and allow only one curb cut per parcel. 
7.  Pedestrians shall have a clear and direct route from on-site parking to the building entry and public sidewalk system. The circulation path shall be direct, continuous, marked, and free of barriers (e.g., site equipment, signage, utility poles, etc.). 
8.  Any paving pattern, color, and material used to articulate pathways and pedestrian areas shall continue when driveways intersect with these areas. Where pedestrian circulation paths cross vehicular circulation paths, a material change, contrasting color, or slightly raised crossing shall be used to clearly delineate the continuing pedestrian path. 
9.  Adjacent properties shall be adequately screened from the parking structures and lots. 
10.  Secure, covered bicycle parking in residential mixed-use projects shall be provided. 
11.  Commercial bicycle racks shall be in public view, close to building entrances, with high visibility and sufficient lighting. 
12.  Include corner bulb-outs with gathering spaces and special crosswalks at key intersections. Considerations for gathering space components shall include shelter from sun and rain, seating options, landscaping (including shade trees and planters), trash receptacles, signage and fountains. 
I.  Landscaping. 
1.  Emphasis shall be placed on California or Mediterranean style landscaping, particularly indigenous plants, ornamental vines, and flowers in either container pots or as part of an arbor/trellis. Landscaping must be well maintained with drip irrigation systems for trees/garden beds and pots that does not drain across the pavement. 
2.  All landscaping shall employ features and techniques that reduce the demand for and consumption of water, including appropriate low-water plants, a high degree of paving permeability and water conserving irrigation techniques and systems. 
3.  Planting plans for building setbacks should include a hierarchy of plantings in terms of size and types of plant materials that mark the transition between the horizontal ground plane at the sidewalk or parking area and the tall, vertical facades of buildings. 
4.  Continuous street trees shall be included along all street frontages of mixed-use development. 
5.  Trees in paved areas shall be provided with "deep root" barriers, deep root automatic irrigation, and expandable metal tree grates of adequate size. Root barriers shall be of a material specifically designed for containing tree roots. Irrigation shall be adapted for deep watering. 
6.  For plazas, shade trees or other sun-screening elements shall be incorporated in the design to provide well-shaded seating areas. Decorative planters shall be considered for plazas. 
7.  Parking lots visible from the street and pedestrian areas shall incorporate landscaping treatments (e.g., trees, shrubs, groundcover, etc.). Larger parking lots shall also incorporate landscaped medians where appropriate. 
J.  Lighting. 
1.  Lighting fixtures shall be attractively designed to complement the architecture of the project, signify building entry locations, and improve visual identification of residences and businesses. 
2.  On each project site, all lighting fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the buildings and from the same "family" with respect to design, materials, color, style, and color of light. 
3.  Wall mounted lights shall be used to the greatest extent possible to minimize the total number of freestanding light fixtures. 
4.  The lighting of building elements and garden walls is an effective and attractive lighting technique that should be considered. 
5.  In order to use less energy and reduce light pollution, ensure that lighting associated with new development or facilities (including street lighting, recreational facilities, and parking) shall be designed to prevent artificial lighting from illuminating adjacent residential neighborhoods and/or natural areas at a level greater than one foot candle above ambient conditions. 
K.  Walls. 
1.  Encourage alternatives to soundwalls and permit new soundwalls only where alternatives are not feasible. Along major arterials that coincide with a mixed use center, such as Kettleman Lane, ensure that soundwalls do not disrupt pedestrian-orientated character. Alternative designs could include frontage roads, dense vegetation, and ensuring sufficient insulation in residential units that would potentially be impacted by the noise. 
L.  Equipment, Service Area, and Refuse Area Screening. 
1.  Roof-mounted utility and communication equipment shall be screened from view by structural features that are an integral part of the building's architectural design. 
2.  Loading and service areas shall be concealed from view within the building envelope or shall be located to the rear of the site and designed for minimal visual impact and circulation conflicts. 
3.  When trash enclosures, loading docks, utility equipment, and similar uses are visible from a side street or a neighboring property, they shall be screened using materials, colors, and landscaping that are harmonious with the site design and building architecture. 
4.  Trash storage areas shall be covered to reduce unsightly views. 
5.  Trash enclosures shall provide an area for recycling. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.22.070 - Mixed use corridor design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose. The mixed use corridor design guidelines are intended to provide clear and useful recommendations for the design, construction, review, and approval of mixed use corridor development in the city of Lodi. Mixed Use Corridor development will play a vital role in reactivating key roadway corridors in the city through stimulation of new development along the corridors and interconnection of the corridors with surrounding neighborhoods. This chapter will help ensure that new projects will be well designed, uphold the city's vision, and contribute to the quality of the public realm. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The design guidelines in this chapter apply to the roadways designated as mixed use corridor in the general plan. Key corridors include Kettleman Lane, Cherokee Lane, Lodi Avenue, and Central Avenue. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. 
2.  The review authority may interpret these design guidelines with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the review authority to be more important in the particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed. 
C.  Site Planning. 
1.  Special Standards for Lodi Avenue and Central Avenue. At least thirty percent of development site shall include active uses—retail, restaurants, cafes, and personal service establishments fronting the streets at the ground level in order to accommodate pedestrian-oriented, neighborhood serving commercial uses. The minimum interior depth of these commercial spaces shall be twenty-five feet. A range of compatible uses, such as residential or office, may be located at upper levels and in portions not fronting the streets. 
2.  Special Standards for Kettleman Lane. Allow any mix of uses as permitted within the mixed use corridor classification. Ensure that residential uses are sited at upper levels or, if at ground level, then not directly facing the highly trafficked Kettleman Lane. 
3.  Special Standards for Cherokee Lane. Require any new development of site with mixed use designation south of Tokay Street to devote at least one-quarter of the built-up area to commercial uses, while allowing the full spectrum of single or mixed-uses permitted within the designation. 
D.  Building Placement. 
1.  Buildings shall be encouraged to locate near or along the front property line(s). 
2.  Variations in the zero setback from the property line(s) may be appropriate when the resulting setback provides greater accommodation for pedestrian circulation, sidewalk dining areas, enhanced entries, and improves the pedestrian realm. 
3.  When a front setback is necessary, a majority of the setback shall be hardscaped with limited landscaping to accommodate uses that keep the public realm active, such as outdoor dining and seating. 
E.  Building Orientation. 
1.  The main pedestrian access point to the building shall be located along the facade that is oriented to the primary street. 
2.  Buildings on corner lots shall have the primary entry facing the intersection. Corner entries help create an active public realm and reinforce significant street and sidewalk intersections. 
3.  Entries that face the primary street shall be directly connected to the street's sidewalks. Secondary and residential entrances can be connected to interior courtyards and parking lots. 
4.  The most active ground floor uses such as storefronts, lobbies, and restaurant dining areas shall front the public sidewalk. Private amenities, such as courtyards, that are not accessible to the public shall be located within the project site or on upper floors and not along the street. 
F.  Building Design and Architecture. 
1.  General Building Organization and Frontage Standards. 
a.  In mixed use corridors the development of a complex of buildings is preferable to a single large structure because the varied massing provides visual interest and human scale. Additionally, the spaces created between the various buildings provide opportunities for pedestrian plazas, courtyards and other outdoor gathering areas. 
b.  Building plans, facades, and architectural details shall create visual interest at the street level (e.g., staggering the frontage of the building, recessing doors and windows, providing awnings and canopies for weather protection and scale, and visually extending interior spaces outside through paving and glazing to create the concept of an indoor/outdoor room, etc.). 
c.  Projects located at intersections shall ensure the design treatments are continued around the corner. 
d.  Development located at signalized intersections of major streets shall be encouraged to include pedestrian-oriented, community serving commercial uses such as a bookstore, coffee shop, or local market. 
e.  Development located at key intersections, including Lodi Avenue/Central Avenue; Lodi Avenue/School Street; and Lodi Avenue/Sacramento Street, shall contain appropriate design features, including buildings that punctuate the corner with design elements and/or projects that provide additional public or pedestrian amenities, such as plazas. 
2.  Specific Building Organization and Frontage Standards for all Mixed Use Corridors except Kettleman Lane and Cherokee Lane. Maintain a consistent building base/street wall along the majority of site frontage along mixed use corridors (with the exception of Kettleman Lane and Cherokee Lane), with a minimum height of fifteen to twenty-five feet. 
3.  Articulation. 
a.  Where multiple-tenant spaces are incorporated into a building, individual tenant spaces shall be located within the building bays. This can be achieved by any of the following: 
i.  Placing a column, pier or pilaster between facade elements. 
ii.  Applying vertical slot or recess between facade elements. 
iii.  Providing variation in plane along the building wall. 
iv.  Varying the building wall by recessing the storefront entrance or creating a niche for landscaping or pedestrian area. 
b.  Primary building entries shall be accented with strong architectural definition. 
c.  Mixed use buildings shall be designed with a distinct "base", "middle", and "top" to create a human-scaled public realm. Elements that are recommended to articulate a building's facade include: 
i.  Design details for the top of a building, including cornice lines, parapets, eaves, brackets and other detailing. 
ii.  Design details for the body, or middle, of the building including windows, awnings, trellises, canopies, alcoves, balconies, pilasters, columns, decorative lighting and window boxes. 
iii.  Design details for the base of a building, including recessed entry areas, covered outdoor areas and alcoves. 
d.  The proportion and placement of windows on upper floors shall be designed to look different from the windows on the ground floor. 
e.  Awnings are encouraged, and if used, should be provided over each storefront of buildings with multiple storefronts. These awnings should be located within the individual structural bays and should not hide architectural detailing. 
f.  Awnings on multi-tenant buildings should be the same color and style and should be consistent with the character and design of the building. 
g.  In order to promote active, pedestrian-friendly streets, each individual tenant or business establishment and residential lobbies shall be oriented to and accessible from the major street frontage and directly accessible from the public sidewalk. 
h.  Rear walls and elevations visible from the public right-of-way shall be designed to maximize visual appeal by using vertical and horizontal wall plane breaks. 
4.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs should be compatible with the architectural style of the building. 
b.  The roof shape should reflect the configuration of the building's mass and volume, and should be consistent in its character from all vantage points. 
c.  Sloping roof forms are encouraged. 
d.  The visible portion of sloped roofs shall be sheathed with a roofing material complementary to the architectural style of the building. 
e.  All buildings shall provide cornice or parapet detailing in order to delineate a strong roofline along the primary facades. 
f.  Cornices and horizontal bands of genuine materials, such as wood trim rather than foam are strongly encouraged. 
g.  False fronts, applied mansard forms and other artificial rooflines that are not an integral component of the architectural design should be avoided. 
5.  Building Materials. 
a.  A well-defined building "base" (i.e., ground floor) provides scale and articulation at the pedestrian level. The "base" shall consist of traditional thicker walls along with high quality, durable, and easy to clean materials and finishes. Special materials (e.g., granite, marble, polished stone, and other metal panels) shall be utilized as accent materials on the building's "base." 
b.  Upper floors that are less prone to potential vandalism shall utilize high quality finish materials of traditional mixed-use projects (e.g., brick veneer, smooth troweled stucco, etc.). 
c.  Materials and colors shall be selected to unify the building appearance and fit into the pedestrian context. Avoid overly vibrant colors and/or monochromatic color palettes. 
d.  Awning materials should be compatible with the overall design and character of the building. The use of fabric awnings is encouraged. The use of vinyl and plastic awnings is discouraged. 
6.  Windows. 
a.  Windows shall be large glazed panels, possibly with small upper transoms. Window patterns shall have a slight inset and not appear flat. Glass shall be clear (eighty-eight percent light transmission) and not heavily tinted so as to provide views into active spaces or window displays. 
b.  Thirty to sixty percent of linear store frontage at the street facade should be used for the display windows and evenly distributed. A higher percentage shall be encouraged for Lodi and Central Avenues, where higher pedestrian activity is expected. False fronts or windows should not be included that are not integral components of the building. 
c.  Windows on the upper floors shall be smaller in size than storefront windows on the first floor and shall encompass a smaller proportion of facade surface area. 
d.  Upper story windows shall be detailed with architectural elements, such as projecting sills, molded surrounds and/or lintels. 
e.  Where unique use or occupancy requirements preclude the addition of windows, such as theaters or parking structures, exterior walls shall be designed to provide architectural relief or shall be screened by landscaping and pedestrian amenities, such as trellises, benches or shade structures. 
f.  To ensure and protect the privacy of residents in adjacent single-family homes, windows in mixed-use projects facing single family residences within fifteen feet of the property line, shall be carefully arranged. Examples of privacy options include translucent or louvered windows, offset window patterns, and locating windows five-feet above the floor level. 
G.  Plazas. 
1.  Plazas shall incorporate high quality paving materials, such as stone, concrete or tile. The paving shall complement the adjacent public streetscape elements. 
2.  Plazas should be visible from public streets and the pedestrian network and accessible from the building as well as the street and pedestrian network. 
3.  Focal elements such as sculptures, art, or water features shall be incorporated into courtyard and plaza design. 
4.  Site furniture shall be carefully placed to not create pedestrian/vehicular conflicts. All outdoor seating areas shall leave at least five feet of unobstructed pedestrian space. 
5.  Graffiti resistant material and/or coating and skateboard deterrents shall be required to retain the furniture's attractiveness. 
6.  All outdoor dining furniture and umbrellas in the public right-of-way shall be removed and stored inside during hours of non-operation. 
H.  Parking and Circulation. 
1.  Customer and tenant parking shall be encouraged to be located at the rear of buildings, in facilities, in off-street parking lots, or adjacent parking lots. Whenever possible, parking shall be placed behind the mixed use buildings. 
2.  Mixed-use projects must provide secure separate parking spaces for the residential units. The secure residential spaces shall be accessed via a gate code or other security mechanism. 
3.  Vehicular access shall be provided from side streets, adjacent alleys, and parallel streets whenever possible. 
4.  Where possible, rear parking lots shall be designed and located contiguously so vehicles can travel from one private parking lot to another without having to enter the street. This may be achieved with reciprocal access agreements. 
5.  The number of curb cuts for vehicular entry into the site shall be minimized so that pedestrian and bicycle areas are safe, secure, and passable. 
6.  Where possible, require abutting new developments to share a single access point from the road and allow only one curb cut per parcel. 
7.  Pedestrians shall have a clear and direct route from on-site parking to the building entry and public sidewalk system. The circulation path shall be direct, continuous, marked, and free of barriers (e.g., site equipment, signage, utility poles, etc.). 
8.  Any paving pattern, color, and material used to articulate pathways and pedestrian areas shall continue when driveways intersect with these areas. Where pedestrian circulation paths cross vehicular circulation paths, a material change, contrasting color, or slightly raised crossing shall be used to clearly delineate the continuing pedestrian path. 
9.  Adjacent properties shall be adequately screened from the parking structures and lots. 
10.  Secure, covered bicycle parking in residential mixed-use projects shall be provided. 
11.  Commercial bicycle racks shall be in public view, close to building entrances, with high visibility and sufficient lighting. 
12.  Include bicycle lanes along mixed use corridors per Figure 5-3, general plan bicycle system, of the transportation element of the Lodi general plan. 
13.  The following key intersections shall include improved pedestrian crossings, per Figures 4-6 to 4-9 of the community design and livability element of the Lodi general plan. Improvements that shall be considered include but are not limited to corner bulb-outs with gathering spaces and special crosswalks. Gathering space components could include shelter from sun and rain, seating options, landscaping (including shade trees and planters), trash receptacles, signage and fountains: 
a.  Kettleman Lane. 
i.  Kettleman Lane/South Mills Avenue; 
ii.  Kettleman Lane/Woodbridge Irrigation District Canal Trail Crossing; 
iii.  Kettleman Lane/South Ham Lane; 
iv.  Kettleman Lane/South Fairmont Avenue; 
v.  Kettleman Lane/South Hutchins Street. 
b.  Lodi Avenue. 
i.  Lodi Avenue/South Hutchins Street. 
c.  Central Avenue. 
i.  Central Avenue/Tokay Street; 
ii.  Central Avenue/Eden Avenue; 
iii.  Central Avenue/Flora Avenue; 
iv.  Central Avenue/Hilborn Avenue; 
14.  The following priority streets shall include streetscaping and pedestrian comfort measures within the mixed use corridor boundaries, per Figures 4-6 to 4-9 of the community design and livability element of the Lodi general plan. Streetscape amenities may include: street trees, wide sidewalks, special paving, street lighting, seating, info kiosks, open bus stop shelters, and bicycle racks: 
a.  Kettleman Lane. 
i.  South Mills Avenue; 
ii.  South Ham Lane; 
iii.  South Fairmont Avenue; 
iv.  South Hutchins Street. 
b.  Cherokee Lane. 
i.  Pine Street; 
ii.  Lodi Avenue; 
iii.  Tokay Street; 
iv.  Industrial Way; 
v.  Vine Street. 
c.  Lodi Avenue. 
i.  South Ham Lane; 
ii.  South Hutchins Street; 
iii.  South Pleasant Avenue; 
iv.  Stockton Street; 
v.  Garfield Avenue. 
I.  Landscaping. 
1.  Emphasis shall be placed on California or Mediterranean style landscaping, particularly indigenous plants, ornamental vines, and flowers in either container pots or as part of an arbor/trellis. Landscaping must be well maintained with drip irrigation systems for trees/garden beds and pots that does not drain across the pavement. 
2.  All landscaping shall employ features and techniques that reduce the demand for and consumption of water, including appropriate low-water plants, a high degree of paving permeability and water conserving irrigation techniques and systems. 
3.  Planting plans for building setbacks should include a hierarchy of plantings in terms of size and types of plant materials that mark the transition between the horizontal ground plane at the sidewalk or parking area and the tall, vertical facades of buildings. 
4.  Continuous street trees shall be included between the corridor roadway and sidewalk, unless infeasible. 
5.  Medians within corridor roadways shall be wide enough to act as refuges and support some landscaping, particularly at crossings. 
6.  Trees in paved areas shall be provided with "deep root" barriers, deep root automatic irrigation, and expandable metal tree grates of adequate size. Root barriers shall be of a material specifically designed for containing tree roots. Irrigation shall be adapted for deep watering. 
7.  For plazas, shade trees or other sun-screening elements shall be incorporated in the design to provide well-shaded seating areas. Decorative planters shall be considered for plazas. 
8.  Parking lots visible from the street and pedestrian areas shall incorporate landscaping treatments (e.g., trees, shrubs, groundcover, etc.). Larger parking lots that are not parking structures shall also incorporate landscaped medians where appropriate. 
J.  Lighting. 
1.  Lighting fixtures shall be attractively designed to complement the architecture of the project, signify building entry locations, and improve visual identification of residences and businesses. 
2.  On each project site, all lighting fixtures shall be architecturally compatible with the buildings and from the same "family" with respect to design, materials, color, style, and color of light. 
3.  Wall mounted lights shall be used to the greatest extent possible to minimize the total number of freestanding light fixtures. 
4.  The lighting of building elements and garden walls is an effective and attractive lighting technique that should be considered. 
5.  In order to use less energy and reduce light pollution, ensure that lighting associated with new development or facilities (including street lighting, recreational facilities, and parking) shall be designed to prevent artificial lighting from illuminating adjacent residential neighborhoods and/or natural areas at a level greater than one foot candle above ambient conditions. 
K.  Signage and Gateways. For mixed use corridors, including but not necessarily limited to Kettleman Lane, Cherokee Lane, Lodi Avenue, Central Avenue, Sacramento Street, and Stockton Street, develop a wayfinding and signage scheme along the corridors that utilizes public art and street elements, such as banners and light fixtures. The scheme should reinforce the city's identity and linkages to downtown. 
L.  Walls. Encourage alternatives to soundwalls and permit new soundwalls only where alternatives are not feasible. Alternative designs could include frontage roads, dense vegetation, and ensuring sufficient insulation in residential units that would potentially be impacted by the noise. 
M.  Equipment, Service Area, and Refuse Area Screening. 
1.  Roof-mounted utility and communication equipment shall be screened from view by structural features that are an integral part of the building's architectural design. 
2.  Loading and service areas shall be concealed from view within the building envelope or shall be located to the rear of the site and designed for minimal visual impact and circulation conflicts. 
3.  When trash enclosures, loading docks, utility equipment, and similar uses are visible from a side street or a neighboring property, they shall be screened using materials, colors, and landscaping that are harmonious with the site design and building architecture. 
4.  Trash storage areas shall be covered to reduce unsightly views. 
5.  Trash enclosures shall provide an area for recycling. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.24 - INDUSTRIAL ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.24.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the industrial zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established), determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site development. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.24.020 - Purposes of industrial zoning districts. 
The industrial zoning districts are intended to provide for a range of industrial uses, emphasizing high quality development, and to encourage revitalization of existing industrial land uses. The purpose of the individual industrial zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  M (Industrial) District. The M zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for a mix of heavy manufacturing, warehousing, general service, storage, and distribution activities. The maximum FAR is 0.6. The M zoning district is consistent with the industrial land use designation of the general plan. 
B.  BP (Business Park) District. The BP zoning district is applied to areas appropriate for office activities that generate high employment yield per acre. It accommodates campus-like environments for a corporate headquarters and other office parks. This designation may also provide for light industrial and production facilities. The maximum FAR is 1.0. The BP zoning district is consistent with the business park land use designation of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.24.030 - Industrial zoning district land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 2-10 identifies the uses of land allowed by this development code in the industrial zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements). 
Note: Where the last column in the tables ("specific use regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply. 
TABLE 2-10 
Industrial Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements 	A 	Allowed Use 
	UP 	Use Permit Required 
	MUP 	Minor Use Permit Required 
	— 	Use Not Allowed 
LAND USE 	PERMIT REQUIRED BY 
TDISTRICT 	Specific Use 
Regulations 
	M 	BP 	
AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE 
Production of crops 	A 	A 	
RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES 
City offices 	A 	A 	
Clubs, lodges, and membership halls 	A 	— 	
Health/fitness facilities 	— 	A 	
Indoor sports facilities 	— 	A 	
Outdoor recreation facilities 	UP 	UP 	
Schools—Specialized education and training 	A 	A 	
Studios—Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc. 	UP 	UP 	
RESIDENTIAL USES 
Residential shelters 	UP 	— 	
RETAIL TRADE 
Accessory retail uses 	A 	A 	
Adult entertainment business 	A 	— 	Municipal Code Chapter 5.40 
Alcoholic beverage sales, on-site 	UP 	UP 	
Auto parts sales 	A 	— 	
Auto sales and rental 	A 	A 	
Building material stores 	A 	— 	
Construction/heavy equipment sales and rental 	A 	A 	
Convenience stores 	— 	UP 	
Drive-in and drive-through sales and services 	— 	UP 	
Gas stations 	A 	UP 	
Mobile home and RV sales 	A 	A 	
Plant nurseries and garden supply stores 	A 	— 	
Restaurants 	A 	A 	
SERVICES—BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, PROFESSIONAL 
Automated teller machines (ATMs) 	A 	A 	
Banks and financial services 	A 	A 	
Business support services 	A 	A 	
Medical—Clinics, offices, and laboratories 	— 	A 	
Medical—Extended care 	— 	A 	
Medical—Hospitals 	— 	A 	
Offices 	A 	A 	
Professional services 	A 	A 	
SERVICES 
Auto repair and maintenance 	A 	— 	
Car wash 	— 	UP 	
Contractor storage yard 	A 	— 	
Food locker/distribution 	A 	— 	
Hotels and motels 	UP 	UP 	
Mortuaries and funeral homes 	A 	— 	
Research and development 	A 	A 	
Storage—Indoor 	A 	— 	
Upholstering shops 	A 	— 	
Veterinary clinics, outpatient treatment only 	A 	— 	
Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, kennels 	A 	— 	
INDUSTRIAL, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, WHOLESALING 
Accessory uses—Industrial 	A 	A 	
Auto dismantling 	UP 	— 	
Chemical manufacturing and processing 	UP 	UP 	
Electronics, equipment, and appliance manufacturing 	A 	A 	
Food and beverage product manufacturing 	A 	UP 	
Furniture/fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shops 	A 	UP 	
Handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing 	A 	UP 	
Laundries and dry cleaning plants 	A 	— 	
Lumberyards 	A 	— 	
Metal products fabrication, machine/welding shops 	A 	— 	
Milling 	A 	— 	
Paper and allied product manufacturing 	A 	— 	
Petroleum/coal product storage and processing 	UP 	— 	
Printing and publishing 	A 	A 	
Product assembly and packaging 	A 	A 	
Quarry materials storage and processing 	UP 	— 	
Railyard/boat/aircraft manufacturing and repair 	UP 	— 	
Recycling facilities 			
 Small collection facility 	— 	— 	17.36.110 
 Large collection facility 	UP 	— 	17.36.110 
Plastics manufacturing 	A 	UP 	
Warehouses, wholesaling and distribution 	A 	UP 	
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES 
Broadcast studios 	A 	UP 	
Parking facilities/vehicle storage 	A 	— 	
Telecommunications facilities 	MUP 	— 	17.36.140 
Truck and freight terminals 	A 	— 	
Utility facility 	UP 	— 	
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.24.040 - Industrial zoning district general development standards. 
Subdivisions, new land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Table 2-11, in addition to the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 3, (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
TABLE 2-11 
Industrial District General Development Standards 
Development Feature 	Requirement by Zoning District 
	M 	BP 
Minimum lot size 	Minimum area, width, and depth required for new parcels. 
 Area 	10,000 sq. ft. 	1 acre 
 Width and depth 	75 ft. wide/100 ft. deep 	75 ft. wide/100 ft. deep 
Setbacks 	Minimum and, where noted, maximum setbacks required. See Section 17.14.060 for exceptions to these requirements. 
 Front 	10 ft. 	25 ft. 
 Street side 	10 ft. 	10 ft. 
 Sides (each) 	None (1) 	None (1) 
 Rear 	None (1) 	None (1) 
Floor area ratio (FAR) 	0.60 	1.0 
Height limit 	70 ft. (2) 
Landscaping 	Landscaping shall be provided: 
1. As required by Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping); and 
2. A minimum of 10 ft. of landscaping shall be provided across the entire frontage of an industrial building. 
Parking 	As required by Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading) 
Enclosure requirement 	All uses shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building unless the specific use and zone permit otherwise. Uses allowed in an applicable zone that are determined by the director to require outdoor storage or activities (for example, vehicle sales lots, service stations, etc.) may be exempted from this requirement. 
 
Notes: 
(1)  None required except: When adjacent to a res. zone boundary where a min. of twenty feet is required. 
(2)  Additional height is allowed by use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.24.050 - Industrial design guidelines. 
A.  Purpose. The industrial design guidelines are intended to provide clear and useful recommendations for the design, construction, review, and approval of industrial development in the city of Lodi. The city of Lodi recognizes the unique requirements of industrial development and the potential for such development, through careful design, to make a positive contribution to the appearance of the community. Site and building design provisions herein are focused on the view from public rights-of-way and compatibility with surrounding development. This chapter will help ensure that new projects will be well designed, uphold the city's vision, and contribute to the quality of the public realm. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  The design guidelines in this chapter apply to the sites designated as industrial in the general plan. The general plan industrial land use designation includes the general mills factory and sites along the railroad and east of State Route 99. The design elements of each project (including site design, architecture, landscaping, parking design) will be reviewed on a comprehensive basis. 
2.  The review authority may interpret these design guidelines with some flexibility in their application to specific projects, as not all design criteria may be workable or appropriate for each project. In some circumstances, one guideline may be relaxed to facilitate compliance with another guideline determined by the review authority to be more important in the particular case. The overall objective is to ensure that the intent and spirit of the design guidelines are followed. 
C.  Building Orientation. 
1.  Design industrial sites to minimize the visual impacts of parking areas, equipment, and outdoor storage from public rights-of-way. Mitigate these undesirable visual impacts through proper placement and design of buildings, screen walls, and landscaping. 
2.  New buildings shall be oriented toward the adjoining public streets, so that public entrances are a focal point on the building and site layout. 
3.  Industrial buildings shall be oriented so that bays and loading docks do not directly face the primary street frontage. Loading areas shall be located in the rear or side of the building whenever possible; however, they should never face adjacent residential uses. 
D.  Building Design and Architecture. 
1.  Massing and Scale. 
a.  Organize the massing of larger buildings into components that more readily relate to the human scale. 
b.  Reduce the mass and scale of large industrial buildings with building facades and wall height variations, and by articulating rooflines and wall planes. 
c.  Avoid long, repetitive, monotonous facades particularly those that repeat the same design element several times along the same elevation. 
d.  The scale of building(s) on the site edge shall be compatible with the scale of adjoining development. Where surrounding development is of a small scale, large scale buildings shall be located internal to the site and transition down in scale as the outer edge of the site approaches. 
2.  Articulation and Detail. 
a.  Individual design elements shall be faithful to the overall architecture of the building. Architectural details shall be part of the design and not something applied as an afterthought. A consistent design theme provides continuity and avoids confusion of style. 
b.  Front and street-side facades of large buildings visible from a public street or adjacent residential property shall include architectural features such as reveals, windows and openings, trellises, changes in color, texture, and material to add interest to the building elevation and reduce its visual mass. 
c.  Consideration shall be given to recessing building floors above the first story and providing vertical or horizontal offsets in the wall surfaces at regular intervals, including columns, projections, and recesses, (e.g. every twenty feet). 
d.  All sides of the building visible from the street or residential property shall have the same level of architectural detailing as the main elevation. 
e.  Primary building entries shall have pedestrian scale and shall be expressed with windows, awnings, trellises, articulation, arcades, landscape, planters, and material changes or other design elements so that the building entry is easily identified and visible from the street and parking lot. 
f.  Architectural detail at the street level shall establish human scale and enhance the building's and the streetscape's appearance. 
3.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall be compatible with the architectural style and scale of the building. 
b.  The roof shape shall reflect the configuration of the building's mass and volume, and shall be consistent in its character where visible from public streets. 
c.  Rooflines for large buildings shall be broken up and varied by providing change in the height of a portion of the roof(s), change in form, or other articulations. High pitched "A-frame" type rooflines and partial mansards should be avoided. 
4.  Building Materials and Colors. 
a.  Innovative use of durable, high quality materials such as brick, stone, tile, stucco, and concrete is encouraged. 
b.  Incorporation of energy conservation features is encouraged in industrial buildings to exceed California's 2005 Title 24 regulation standards for building energy efficiency. 
c.  Use a color scheme (for example: two analogous colors plus a complementary trim color) to create visual interest and enhance the streetscape appearance of the building. 
d.  Use earthtone colors and keep the number of colors used on the building and within the overall streetscape to a minimum. 
e.  Use smaller, articulated, varied color and texture wall surfaces rather than larger homogenous ones. 
f.  The same exterior colors and finishes shall be used on all sides of the structure. 
g.  Building color shall not be used as signage, branding, or business identification. 
h.  Awning materials shall be compatible with the overall design and character of the building. The use of fabric awnings is encouraged. The use of vinyl and plastic awnings is discouraged. 
E.  Parking and Circulation. 
1.  Site access shall allow for easy circulation throughout the project to minimize conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians, between employee/visitor traffic and truck shipping/delivery. Separate walkways shall be provided to the public way from the main entrance. Main pedestrian routes through parking areas to building entrances shall have decorative paving treatment or other demarcation of pedestrian right-of-way. 
2.  Enhance primary entry drives for automobiles, especially visitors, with ornamental landscaping, special treatment, and monument type signs to communicate site access locations. 
3.  Parking lots shall not be the dominant visual element of the site. It is generally more visually appealing to locate parking lots along the side or the rear of buildings. Small customer-oriented parking lots are appropriate toward the front of the site; however, the majority of employee parking should be located to the rear of the site to the maximum extent feasible. To avoid large expanses of paved areas, large parking lots should be divided into smaller parking areas. Buildings should not be located in a manner that make them appear like "islands" surrounded by paved areas. 
4.  The number of site accesses (ingress/egress) shall be controlled in terms of the location and number of driveways to minimize traffic safety conflicts, street congestion, and unnecessarily disrupted street frontage. Where possible, adjoining properties should share access driveways to minimize the number of driveways along public streets. Shared service or secondary access alleys shall also be considered. Use of an existing side street for primary or secondary access is encouraged as opposed to creating one or more new curb cuts on a collector or arterial street. 
5.  New streets for industrial projects shall be designed to handle heavier loads associated with truck operations, as necessary. Larger turning movements shall also be included in new streets to facilitate truck movements. 
F.  Landscaping. 
1.  Emphasis shall be placed on California or Mediterranean style landscaping, particularly indigenous plants, ornamental vines, and flowers in either container pots or as part of an arbor/trellis. Landscaping must be well maintained with drip irrigation systems for trees/garden beds and pots that do not drain across the pavement. 
2.  All landscaping shall employ features and techniques that reduce the demand for and consumption of water, including appropriate low-water plants, a high degree of paving permeability and water conserving irrigation techniques and systems. Recycled water should be utilized to the extent possible. 
3.  Trees in paved areas shall be provided with "deep root" barriers, deep root automatic irrigation, and expandable metal tree grates of adequate size. Root barriers shall be of a material specifically designed for containing tree roots. Irrigation shall be adapted for deep watering. 
4.  Planting plans for building setbacks should include a hierarchy of plantings in terms of size and types of plant materials that mark the transition between the horizontal ground plane at the sidewalk or parking area and the tall, vertical facades of buildings. 
5.  The use of vines, trellises, and landscape screen walls is strongly encouraged on larger areas of unadorned building facades to soften the appearance and to deter graffiti. 
6.  Increase the amount of landscaping and special landscape features at project entries and pedestrian gathering areas. 
7.  Minimize the quantity of impervious paving in parking areas and maximize the use of landscaping or permeable pavement on-site to reduce surface water runoff and the need for water detention basins. 
8.  Where it is infeasible to locate all large parking areas to the rear of the building, views of expansive paved areas from public rights-of-way and/or residential areas shall be minimized by landscaping within and along the perimeter of parking lots. 
9.  Required parking lot landscaping shall include the use of landscape planters along parking aisles throughout the parking lot. 
10.  Streetscapes shall incorporate a mix of trees, shrubbery, and ground cover to establish a landscape corridor presence. 
11.  Consideration shall be given to the incorporation of open space areas in the form of courtyards, plazas, shaded arcades and functional landscaped areas. These features should link adjoining buildings and take advantage of outdoor as well as indoor space. These features can be located in areas with recessed facades or setbacks in excess of minimum standards, and may be designed for use by employees and/or customers. Pedestrian features such as benches, tables, fountains, artwork, and landscaping should be incorporated as focal points or relaxation area. 
G.  Lighting. 
1.  The design and location of outdoor lighting fixtures shall preclude direct glare onto adjoining non-industrial property and streets. 
2.  Outdoor lighting shall be designed to foster security. Illumination should be increased at building entries to increase visibility and safety. 
3.  Use landscape lighting and exterior lighting to enhance project design features. Lighting fixtures shall have sharp cut off so that no direct lighting falls onto adjacent properties or the public right-of-way. 
4.  As applicable, illuminate flags only with very narrow spot type lamps directed no more than fifteen degrees from vertical. Shield fixtures so that the light source is not visible from off-site. 
H.  Equipment, Service Area, and Refuse Area Screening. 
1.  Roof-mounted utility and communication equipment shall be screened from view by structural features that are an integral part of the building's architectural design. 
2.  Loading and service areas shall be concealed from view within the building envelope or shall be located to the rear of the site and designed for minimal visual impact and circulation conflicts. 
3.  When trash enclosures, loading docks, utility equipment, and similar uses are visible from a street, they shall be screened using materials, colors, and landscaping that are harmonious with the site design and building architecture. 
4.  Trash enclosures shall provide an area for recycling. 
I.  Metal Buildings. Metal buildings present their own special set of challenges and opportunities in the community context. If metal buildings are well articulated and surfaces are judiciously mixed with other materials, or textures, and colors, they can make an attractive contribution to industrial park appearance. 
1.  Metal buildings should incorporate architectural features such as gable, hip, and other sloping roof forms, prominent main entries, windows, storefront, glazed doors, canopies and window awnings, use of brick or stone at building base, and architectural lighting fixtures to make a positive contribution to the streetscape. 
2.  Street frontages of metal buildings shall present sloping or articulated roof forms. Eaves and steeper roof pitches are more attractive than shallow roofs and roofs without eaves. 
3.  As with all building design, roofs, particularly metal roofs, contribute significantly to a building's appearance and character. Variety in roof shapes and colors should complement the scale of the building. Darker, non-glare colors help reduce the mass of metal roof designs. Metal roofs can incorporate standing seam, tile and shake materials to create visual interest in design. 
4.  Long, stark, and uninterrupted panels used for metal buildings shall be avoided. Use of panels with continuous vertical seams shall also be avoided. Other building materials should be incorporated into structural design to add contrast, variety, and visual interest in building form. Wall systems should use techniques that hide or disguise wall fastening systems and seams. Building features such as columns, curved metal corners, deep reveals at construction joints or other details should be incorporated into building design to add interest into the architectural design. 
5.  Window treatments can provide a key design element for metal buildings. Windows shall particularly be incorporated along the street front elevation(s) to help metal buildings incorporate human-scale design elements that address the building to the street. Windows should incorporate changes in building plane by either recessing or projecting them as integral parts of the overall design theme. Detailed window fenestration should be incorporated around windows including change in relief, color, pattern, and/or materials. 
6.  Downspouts shall be concealed unless they are part of the design, in which case downspouts shall be coated to match the wall color. 
7.  Any freestanding outbuildings shall use forms, shapes and materials that are consistent with the main structure. 
8.  Large expanses of light colored metal wall materials shall be avoided. Darker colors help visually reduce the prominence of large metal buildings. Horizontal color bands, and wall projections and recesses, provide shadowing to accentuate differentiation for wall designs. Consider using corrugated or flat fiber-reinforced cement panels, as well as metal. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.26 - SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.26.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter lists the uses of land that may be allowed within the special purpose zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established), determines the type of land use permit/approval required for each use, and provides basic standards for site development. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.26.020 - Purposes of special purpose zoning districts. 
The purposes of the individual special purpose zoning districts and the manner in which they are applied are as follows: 
A.  PF (Public and Community Facilities) Zoning District. The PF zoning district is applied to areas suitable for public land uses including government offices, schools, and libraries, and other related public uses. The PF zoning district is consistent with the public/quasi public and the detention basins and parks land use designations of the general plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.26.030 - Special purpose district land uses and permit requirements. 
Table 2-12 identifies the uses of land allowed by this development code in the commercial zoning districts, and the land use permit required to establish each use, in compliance with Section 17.12.030 (Allowable Land Uses and Permit Requirements). 
Note: Where the last column in the tables ("specific use regulations") includes a section number, the regulations in the referenced section apply to the use; however, provisions in other sections of this development code may also apply. 
TABLE 2-12 
Special Purpose Zones—Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements 	A 	Allowed Use 
	UP 	Use Permit Required 
	MUP 	Minor Use Permit Required 
	— 	Use Not Allowed 
LAND USE 	PF DISTRICT 
PERMIT 
REQUIREMENT 	SPECIFIC USE 
REGULA- 
TIONS 
RECREATION, EDUCATION, AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLY USES 
Cemetery 	A 	
City offices 	A 	
Clubs, lodges, and membership halls 	A 	
Community centers 	A 	
Indoor sports facilities 	A 	
Fairgrounds 	A 	
Health/fitness facilities 	A 	
Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities 	A 	
Indoor sports facility 	A 	
Libraries, museums, galleries (public) 	A 	
Outdoor recreation facilities 	A 	
Parks and playgrounds 	UP 	
Religious facilities 	A 	
School—Public 	A 	
Schools—Specialized education and training 	A 	
Studios—Art, dance, martial arts, music, etc. 	A 	
Theaters and auditoriums 	A 	
TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES 
Parking facilities/vehicle storage 	A 	
Telecommunications facilities 	A 	
Utility facility 	A 	
 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.26.040 - Public and community facilities district development standards. 
Standards for development within the PF zoning district will be determined by the city through the project review process. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.28 - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 
 
17.28.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter regulates new and existing structures and land uses in the overlay zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established). The provisions of this chapter provide guidance for development in addition to the standards and regulations of the primary zoning districts, where important site, environmental, safety, compatibility, or design issues require particular attention in project planning. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.28.020 - Applicability of overlay zoning districts. 
The provisions of this chapter apply to proposed land uses and development in addition to all other applicable requirements of this development code. Any perceived conflict between the provisions of this chapter and any other provision of this development code shall be resolved in compliance with Section 17.02.020(D). 
A.  Mapping of Overlay Districts. The applicability of any overlay zoning district to a specific site is shown by the overlay zoning map symbol established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established), being appended as a suffix to the symbol for the primary zoning district on the zoning map. The overlay districts are applied to property through the rezoning process (Chapter 17.72). 
B.  Allowed land uses, permit requirements, development standards. Except as may be otherwise provided by this chapter for a specific overlay district: 
1.  Any land use normally allowed in the primary zoning district by this article may be allowed within an overlay district, subject to any additional requirements of the overlay district; 
2.  Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall obtain the land use permits required by this article for the primary zoning district; and 
3.  Development and new land uses within an overlay district shall comply with all applicable development standards of the primary zoning district, except as modified by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.28.030 - Flood hazard (-F) overlay zoning district. 
A.  Purpose. The -F overlay district is intended to protect people and property from flood hazard risks by appropriately regulating development and land uses within areas subject to flooding. Special regulation is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and general welfare, and of property and improvements from hazards and damage resulting from floodwaters and to promote the open space conservation element policies of the general plan. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Application to Property. The -F overlay district is applied to areas within the city prone to flood hazard risks, combined with any primary zoning district as shown on the zoning map and by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established). 
2.  Floodplain Boundaries. The Mokelumne River floodplain is defined as those areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Insurance Administration through a scientific and engineering report entitled "The Flood Insurance Study for the City of Lodi," dated June, 1987, with accompanying flood insurance rate maps and any revision thereto, which are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this section. Maps and data which reflect this delineation are on file in the office of the director of community development. 
C.  Permit Requirements. No structure or land shall, after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, be located, extended, converted or altered within the -F overlay zoning district without full compliance with the terms of this chapter, and without having first received a development or construction permit in accordance with the provisions of this title and, for developments requiring use permits, with the provisions of Section 17.12.030. 
D.  Allowable Land Uses. Nothing in this subsection is intended to authorize a use not otherwise allowed in the primary zoning district with which the -F overlay district is combined. 
1.  Permitted Uses Generally. Unless otherwise prohibited or subject to a use permit in the primary zoning district, the following uses are permitted without a use permit where modification or removal of native vegetation, including trees, is not required: 
a.  Agriculture; 
b.  Open space agricultural uses not requiring a closed building such as, orchards, and livestock feeding and grazing; 
c.  The storage of farm machinery which is readily removable from the area within the time available after flood warning; 
d.  Recreational: Firmly anchored recreational floating docks; and 
e.  Modification of Native Vegetation: Where modification or removal native vegetation is required, such modification or removal may be after obtaining a development permit consisting of written approval from the community development director; provided, that such modifications in the floodplain have been found to be consistent with the general plan. 
2.  Permitted Uses—Use Permit and State Approval. Unless otherwise prohibited in the primary zoning district, the following uses may be permitted after approval of a conditional use permit by the city and after approval by the State Department of Fish and Game and the reclamation board of the state; provided, that as determined by said reclamation board, a combination of such uses within the floodplain does not materially increase the flood height of the intermediate regional floodplain; and provided further, that as determined by the State Department of Fish and Game, full mitigation measures will be used to protect and enhance the trees, native plant materials and wildlife in the floodplain, in accordance with good fish and game practices and in accordance with the following: 
a.  Residential dwellings on existing undeveloped lots in subdivisions approved before January 1, 1977; 
b.  Outdoor recreational facilities: 
i.  Campgrounds; 
ii.  Boating facilities; 
iii.  Parks; 
iv.  Golf courses or driving ranges; 
v.  Athletic fields; and 
vi.  Shooting ranges; 
c.  Fences, fills, walls, excavations or other appurtenances which do not constitute an obstruction or debris-catching obstacle to the passage of floodwaters and which are consistent with the open space-conservation element policies; 
d.  Private drives, bridges, and public utility wires and pipelines for transmission and distribution; 
e.  Improvements in stream channel alignment, cross-section and capacity, including modification of riverbank and flood protection levees; 
f.  Structures that are designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow of water and are firmly anchored to prevent the structure from flotation (excepting floating docks); provided, that no structures for human habitation is permitted; 
g.  Other similar uses of a type not appreciably damaged by floodwaters. 
3.  Prohibited Uses—Storage or Processing. The storage or processing of materials that are in time of flooding buoyant, flammable or explosive, or could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, is prohibited. 
E.  Development Standards. In all areas zoned in the -F overlay district, the provisions set out in subsections 1 through 6 are required. 
1.  Elevation of Lowest Floor. The lowest floor of any residential structure, including garages and accessory buildings, shall be elevated eighteen inches or more above the level of the base flood elevation. 
2.  Anchorage. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
3.  Construction Practices and Materials. All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
4.  Water and sewer systems. New and replacement water and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters. 
5.  Nonresidential Structures. New nonresidential structures shall be floodproofed or elevated eighteen inches or more above the level of the base flood. 
6.  Floodproofing. All structures requiring floodproofing shall be so designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads with effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the standards of this section are satisfied and a copy of such certification shall be provided to the director of public works and the chief building inspector. 
F.  Warning—Liability Denied. The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.28.040 - Planned development (-PD) overlay zoning district. 
A.  Purpose. The -PD overlay district is intended to identify areas where the city has determined that flexibility in the application of development standards will produce development projects of superior quality, including retention of unique site characteristics, creative and efficient project design, etc., than would have been achieved through strict application of the development standards required by the primary zoning district. The -PD zoning district is consistent with all land use designations of the general plan. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  Eligible Primary Districts. The -PD overlay district may be combined with any of the residential, commercial, or industrial zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established). 
2.  Minimum Site Area for District. The -PD overlay zoning district shall only be applied to sites of five acres or larger. 
C.  Permit Requirements. Planned Development Permit approval (Section 17.40.060) shall be required for all development and new land uses except the interim land uses allowed by subsection D below. A planned development permit application must be simultaneously submitted with an application for rezoning to apply the -PD overlay zoning district, where rezoning is initiated by a property owner. 
D.  Allowable Land Uses. Any land use normally allowed by this article in the applicable primary zoning district may be authorized within the -PD overlay district through the planned development permit. Prior to the approval of a planned development permit, allowable uses shall be limited to the following: 
1.  Interim Uses—Residential Districts. When the -PD overlay is combined with a residential zoning district, a site may be used for any of the agricultural, resource, and open space uses identified as permitted by Table 2-4. With use permit approval, a site may be used for these temporary, short-term activities involving no physical improvements to the site. 
2.  Interim Uses—Commercial Districts. When the -PD overlay is combined with a commercial zoning district, a site may be used in advance of planned development permit approval only for temporary, short-term activities involving no physical improvements to the site, when authorized by use permit approval. 
3.  Interim Uses—Industrial Districts. When the -PD overlay is combined with a industrial zoning district, a site may be used in advance of Planned Development Permit approval only for temporary, short-term activities involving no physical improvements to the site, when authorized by use permit approval. 
E.  Development Standards. Proposed development and new land uses shall comply with all development standards established by the applicable planned development permit, or previous master plan and precise development plan, in addition to the requirements of the primary zoning district, and the applicable development standards (e.g., landscaping, parking and loading, etc.) in Article 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 3. - SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS  
Chapter 17.30 - LANDSCAPING 
 
17.30.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
The purpose of this chapter is to protect public health, safety, and welfare by: 
A.  Preserving and enhancing the visual character of the community, and providing cooling shade; 
B.  Enhancing well-designed structures and increasing compatibility between abutting land uses and public rights-of-way by providing landscape screening and buffers; and 
C.  Provide for the conservation and safeguard of water resources through the efficient use of water, appropriate use of plant materials, and regular maintenance of landscaped areas. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Landscaping Required. The provisions of this chapter apply to all new proposed development. An addition to a structure that is twenty-five percent or more of the floor area of the existing structure, and any change of use, shall require that the entire parcel be brought into compliance with the requirements of this chapter. In the case of an existing use, if the amount of required landscaping cannot be accommodated because of physical constraints on the site, (e.g., structures, parking, circulation, etc.) the applicant shall provide whatever additional landscaping the site can accommodate towards meeting the landscape requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Other Requirements. Standards for the provision of landscaping within the public right-of-way are located in Article 5 (Subdivisions). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.030 - Landscape plan approval requirements. 
A.  Preliminary Landscape Plan. A preliminary landscape plan shall be submitted as part of an application for a land use entitlement for new development, except for single family on individual lots, or the significant expansion or redevelopment of an existing use as determined by the director. 
B.  Final Landscape Plan. Following approval of the land use entitlement, a final landscape plan shall be submitted as part of the application for a building permit. Final plans shall be approved by the director prior to the start of on-site construction or soil disturbance and prior to the issuance of a building permit. 
C.  Content. Preliminary landscape plans and final landscape plans shall contain information as specified in the instructions for preparing landscape plans provided by the department. 
D.  Review and Approval. After initial application, the director shall review each preliminary landscape plan and final landscape plan to verify its compliance with the provisions of this chapter. The director may approve the submittal in compliance with this chapter, or may disapprove or require changes to a submittal if it is not in compliance. 
E.  Statement of Surety. When required by the director, a statement of surety in the form of cash, performance bond, letter of credit, or certificate of deposit, in an amount equal to one hundred fifty percent of the total value of all plant materials, irrigation, installation, and maintenance shall be posted with the city for a two-year period. The director may require statements of surety for phased development projects, a legitimate delay in landscape installation due to seasonal requirements (including adverse weather conditions) and similar circumstances where it may not be advisable or desirable to install all of a project's landscaping before occupancy of the site. 
F.  Minor Changes to Approved Plans. Landscape plan approval may include the director authorizing minor changes from the requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.040 - Landscape location requirements. 
Landscaping shall be provided in the locations specified below except for single-family uses. 
A.  Setbacks. All setback and open space areas required by this development code, and easements for utilities, and drainage courses shall be landscaped, except where it is determined by the director that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
B.  Unused Areas. All areas of a project site not intended for a specific use, including pad sites in shopping centers held for future development, shall be landscaped unless it is determined by the director that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter. 
C.  Parking Areas. Parking areas shall be landscaped in compliance with the following requirements: 
1.  Landscape Materials. Landscaping materials shall be provided throughout the parking lot area using a combination of trees, shrubs, and ground cover. 
2.  Curbing. Areas containing plant materials shall be bordered by a concrete curb at least six inches high and six inches wide. Alternative barrier design to protect landscaped areas from damage by vehicles may be approved by the director. 
3.  Location of Landscaping. Parking lot landscaping shall be located so that pedestrians are not required to cross landscaped areas to reach building entrances from parked cars. This should be achieved through proper orientation of the landscaped fingers and islands. 
4.  Bumper Overhang Areas. To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. 
5.  Perimeter Parking Lot Landscaping. 
a.  Adjacent to Streets. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining a public street shall be designed to provide a landscaped planting strip between the street right-of-way and parking area equal in depth to the setback required by the zoning district or ten feet, whichever is greater. Required parking areas for residential uses shall not be located within the required setback areas. 
The landscaping shall be designed and maintained to screen cars from view from the street and shall be a height of between thirty and forty-two inches. Screening materials may include a combination of plant materials, earth berms, solid masonry walls, raised planters, or other screening devices to meet the intent of this requirement. Shade trees shall be provided at a minimum rate of one for every thirty linear feet of landscaped area. 
b.  Adjacent to Side or Rear Property Lines. Parking areas for nonresidential uses shall provide a perimeter landscaped strip at least five feet wide (inside dimension) where the facility adjoins a side or rear property line. The perimeter landscaped strip may include a required yard or buffer area. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one for each thirty linear feet of landscaped area. 
c.  Adjacent to Structures. When parking areas are located adjacent to nonresidential structures, a minimum five-foot wide landscape strip shall be provided adjacent to the structure. 
d.  Adjacent to Residential Use. Parking areas for nonresidential uses adjoining residential uses shall provide a landscaped buffer yard with a minimum ten-foot width between the parking area and the common property line bordering the residential use. A solid masonry wall or fence and landscape buffer shall be provided along the property line to address land use compatibility issues such as nuisance noise and light or glare. Trees shall be provided at the rate of one for each thirty linear feet of landscaped area. 
6.  Interior Parking Lot Landscaping. 
a.  Minimum Area of Landscaping. A minimum of five percent of the total off-street parking area shall be landscaped with trees, shrubs, and ground cover. The perimeter landscaping required by subsection (C)(5) of this section shall not be considered part of the required parking lot landscaping. 
b.  Planter Dimensions. Planters with trees shall have a minimum interior dimension of five feet. All ends of parking lanes shall be separated from drive aisles by landscaped islands or other means approved by the director. 
c.  Larger Projects. Parking lots with more than one hundred fifty spaces shall provide a concentration of landscape elements at primary entrances, including specimen trees, flowering plants, and enhanced paving. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.050 - Residential front and street side yard landscape requirements. 
The following landscape requirements apply to all residential properties: 
A.  Hardscape. No more than fifty percent of the front and street side yard area, visible from the public right of way, may be paved with hardscape materials such as concrete, asphalt, pavers, etc. 
B.  Landscape. Any portion of the front and street side yard, visible from the public right of way, that is not covered with a hardscape material must be landscaped with grass, annuals, perennials, groundcover, shrubs, trees, other recognized landscape materials, and any design elements such as planters, rocks, mulch and similar element when integrated as part of the landscape. Living vegetation must cover at least seventy-five percent of the landscaped yard areas. 
C.  Maintenance. All landscaped yard areas must be irrigated, mowed, trimmed and maintained as often as necessary to prevent overgrowth and blight. No dirt yards shall be allowed. No junk, debris or similar materials may be stored in the front or street side yard area. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.060 - Maintenance of landscape areas. 
A.  Maintenance Required. All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a healthful and sound condition at all times. Irrigation systems and their components shall be maintained in a fully functional manner consistent with the originally approved design and the provisions of this chapter. Regular maintenance shall include checking, adjusting, and repairing irrigation equipment; resetting automatic controllers; aerating and dethatching turf areas; adding/replenishing mulch, fertilizer, and soil amendments and dead or deceased plants; pruning; and weeding all landscaped areas. 
B.  Water Waste Prohibited. Water waste in existing developments resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation leading to excessive runoff, low head drainage, overspray, and other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, nonirrigated areas, walks, roadways, or structures is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.30.070 - Water efficient landscape requirements. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  The water efficient landscape requirements shall apply to all of the following landscape projects: 
a.  New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review; 
b.  Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review; 
c.  Existing landscapes limited to Sections 17.30.070U., V. and W.; and 
d.  Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to Sections 17.30.070G., N. and O.; and existing cemeteries are limited to Sections 17.30.070U., V. and W. 
2.  Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this ordinance or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 495 Appendix D. 
3.  For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel's landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 495 Appendix D section (5). 
4.  The water efficient landscape requirements do not apply to: 
a.  Registered local, state or federal historical sites; 
b.  Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; 
c.  Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or 
d.  Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. 
B.  Definitions. The terms used in the water efficient landscape requirements have the meaning set forth below: 
"Applied water" means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape. 
"Automatic irrigation controller" means a timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers are able to self-adjust and schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data. 
"Backflow prevention device" means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system. 
"Certificate of completion" means the document required under Section 17.30.070L. 
"Certified irrigation designer" means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization, or other program, such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense Irrigation Designer Certification Program and Irrigation Association's Certified Irrigation Designer Program. 
"Certified landscape irrigation auditor" means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization, or other program such as the US Environmental Protection Agency's WaterSense Irrigation Auditor Certification Program and Irrigation Association's Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor Program. 
"Check valve" or "anti-drain valve" means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off. 
"Common interest developments" means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351. 
"Compost" means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth. 
"Conversion factor (0.62)" means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year. 
"Distribution uniformity" means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area. 
"Drip irrigation" means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Ecological restoration project" means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem. 
"Effective precipitation" or "usable rainfall," "(EPPT)" means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth. 
"Emitter" means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil. 
"Established landscape" means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. 
"Establishment period of the plants" means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Typically, most plants are established after one or two years of growth. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment. 
"Estimated total water use," "(ETWU)" means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 17.30.070G. 
"ET adjustment factor" (ETAF) means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape area shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8. 
"Evapotranspiration rate" means the quantity of water evaporated from adjacent soil and other surfaces and transpired by plants during a specified time. 
"Flow rate" means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second. 
"Flow sensor" means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter. 
"Friable" means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly-planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded. 
"Fuel modification plan guidelines" means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone. 
"Graywater" means untreated wastewater that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating wastes. "Graywater" includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathroom washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12. 
"Hardscapes" means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious). 
"Hydrozone" means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs and rooting depth. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated. 
"Infiltration rate" means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour). 
"Invasive plant species" means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious species. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA Invasive and Noxious Weeds. 
"Irrigation audit" means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association's Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency "Watersense" labeled auditing program. 
"Irrigation efficiency," "(IE)" means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of the water efficient landscape requirements are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems. 
"Irrigation survey" means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system. 
"Irrigation water use analysis" means an analysis of water-use data based on meter readings and billing data. 
"Landscape architect" means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California pursuant to Business and Professions Code Section 5615. 
"Landscape area" means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation). 
"Landscape contractor" means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems. 
"Landscape documentation package" means the documents required under Section 17.30.070F. 
"Landscape project" means total area of landscape in a project as defined in "landscape area" for the purposes of the water efficient landscape requirements, meeting requirements under Section 17.30.070A. 
"Landscape water meter" means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to a totalizer to record water use. 
"Lateral line" means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve. 
"Local water purveyor" means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company, that provides retail water service. 
"Low volume irrigation" means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants. 
"Main line" means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet. 
"Master shut-off valve" is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When this valve is closed, water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve. 
"Maximum applied water allowance," "(MAWA)" means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 17.30.070G. It is based upon the area's reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants, such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)]. 
"Median" is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses. 
"Microclimate" means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces. 
"Mined-land reclamation projects" means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975. 
"Mulch" means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion. 
"New construction" means, for the purposes of this title, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building. 
"Non-residential landscape" means landscapes in commercial, institutional, industrial, and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas. 
"Operating pressure" means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate. 
"Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems" means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors). 
"Overspray" means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area. 
"Permit" means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes. 
"Pervious" means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil. 
"Plant factor" or "plant water use factor" is a factor, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this title, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this title are derived from the publication "water use classification of landscape species." Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). 
"Project applicant" means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 17.30.070F., to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city of Lodi. A project applicant may be the property owner or his or her designee. 
"Rain sensor" or "rain sensing shutoff device" means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains. 
"Record drawing" or "as-builts" means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor. 
"Recreational area" means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, amphitheaters or golf course tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds and greens where turf provides a playing surface. 
"Recycled water," "reclaimed water," or "treated sewage effluent water" means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption. 
"Reference evapotranspiration" or "ETo" means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated. 
"Regional water efficient landscape ordinance" means a local ordinance adopted by two or more local agencies, water suppliers and other stakeholders for implementing a consistent set of landscape provisions throughout a geographical region. Regional ordinances are strongly encouraged to provide a consistent framework for the landscape industry and applicants to adhere to. 
"Rehabilitated landscape" means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 17.30.070A., and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred square feet. 
"Residential landscape" means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes. 
"Runoff" means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope. 
"Soil moisture sensing device" or "soil moisture sensor" means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event. 
"Soil texture" means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay. 
"Special landscape area" (SLA) means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, recreational areas, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled. 
"Sprinkler head" means a device which delivers water through a nozzle. 
"Static water pressure" means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing. 
"Station" means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously. 
"Submeter" means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter. 
"Swing joint" means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage. 
"Turf" means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses. 
"Valve" means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system. 
"Water conserving plant species" means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor. 
"Water feature" means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. 
"Watering window" means the time of day irrigation is allowed. 
"WUCOLS" means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, the Department of Water Resources 2014 edition. 
C.  Provisions for New Construction or Rehabilitated Landscapes. The city of Lodi may designate by mutual agreement, another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in the water efficient landscape requirements. The city may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this title. 
D.  Compliance with Landscape Documentation Package. 
1.  Prior to construction, the city shall: 
a.  Provide the project applicant with the ordinance and procedures for permits, plan checks, or design reviews; 
b.  Review the landscape documentation package submitted by the project applicant; 
c.  Approve or deny the landscape documentation package; 
d.  Issue a permit or approve the plan check or design review for the project applicant; and 
e.  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package, submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
2.  Prior to construction, the project applicant shall: 
a.  Submit a landscape documentation package to the city. 
3.  Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the city, the project applicant shall: 
a.  Receive a permit or approval of the plan check or design review and record the date of the permit in the certificate of completion; 
b.  Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package, along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or his/her designee; and 
c.  Submit a copy of the water efficient landscape worksheet to the local water purveyor. 
E.  Penalties. The city may identify penalties to the project for non-compliance with the water efficient landscape requirements. 
F.  Elements of the Landscape Documentation Package. The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements: 
1.  Project information: 
a.  Date; 
b.  Project applicant; 
c.  Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s)); 
d.  Total landscape area (square feet); 
e.  Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed); 
f.  Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local retail water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well; 
g.  Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package; 
h.  Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner; and 
i.  Applicant signature and date with statement: "I agree to comply with the requirements of the Water Efficient Landscape Requirements and submit a complete Landscape Documentation Package". 
2.  Water efficient landscape worksheet: 
a.  Hydrozone information table; 
b.  Water budget calculations: 
i.  Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA); and 
ii.  Estimated total water use (ETWU). 
3.  Soil management report. 
4.  Landscape design plan. 
5.  Irrigation design plan. 
6.  Grading design plan. 
G.  Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet. 
1.  A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non- residential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA. 
In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the reference evapotranspiration table below. For geographic areas not covered in California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 495 Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999. 
Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table. 
County and City 	Jan 	Feb 	Mar 	Apr 	May 	Jun 	Jul 	Aug 	Sep 	Oct 	Nov 	Dec 	Annual ETo 
SAN JOAQUIN 
Lodi West 	1.0 	1.6 	3.3 	4.3 	6.3 	6.9 	7.3 	6.4 	4.5 	3.0 	1.4 	0.8 	46.7 
 
*The values in this table were derived from: 
1) California Irrigation Management Information System (CIMIS); 
2) Reference EvapoTranspiration Zones Map, UC Dept. of Land, Air & Water Resources and California Dept of Water Resources 1999; 
3) Reference Evapotranspiration for California, University of California, Department of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987) Bulletin 1922; and 
4) Determining Daily Reference Evapotranspiration, Cooperative Extension UC Division of Agriculture and Natural Resources (1987), Publication Leaflet 21426. 
2.  Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements: 
a.  The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants. 
b.  All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone. 
c.  All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 495 Appendix B. 
d.  ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
H.  Soil Management Report. In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or his/her designee, as follows: 
1.  Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations. 
a.  Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants. 
b.  The soil analysis shall include: 
i.  Soil texture; 
ii.  Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table; 
iii.  pH; 
iv.  Total soluble salts; 
v.  Sodium; 
vi.  Percent organic matter; and 
vii.  Recommendations. 
c.  In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots. 
2.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall comply with one of the following: 
a.  If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city as part of the landscape documentation package; or 
b.  If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city as part of the certificate of completion. 
3.  The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans. 
4.  The project applicant, or his/her designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the city with certificate of completion. 
I.  Landscape Design Plan. 
1.  For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
a.  Plant Material. 
i.  Any plant may be selected for the landscape, providing the estimated total water use in the landscape area does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
(A)  Protection and preservation of native species and natural vegetation; 
(B)  Selection of water-conserving plant, tree and turf species, especially local native plants; 
(C)  Selection of plants based on local climate suitability, disease and pest resistance; 
(D)  Selection of trees based on applicable city tree ordinances or tree shading guidelines, and size at maturity as appropriate for the planting area; 
(E)  Selection of plants from city and regional landscape program plant lists; and 
(F)  Selection of plants from local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
ii.  Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 17.30.070J.1.b.iv. 
iii.  Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following: 
(A)  Use the sunset western climate zone system which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate; 
(B)  Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure [e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines]; allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and 
(C)  Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain. 
iv.  Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run multiplied by one hundred equals slope percent). 
v.  High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians 
vi.  A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Sections 4291(a) and (b). Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local fuel modification plan guidelines. 
vii.  The use of invasive plant species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged. 
viii.  The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group. 
b.  Water Features. 
i.  Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features. 
ii.  Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features. 
iii.  Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation. 
iv.  Pool and spa covers are highly recommended. 
c.  Soil Preparation, Mulch, and Amendments. 
i.  Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement. 
ii.  Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of the soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 492.5). 
iii.  For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling. 
iv.  A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such. 
v.  Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering standards. 
vi  The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement. 
vii.  Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer products shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local fuel modification plan guidelines or other applicable local ordinances. 
2.  The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall: 
a.  Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method; 
b.  Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation; 
c.  Identify recreational areas; 
d.  Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants; 
e.  Identify areas irrigated with recycled water; 
f.  Identify type of mulch and application depth; 
g.  Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity; 
h.  Identify type and surface area of water features; 
i.  Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious); 
j.  Identify location and installation details, and twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan and examples (see Section 17.30.070S.). 
k.  Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies as discussed in Section 17.30.070S. and their twenty-four-hour retention or infiltration capacity; 
l.  Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution; 
m.  Contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Requirements and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan"; and 
n.  Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. 
J.  Irrigation Design Plan. 
1.  This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers' recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. 
a.  System. 
i.  Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand square feet but not more than five thousand square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either: 
(A)  A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or 
(B)  A privately-owned meter or submeter. 
ii.  Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems. 
iii.  If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer's recommended pressure range for optimal performance. 
(A)  If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system. 
(B)  Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure, and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation. 
iv.  Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain. 
v.  Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair. 
vi.  Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable city code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements. 
vii.  Flow sensors that detect high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand square feet or larger. 
viii.  Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low-pressure shut-down features. 
ix.  The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures. 
x.  Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems. 
xi.  The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan. 
xii.  The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 17.30.070G. regarding the maximum applied water allowance. 
xiii.  All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers'/International Code Council's (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 "Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard." All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014. 
xiv.  It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system. 
xv.  In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone. 
xvi.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer's recommendations. 
xvii.  Head-to-head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer's recommendations. 
xviii.  Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass. 
xix.  Check valves or anti-drain valves are required systems on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur. 
xx.  Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produce no runoff or overspray. 
xxi.  Overhead irrigation shall not be permitted within twenty-four inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if: 
(A)  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; 
(B)  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or 
(C)  The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in Section 17.30.070J.1.a.ix. Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
xxii.  Slopes greater than twenty-five percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding 0.75 inches per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit. 
b.  Hydrozone. 
i.  Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use. 
ii.  Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone. 
iii.  Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation for trees. 
iv.  Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if: 
(A)  Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or 
(B)  The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations. 
v.  Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted. 
vi.  On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve. Use this valve number in the Hydrozone Information Table (see California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 495 Appendix B, Section A). This table can also assist with the irrigation audit and programming the controller. 
2.  The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain: 
a.  Location and size of separate water meters for landscape; 
b.  Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices; 
c.  Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply; 
d.  Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station; 
e.  Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 17.30.070Q.; 
f.  The following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the ordinance and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan"; and 
g.  The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. 
K.  Grading Design Plan. For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits satisfies this requirement. 
1.  The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including: 
a.  Height of graded slopes; 
b.  Drainage patterns; 
c.  Pad elevations; 
d.  Finish grade; and 
e.  Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable. 
2.  To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants: 
a.  Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes; 
b.  Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and 
c.  Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas. 
3.  The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: "I have complied with the criteria of the Water Efficient Landscape Requirements and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan" and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. 
L.  Certificate of Completion. 
1.  The certificate of completion shall include the following six elements: 
a.  Project information sheet that contains: 
i.  Date; 
ii.  Project name; 
iii.  Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address; 
iv.  Project address and location; and 
v.  Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address. 
b.  Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package. 
i.  Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these "as-built" or record drawings shall be included with the certification. 
ii.  A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes. 
c.  Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 17.30.070M.); 
d.  Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 17.30.070N.); 
e.  Irrigation audit report (see Section 17.30.070O.); and 
f.  Soil management report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 17.30.070H.). 
2.  The project applicant shall: 
a.  Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city for review; and 
b.  Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or his or her designee. 
3.  The city shall: 
a.  Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant; and 
b.  Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. 
M.  Irrigation Scheduling. For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria: 
1.  Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers. 
2.  Overhead irrigation shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
3.  For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data. 
4.  Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following: 
a.  The plant establishment period; 
b.  The established landscape; and 
c.  Temporarily irrigated areas. 
5.  Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply: 
a.  Irrigation interval (days between irrigation); 
b.  Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff); 
c.  Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff; 
d.  Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis; 
e.  Application rate setting; 
f.  Root depth setting; 
g.  Plant type setting; 
h.  Soil type; 
i.  Slope factor setting; 
j.  Shade factor setting; and 
k.  Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. 
N.  Landscape and Irrigation Maintenance Schedule. 
1.  Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion. 
2.  A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost; replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas; and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance. 
3.  Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally-installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. 
4.  A project applicant is encouraged to implement established landscape industry sustainable best practices for all landscape maintenance activities. 
O.  Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis. 
1.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a local agency landscape irrigation auditor or a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape. 
2.  In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments), an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen percent will satisfy this requirement. 
3.  For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects, as described in Section 17.30.070A.: 
a.  The project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming; and 
b.  The city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analysis, irrigation audits, and irrigation surveys for compliance with the maximum applied water allowance. 
P.  Irrigation Efficiency. For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. 
Q.  Recycled Water. 
1.  The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water. 
2.  All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable city and state laws. 
3.  Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. 
R.  Graywater Systems. 
1.  Graywater systems promote the efficient use of water and are encouraged to assist in on-site landscape irrigation. All graywater systems shall conform to the California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5, Chapter 16) and any applicable local ordinance standards. Refer to Section 17.30.010D. for the applicability of this ordinance to landscape areas less than two thousand five hundred square feet with the estimated total water use met entirely by graywater. 
S.  Stormwater Management and Rainwater Retention. 
1.  Stormwater management practices minimize runoff and increase infiltration which recharges groundwater and improves water quality. Implementing stormwater best management practices into the landscape and grading design plans to minimize rainwater runoff and to increase on-site retention and infiltration are encouraged. 
2.  Project applicants shall refer to the city or regional water quality control board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. 
3.  All planted landscape areas are required to have friable soil to maximize water retention and infiltration. Refer to California Code of Regulations Title 23, Chapter 2.7, § 492.6(a). 
4.  It is strongly recommended that landscape areas be designed for capture and infiltration capacity that is sufficient to prevent runoff from impervious surfaces (i.e., roof and paved areas) from either: (1) the one inch, twenty-four-hour rain event or (2) the eighty-fifth percentile, twenty-four-hour rain event, and/or additional capacity as required by any applicable local, regional, state or federal regulation. 
5.  It is recommended that storm water projects incorporate any of the following elements to improve on-site storm water and dry weather runoff capture and use: 
a.  Grade impervious surfaces, such as driveways, during construction to drain to vegetated areas. 
b.  Minimize the area of impervious surfaces such as paved areas, roof and concrete driveways. 
c.  Incorporate pervious or porous surfaces (e.g., gravel, permeable pavers or blocks, pervious or porous concrete) that minimize runoff. 
d.  Direct runoff from paved surfaces and roof areas into planting beds or landscaped areas to maximize site water capture and reuse. 
e.  Incorporate rain gardens, cisterns, and other rain harvesting or catchment systems. 
f.  Incorporate infiltration beds, swales, basins and drywells to capture storm water and dry weather runoff and increase percolation into the soil. 
g.  Consider constructed wetlands and ponds that retain water, equalize excess flow, and filter pollutants. 
T.  Public Education. 
1.  Publications. Education is a critical component to promote the efficient use of water in landscapes. The use of appropriate principles of design, installation, management and maintenance that save water is encouraged in the community. 
a.  The city shall provide information to owners of permitted renovations and new, single-family residential homes regarding the design, installation, management, and maintenance of water efficient landscapes based on a water budget. 
2.  Model Homes. All model homes shall be landscaped and use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this title. 
a.  Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as designed per the local ordinance; specify who designed and installed the water efficient landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems. 
b.  Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. 
U.  Provisions for Existing Landscapes. The city may by mutual agreement designate another agency, such as a water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this title. Local agencies may collaborate with water purveyors to define each entity's specific responsibilities relating to this title. 
V.  Irrigation Audit, Irrigation Survey, and Irrigation Water Use Analysis. 
1.  This section shall apply to all existing landscapes that were installed before December 1, 2015 and are over one acre in size. 
a.  For all landscapes that have a water meter, the city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation water use analyses, irrigation surveys, and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary to reduce landscape water use to a level that does not exceed the maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes. The maximum applied water allowance for existing landscapes shall be calculated as: MAWA = (0.8) (ETo)(LA)(0.62). 
b.  For all landscapes that do not have a meter, the city shall administer programs that may include, but not be limited to, irrigation surveys and irrigation audits to evaluate water use and provide recommendations as necessary in order to prevent water waste. 
2.  All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. 
W.  Water Waste Prevention. 
1.  The city shall prevent water waste resulting from inefficient landscape irrigation by prohibiting runoff from leaving the target landscape due to low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where water flows onto adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, walks, roadways, parking lots, or structures. Penalties for violation of these prohibitions shall be established locally. 
2.  Restrictions regarding overspray and runoff may be modified if: 
a.  The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or 
b.  The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping. 
X.  Effective Precipitation. The city considers effective precipitation (twenty-five percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use and uses the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance: 
MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.7 x LA) + (0.3 x SLA)] for residential areas. 
MAWA= (ETo - Eppt) (0.62) [(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for non-residential areas. 
(Ord. No. 1929, § 1, 10-19-2016) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1929, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 2019, repealed the former § 17.30.070, and enacted a new § 17.30.070 as set out herein. The former § 17.30.070 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1869, § 2, adopted Feb. 20, 2013.  
Chapter 17.32 - PARKING AND LOADING 
 
17.32.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes regulations to ensure that sufficient off-street parking facilities are provided for all uses and that parking facilities are properly designed, attractive, and meet the needs of specific uses. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.020 - Applicability. 
Every use and structure, including a change or expansion of a use or structure shall provide parking and loading areas in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. A use shall not be commenced and structures shall not be occupied until improvements required by this chapter are satisfactorily completed. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.030 - General parking regulations. 
A.  Parking and Loading Spaces to be Permanent. Parking and loading spaces shall be permanently available, marked and maintained for parking or loading purposes for the use they are intended to serve. The director may approve the temporary reduction of parking or loading spaces in conjunction with a seasonal or intermittent use. 
B.  Parking and Loading to be Unrestricted. Owners, lessees, tenants, or persons having control of the operation of a premises for which parking or loading spaces are required shall not prevent or restrict authorized persons from using these spaces. 
C.  Parking Area Use. Required off-street parking areas shall be used exclusively for the temporary parking of vehicles and shall not be used for the sale, lease, display, repair, or storage of vehicles, trailers, boats, campers, mobile homes, merchandise, or equipment, or for any other use not authorized by the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
D.  Commercial Vehicle Parking in Residential Districts. Vehicles that are strictly commercial in nature, such as tow trucks, ambulances, mini-buses, large delivery and/or service trucks, or similar vehicles with a gross load capacity greater than one and one-half tons shall not be allowed to park on private property in residential zones unless the vehicle is placed out of public view and located behind the designated front setback line, or for the immediate loading or unloading of goods or people. 
E.  Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parking. No recreational vehicle shall be parked for overnight occupancy except within an approved recreational vehicle park, or where authorized with temporary use permit approval as a temporary dwelling during construction on the same site. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.040 - Number of parking spaces required. 
Each use shall provide at least the minimum number of parking spaces required by this chapter. 
A.  Parking Requirements by Land Use. Each land use shall be provided the number of parking spaces required by Table 3-1, except where a greater number of spaces are required or an exception has been granted through land use permit approval. In any case where Table 3-1 establishes a parking requirement based on the floor area of a use (e.g. one space per one thousand square feet), the floor area shall be construed to mean gross floor area. 
B.  Expansion of Structure, Change in Use. When an existing nonresidential structure is enlarged or when a change in use requires more parking than is presently provided, additional parking spaces shall be required only for the addition, enlargement, change or expansion of use, and not for the entire structure, as determined by the director. 
C.  Multi-Tenant Sites. A site with multiple tenants shall provide the aggregate number of parking spaces required for each separate use, except where: 
1.  The site was developed comprehensively as a shopping center, the parking ratio shall be the required number of spaces for the shopping center. In this case, the parking requirement will be based on the center as a whole regardless of individual uses as provided in Table 3-1; or 
2.  The site qualifies for shared parking in compliance with Section 17.30.050 (Adjustments to Parking Requirements). 
D.  Uses Not Listed. Land uses not specifically listed in Table 3-1, shall provide parking as required by the director. The director shall use the requirements of Table 3-1 as a guide in determining the minimum number of parking spaces to be provided. 
E.  Excessive Parking. The parking standards established in this chapter are both minimum and maximum standards. Parking spaces in excess of these standards may only be approved in conjunction with SPARC review, a use permit, or planned development permit for the project, and when additional landscaping and pedestrian improvements are also provided. 
F.  Bench or Bleacher Seating. Where fixed seating is provided (e.g., benches or bleachers), a seat shall be construed to be twenty-two inches of bench space for the purpose of calculating the number of required parking spaces. 
G.  Calculation. Any fraction shall be rounded up to nearest whole number. 
H.  A single use with accessory components may be required to provide parking for each component, at the director's discretion. For example, a hotel with a gift shop shall provide space for both program elements. 
TABLE 3-1 
Parking Requirements By Land Use 
Land Use Type: 	Number of Parking Spaces Required 
Manufacturing, Processing, and Warehousing 
General manufacturing, industrial, and processing uses 	1 space for each 1,000 s.f. 
Recycling facilities 	1 space for each 1,000 s.f. 
Research and development, laboratories 	1 space for each 300 s.f. of gross floor area. 
Warehouses, distribution centers, and storage facilities (not including mini-storage for personal use) 	1 space per 1,000 s.f. for the first 20,000 s.f. of gross floor area, plus one space per 2,000 s.f. of the second 20,000 s.f. of gross floor area, plus 1 space per 4,000 s.f. of the remaining gross floor area. The gross floor area may include incidental office space comprising less than 5% of the total gross floor area. The parking requirements for additional office space shall be calculated separately as provided by this table for "Offices." 
Recreation, Education, and Public Assembly 
Child day-care centers 	1 space per 6 children. 
Commercial recreation activities as follows, or otherwise required by use permit: 	
 Golf courses (regulation) 	5 spaces for each hole. 
 Golf courses (pitch and putt) 	4 spaces for each hole. 
 Miniature golf 	3 spaces for each hole. 
 Tennis/racquetball/handball or other courts 	3 spaces for each court, plus 1 space for each 300 s.f. of floor area for ancillary uses. 
Indoor recreation/fitness centers 	
 Arcades 	1 space for each 250 s.f. of gross floor area.  
 Bowling alleys 	4 spaces for each lane, plus required spaces for ancillary uses. 
 Health/fitness clubs 	1 space for each 250 s.f. 
 Pool and billiard rooms 	Two spaces for each table, plus required space for ancillary uses. 
 Skating rinks 	1 space for each 100 s.f. of skating area. 
Outdoor recreation facilities 	2 spaces per each athletic court; 1 space per each 150 s.f. of gross water surface area; 1 space per each 500 square feet of active sports field area. 
Libraries, museums, art galleries 	1 space for each 400 s.f. of gross floor area. 
Public assembly uses (e.g., places of worship, cinemas, performance theaters, meeting halls, and membership organizations) 	1 space for each 4 fixed seats or 1 space for every 50 s.f. of gross assembly area, classrooms, meeting rooms, etc. 
Schools (private) 	
 Elementary/Middle/Junior High 	1.5 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 space for every 200 s.f. of assembly area in an auditorium, plus adequate bus loading facilities. 
 High School 	1.5 spaces for each classroom, plus 1 space for every 200 s.f. of assembly area in an auditorium, plus adequate bus loading facilities. 
 Trade and business schools 	10 spaces per classroom or as determined by the Planning Commission. 
Studios for dance and art 	1 space for each 200 s.f. 
Residential Uses 
Duplexes 	Two covered spaces per unit. 
Mixed-use developments 	Calculated by each separate use on site. 
Mobile home parks 	Two covered spaces for each mobile home. Tandem parking allowed in an attached carport, plus 1 guest parking space for each two units. (1) Recreational vehicle parking shall be provided at the rate of 1 space for every 5 units. 
Multi-family dwelling, condominiums and other attached dwellings 	1 covered space per one bedroom unit, 2 spaces per two bedroom unit (1 must be covered), plus 1 uncovered guest space for each 5 units. (1) 
Senior congregate care facilities 	0.5 space for each residential unit, plus 1 space for each 4 units for guests and employees. (1) 
Senior housing projects 	0.75 space for each unit with half the spaces covered, plus 1 guest parking space for each 10 units. (1) 
Single-family housing 	2 spaces within a garage. 
Retail Trade 
Appliances, building materials, furniture, and hardware stores 	1 space for each 500 s.f. of indoor display area. 
Automobile, mobile home, vehicle, machinery and parts sales 	1 space for each 350 s.f. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 3,000 s.f. of outdoor display, service area, plus 1 space for each 300 s.f. of gross floor area for a parts department. 
Convenience stores 	1 space for each 250 sf. 
Grocery stores 	1 space for each 250 sf. 
Restaurants/bars/night clubs 	1 space for each four seats. 
Retail sales and services 	1 space for each 500 s.f. of gross floor area. 
Shopping centers (shall use unsegregated parking area) 	Minimum parking provided shall be 1 space for each 500 s.f. of gross floor area. Maximum parking provided shall be 1 space for each 200 s.f. of gross floor area. 
Services 
Banks and financial services 	1 space for each 300 s.f. 
Hotels and motels 	1 space for each guest room. 
Kennels and animal boarding 	1 space for each 500 s.f. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 s.f. of boarding area. 
Medical services 	
 Clinic, medical/dental office 	1 space for each 200 s.f. 
 Board and care home, group home, and in-patient drug treatment facility 	1 space for each 3 beds. 
 Convalescent hospital 	1 space for each 3 patient beds per facility license. 
 Hospital 	1 space per bed. 
Mortuary/Funeral Home 	1 space for each 4 seats. 
Offices, administrative, corporate 	1 space for each 250 s.f. 
Personal services 	
 Barber/beauty shops (and other personal services: tattoo studios, massage therapy) 	1 space for each 200 s.f. 
Service stations (including multi-use stations) 	3 spaces for each service bay. 
Storage, personal storage facilities 	1 space for each 20,000 s.f. of gross floor area, plus 2 spaces for manager office/residence. 
Vehicle repair and maintenance 	
 Repair garage 	1 space for each 500 s.f. of gross floor area. 
 Self-service vehicle washing 	2 spaces for each washing stall, for queuing and drying. 
 Full-service vehicle washing 	1 space for each 250 s.f. of gross floor area. 
Veterinary clinic, animal hospital 	1 space for each 350 s.f. of gross floor area, plus 1 space for each 1,000 s.f. of boarding area. 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Guest parking spaces shall be clearly marked for guest parking only and shall be evenly dispersed throughout the development site. Signs shall be provided at appropriate locations to direct visitors to guest parking locations. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.050 - Adjustments to parking requirements. 
Where two or more adjacent nonresidential uses have distinct and differing peak parking usage periods, (e.g. a theater and a bank), a reduction in the required number of parking spaces may be allowed through use permit approval. Approval shall also require a recorded covenant running with the land, recorded by the owner of the parking lot, guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained exclusively for the use served for the duration of the use. 
A.  Reduction of required parking. The review authority may reduce the number of parking spaces required through the granting of a use permit in compliance with the following: 
1.  Quantitative information provided by the applicant that documents the need for fewer spaces (e.g., sales receipts, documentation of customer frequency, information on parking standards required for the proposed land use by other cities, etc.); 
2.  The use or project design creates an integrated whole wherein the parking reduction will not adversely affect other businesses or uses on the same property or within the boundaries of the project; or 
3.  The proposed parking requirement is consistent with other uses of similar intensity established elsewhere in the parking regulations and does not represent a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the intent of the parking regulations to provide adequate and consistent levels of parking for similar uses throughout the city. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.060 - Disabled/handicapped parking requirements. 
Parking areas shall include parking spaces accessible to the disabled in the following manner: 
A.  Number of Spaces and Design Standards. Parking spaces for the disabled shall be provided in compliance with the California Building Code and the Federal Accessibility Guidelines. Disabled accessible parking spaces shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirements of this chapter. 
B.  Residential Multi-Family Uses. For each dwelling unit required to be designed to accommodate the physically handicapped or required to be made adaptable for the physically handicapped, the required parking shall be provided in compliance with the California Building Code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.070 - Parking design standards. 
Parking areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  Location of Parking Areas. 
1.  Required off-street parking shall be located on the same parcel as the uses served; except with use permit approval, parking may be located on a parcel in the vicinity of the parcel served subject to a recorded covenant running with the land, recorded by the owner of the parking lot, guaranteeing that the required parking will be maintained exclusively for the use or activity served for the duration of the use or activity. 
2.  Required parking areas shall not be located in a required front or street side setback. 
3.  Within the downtown, no new parking areas, or curb cuts to serve a parking area shall be installed on School Street. Where possible, new parking areas and/or structures should be located to the rear of buildings and accessed from side streets or alleys. 
B.  Access to Parking Areas and Parking Spaces. 
1.  Access to Parking Lots. Parking lots shall be designed to prevent access at any point other than at designated access drives. 
2.  Parking Space Location. In order to provide adequate queuing area, no parking space shall be located within the required landscape setbacks measured from the property line, except for single-family homes and duplexes. See Figure 3-1. 
  
Figure 3-1 - Queuing Area 
3.  Internal Maneuvering Area. Parking areas shall provide suitable maneuvering room so that vehicles enter the street in a forward direction, except for single-family homes and duplexes. 
4.  Vertical Clearance. A minimum unobstructed clearance height of fourteen feet shall be maintained above areas accessible to vehicles in non-residential parking facilities. 
C.  Access to Adjacent Sites. Applicants for nonresidential developments are encouraged to provide shared vehicle and pedestrian access to adjacent nonresidential properties for convenience, safety and efficient circulation. A joint access agreement guaranteeing the continued availability of the shared access between the properties and running with the land shall be recorded by the owners of the abutting properties, as approved by the director. 
D.  Parking Space and Lot Dimensions. 
1.  Parking spaces within carports and garages. Parking spaces within carports and garages shall have minimum clear dimensions of twenty feet in length by ten feet in width per space. 
2.  Standard Parking Spaces. Minimum parking space dimensions shall be as described in Figure 3-2 and the notes that follow the figure. 
  
Figure 3-2 - Standard Parking Stall Dimensions (continued on next page) 
  
Figure 3-2 - Standard Parking Stall Dimensions (continued) 
3.  Compact Parking Spaces. Parking areas containing a minimum of twenty or more parking spaces may include a maximum of fifteen percent of the total number of parking spaces for compact cars. These spaces shall be designated and distributed throughout the lot. Dimensions of compact parking spaces shall be no smaller than six inches less than a standard stall in width and two feet less than a standard stall in depth. 
E.  Curbing and Wheel Stops. 
1.  Curbing. Continuous concrete curbing at least six inches high and six inches wide shall be provided along the edges of parking spaces adjacent to fences, walls, other structures, and landscaping. 
a.  Alternative barrier designs may be approved by the director. 
b.  Parking spaces adjacent to landscaped areas or other obstructions shall incorporate an additional curbing width of twelve inches (for a total of eighteen inches) to provide a place to stand while exiting and entering vehicles. 
c.  Curbing shall be placed within the parking space a minimum of two feet from the front of the space. 
2.  Wheel Stops. Wheel stops other than continuous concrete curbing shall be prohibited except in work areas, and parking areas not open to the public. 
3.  Bumper Overhang. To increase the parking lot landscaped area, a maximum of two feet of the parking stall depth may be landscaped with low-growth, hearty materials in lieu of paving, allowing a two-foot bumper overhang while maintaining the required parking dimensions. 
F.  Directional Arrows and Signs. 
1.  Parking spaces, aisles, approach lanes and maneuvering areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles. 
2.  The director may require the installation of traffic signs in addition to directional arrows to ensure the safe and efficient flow of vehicles in a parking facility. 
G.  Driveways. 
1.  Width. Maximum driveway width shall be thirty-five feet for standard driveways and fifty-six feet for special driveways unless specifically approved otherwise by the city engineer for high truck volumes or other factors. 
The total width of commercial and industrial driveways shall not exceed sixty percent of the frontage. 
The minimum width of a single driveway shall be twelve feet and twenty-four feet for a driveway serving a parking lot with two-way aisle. Additional driveway width may be required on collectors and arterial streets particularly where there is no parking and a travel lane is adjacent to the curb. 
Standard driveway width is measured at the curb line and includes only the depressed section. Special driveway width is measured between curbs behind property side. Width of a raised medians separating in and out traffic is not included in the width. 
2.  Distances from Curb Returns. Commercial, industrial or other high volume driveways on arterials and major collectors shall be located as far as practical from the nearest curb return and may be prohibited within one hundred feet where the intersection is signalized, is planned for signalization, or intersection capacity is critical. At other locations, the top of the driveway transition shall be at least ten feet from the nearest curb return provided the return meets current standards for radius and location. At streets to be widened or improved, the above distances shall be measured from the ultimate location of the curb return. 
At alleys, the driveway transition shall be permitted no closer than ten feet from the projected intersecting alley curb face, and no closer than three feet from the nearest ally curb return. 
H.  Grades of Driveways and Parking Areas. 
1.  Driveways. Driveways shall not exceed a maximum grade of positive ten percent or negative six percent measured along the driveway centerline. Where there is a change in the slope of the driveway, it shall be demonstrated that vehicles will be able to pass over the change in slope without interference with an average vehicle's undercarriage. 
2.  Parking Areas. Parking areas shall have a maximum grade of seven percent, measured in any direction. 
I.  Landscaping. Parking area landscaping shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping). 
J.  Lighting. Parking areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of the on-site structures. All illumination, including security lighting, shall be directed downward, away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way. Lighting location shall take into account the location and expected mature characteristics of on-site landscape materials. 
K.  Residential Guest Parking. Guest parking for multi-family residential uses shall be designated and restricted for the exclusive use of the guests with appropriate signs and pavement markings. 
L.  Striping and Identification. Parking spaces shall be clearly outlined with four-inch wide lines painted on the surface of the parking facility. Circulation aisles, approach lanes, and turning areas shall be clearly marked with directional arrows and lines to ensure safe traffic movement. 
M.  Surfacing. Parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering areas, and outdoor storage areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, masonry or concrete paving units, and permanently maintained. The use of rock, decomposed granite, turfstone, etc., is not allowed for required parking and driveway areas. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.080 - Driveways and site access. 
A.  Distance from Street Corners. Driveways to parking areas, except single family residential and duplex driveways, shall be located as far as practical from the nearest curb return and may be prohibited within one hundred feet where the intersection is signalized, is planned for signalization, or intersection capacity is critical. At other locations, the top of the driveway transition shall be at least ten feet from the nearest curb return provided the return meets current standards for radius and location. At streets to be widened or improved, the above distances shall be measured from the ultimate location of the curb return. At alleys, the driveway transition shall be permitted no closer than ten feet from the projected intersecting alley curb face, and no closer than three feet from the nearest ally curb return. Exceptions to this standard may be approved by the city engineer. 
B.  Driveway Spacing. Driveways shall be separated along the street frontage as follows: 
1.  Single-family and Duplex Residential Development. Driveways shall be separated by at least six feet, unless a shared, single driveway is approved by the director. The six-foot separation does not include the transition or wing sections on each side of the driveway approach. 
2.  Multi-family and Nonresidential Development. Where two or more driveways serve the same or adjacent multi-family or nonresidential development, the centerline of the driveways shall be separated by a minimum of two hundred feet. 
C.  Drive Aisles. 
1.  Single-family Uses. 
a.  Each single-family dwelling shall provide a continuous paved driveway from the street to the required parking area. Driveways shall be kept free and clear of stored materials, including inoperable vehicles. 
2.  Multi-family and Nonresidential Uses. Drive aisles within multi-family residential and nonresidential parking areas shall be designed and constructed in compliance with Figure 3-8. 
D.  Drive-through Facilities. Retail or service uses providing drive-in/drive through facilities shall be designed and operated to effectively mitigate problems of traffic congestion, excessive pavement, litter, noise, and unsightliness. 
1.  Clearance from Obstruction. The nearest edge of a driveway apron or curb return shall be at least five feet from the nearest property line, centerline of a fire hydrant, utility pole, traffic signal, light standard, or other similar facility. 
2.  Visibility. Drive aisles shall be designed and located so that adequate visibility is ensured for pedestrians, bicyclists, and motorists when entering individual parking spaces, circulating within a parking facility, and entering or leaving a parking facility. 
a.  Aisle Design. 
i.  The entrance/exit of any drive-through aisle shall be at least fifty feet from an intersection of public rights-of-way (measured at the closest intersecting curbs) and at least twenty-five feet from the edge of any driveway on an adjoining parcel. 
ii.  Drive-through aisles shall be designed with a minimum twelve-foot interior radius at curves and a minimum twelve-foot width. 
b.  Stacking Area. A clearly identified area shall be provided for vehicles waiting for drive-through service that is physically separated from other on-site traffic circulation. 
i.  The stacking area shall accommodate a minimum of eight cars for each drive-through window in addition to the vehicle(s) receiving service. 
ii.  The stacking area shall be located at and before the menu board, teller window, etc. 
iii.  Separation of the stacking area from other traffic shall be by concrete curbing or paint striping on at least one side of the lane. 
iv.  Stacking areas parallel to streets or public rights-of-way shall be discouraged. 
c.  Walkways. Pedestrian walkways should not intersect the drive-through aisles, but where they do, they shall have clear visibility and shall be emphasized by enhanced paving. 
3.  Screening. An opaque screen consisting of plant material and a solid masonry wall, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be constructed on each property line that is adjoining a residentially zoned/occupied parcel. The design of the wall and the proposed construction materials shall be subject to the approval of the director. 
4.  Signs. 
a.  Directional Signs. Each entrance to, and exit from, any drive aisle shall be clearly marked to show the direction of traffic flow by signs and pavement markings. 
b.  Menu Boards. Menu boards shall not exceed a maximum height of six feet, and shall face away from public rights-of-way. Outdoor speakers shall be located at least fifty feet from any residentially zoned/occupied parcel. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.090 - Bicycle parking. 
A.  Applicability. Bicycle parking shall be provided for all multi-family and nonresidential uses in compliance with Table 3-2. 
TABLE 3-2 
Bicycle Parking Requirements By Land Use 
Use 	Required Stalls 	Location 
Commercial, services, recreation, education and public assembly 	4 stalls or 20 percent of required off-street automobile parking stalls, whichever is greater (up to a maximum of 30 bicycle stalls) 	Adjacent to bicycle paths and pedestrian walks = 200 ft. of public entrance. 
Residential: Dwelling, multi-family 	1 per 2 units 	Must be secure 
Industrial, manufacturing and processing 	4 stalls or 5 percent of required off-street automobile parking stalls, whichever is greater (up to a maximum of 15 bicycle stalls) 	Adjacent to bicycle paths and pedestrian walks = 200 ft. of public entrance. 
 
1.  For each ten bicycle parking stalls provided, there shall be permitted a reduction of one required automobile parking stall to a maximum of fifteen percent of the required automobile parking stalls, at the discretion of the community development director or planning commission (depending on who is the review authority). 
B.  Bicycle Parking Design and Devices. Bicycle stalls shall be improved in accordance with the following requirements: 
1.  Provided with a device to be approved by the city and capable of supporting a bicycle in an upright or hanging position and having a means that will enable a user to lock a bicycle to such a device. 
2.  Areas containing stalls shall be surfaced with hardscape or paving. 
3.  When located within a parking area, spaces shall be protected by curbs, fences, planter areas, bumpers, or similar barriers for the mutual protection of bikes, automobiles and pedestrians, unless deemed by the city to be unnecessary. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.100 - Loading space standards. 
Loading spaces shall be designed and constructed as follows: 
A.  Location. Loading spaces shall be located based on the operating characteristics of the proposed use: 
1.  As near as possible to the main structure and limited to the rear two-thirds of the parcel, if feasible; 
2.  Loading facilities shall be discouraged from facing streets. Where not possible to do otherwise, ensure that the loading facility is screened from adjacent streets as much as possible; 
3.  To ensure that loading and unloading takes place on-site and in no case within adjacent public rights-of-way or other traffic areas on-site; 
4.  To ensure that vehicular maneuvers occur on-site; and 
5.  To avoid adverse impacts upon neighboring residential properties. 
B.  Dimensions. Loading spaces shall be not less than twelve feet in width, forty-five feet in length, with fourteen feet of vertical clearance. 
C.  Lighting. Loading areas shall have lighting capable of providing adequate illumination for security and safety. Lighting standards shall be energy-efficient and in scale with the height and use of adjacent structures. Lighting shall be designed to prevent spillage of light to adjacent properties. 
D.  Loading Doors and Gates. Loading bays and roll-up doors shall be painted to blend with the exterior structure walls. Loading bays and doors, and related trucks shall be adequately screened from view from adjacent streets as determined by the review authority. 
E.  Loading Ramps. Plans for loading ramps or truck wells shall be accompanied by a profile drawing showing the ramp, ramp transitions and overhead clearances. 
F.  Screening. Loading areas abutting residentially zoned parcels shall be screened in compliance with Section 17.30.060 (Screening). 
G.  Striping. Loading areas shall be striped indicating the loading spaces and identifying the spaces for "loading only." The striping shall be permanently maintained by the property owner/tenant in a clear and visible manner at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.32.110 - Parking and circulation design guidelines. 
A.  General Design Considerations. The primary design considerations for parking lot layout and site access are safety and efficiency, minimizing the visual impact of large paved areas, reinforcing the street environment, integrating parking into overall site development, and maximizing pedestrian orientation by means of lighting, landscape, hardscape, and parking layout. 
1.  Factors to Consider. The following factors should be considered in the design and development of off-street parking areas: 
a.  Ingress and egress with consideration to possible conflicts with vehicular and pedestrian traffic; 
b.  Intra-parking lot pedestrian and vehicular conflicts; 
c.  Reinforcing the street edge and a pedestrian environment; 
d.  On-site circulation and service vehicle zones; 
e.  Overall configuration and appearance of the parking area; 
f.  Promoting compatibility with adjacent land uses; 
g.  Minimizing opportunities for crime and undesirable activities through natural surveillance, access control and activity support; 
h.  Potential to connect parking lot with neighboring properties; 
i.  Shading the parking lot by means of canopy trees and other landscaping; 
j.  Creating a sense of spatial organization and experiential meaning through the layout of the design of the parking lot; 
k.  Reducing heat gain by shading pavement and employing light-colored pavement and walls; and 
l.  Maximizing on-site percolation and minimizing runoff to storm drains. 
2.  Location of Parking Lots. Parking lots should not occupy street frontages, and should be located behind buildings to the maximum extent feasible, so that the street frontage in both residential and non-residential areas remains pedestrian-oriented. 
3.  Relationship to Adjacent Buildings. Parking areas should be separated from buildings by either a raised concrete walkway or landscaped strip. If space allows, parking stalls directly abutting buildings should be avoided. 
4.  Pedestrian-friendly Features. Lighting, landscaping, hardscape, fencing, parking layout and pedestrian paths should all contribute to the strength and clarity of the parking lot as a deliberate and thorough design. 
B.  Access and Entries. 
1.  Pedestrian and vehicular entrances must be clearly identified and easily accessible to minimize pedestrian and vehicle conflicts. Entrances to parking lots should be from alleys, or between buildings, retaining the street frontage for buildings and locating parking to the rear of buildings, or to the side where no other alternative is available. The use of enhanced paving, landscaping, and special architectural features and details is encouraged to distinguish entrances. 
2.  Where a parking cannot be located other than adjacent to a public street, the facility should include a point of entry and clear and safe access for pedestrians from the lot, to the on-street sidewalk, to the sidewalk entrance of the building. 
  
Figure 3-3 - Enhanced Parking Lot Facility 
C.  Lighting. Carefully designed lighting is an essential element of good parking lot design. The placement, type, height number and bulb type of lights should all contribute to a coherent lighting design (see lighting under commercial guidelines). 
D.  Hardscape. 
1.  A well thought-out selection and composition of hardscape materials can help to order space and reinforce the relationship of the parking lot to its surroundings and to the buildings it serves. Entrance and exit areas, areas that are the central focus of the parking lot design, major axis and areas that act as forecourts for entrances may be suitable locations for special paving materials such as brick or stamped asphalt. 
  
Figure 3-4 - Hardscape Materials 
2.  Limit curb cuts for driveways opening to public streets. Common shared access driveways which provide access to more than one site are encouraged to reduce the number of driveway entries along commercial streets. 
  
Figure 3-5 - Spacing or Driveway Curb Cuts 
3.  Design parking areas so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars. Minimize the need for the pedestrian to cross parking aisles and landscape areas. 
4.  Access for service vehicles, trash collection and storage areas should be located on alleys where alleys exist. 
E.  Circulation. 
1.  Separate vehicular and pedestrian circulation systems should be provided where possible. The layout of parking areas should be designed so that pedestrians walk parallel to moving cars, minimizing the need to walk between parked cars or to cross parking aisles and landscape areas. 
2.  Pedestrian linkages between uses in commercial developments should be emphasized. Parking lot designs should include walkways and planting that help direct pedestrians comfortably and safely to their destinations. 
  
Figure 3-6 - Pedestrian Connections 
3.  Parking aisles should be separated from primary vehicle circulation routes whenever possible. 
  
Figure 3-7 - Separate Circulation from Parking Areas 
4.  Where parking areas are connected, interior circulation should allow for a similar direction of travel and parking spaces in all areas to reduce conflict at points of connection. 
  
Figure 3-8 - Shared Parking Access 
F.  Landscaping, Screening, and Buffering. 
1.  Parking facilities should be landscaped with the following objectives in mind: 
a.  Visually break up large paved areas with landscaping; 
b.  Maximize distribution of landscaping; 
c.  Promote compatibility and function as a "good neighbor;" 
d.  Consider the use of trees planted at regular distances as a grove; and, 
e.  Reduce the amount of storm water run-off resulting from the lot; and 
f.  Shade fifty percent of the asphalt area within five years from time of installation. 
2.  If a parking lot must be located adjacent to a street, the lot should be landscaped to soften the visual impact of parked vehicles from the public right-of-way. Screening should consist of a combination of low walls and landscape materials. The objective is to strike a balance between screening parked automobiles and facilitate safety through natural surveillance opportunities. 
3.  As long as an open surveillance zone is maintained between thirty-two and six feet above grade, landscaping should be used in combination with walls and fences. 
4.  Planting areas adjacent to parking areas, drives or walks should be protected by curbing where necessary, while allowing for drainage of surface water into permeable surface areas. See Figure 3-9. 
  
Figure 3-9 - Protect Landscaping 
5.  Both perimeter and interior landscaping should incorporate canopy-type trees. The location and spacing of trees is dependent on the type of tree used, but the overall effect should be of a relatively consistent tree cover which will shade the pavement and vehicles. See Figure 3-10. 
  
Figure 3-10 - Tree Cover 
6.  Reduce conflicts between trees, lighting and signage by coordinating location of trees, light poles and signs. The maximum height of lights shall be lower than the typical pruning height of the tree used. The use of monument signs is highly encouraged to reduce tree/sign conflicts. 
7.  All trees indicated on plans shall be planted and no change of species is allowed unless approved by the director. 
8.  Planter areas shall have increased soil volume and reduced compaction to an appropriate level set by the submitted plans. The use of structural soil mix under paving to retain parking space while increasing soil volume is highly encouraged. 
9.  Tree well and planting islands shall have a minimum dimension of eight feet and be excavated to a depth of three feet and filled with amended soil as necessary. 
10.  Stakes shall be removed from trees as soon as the tree can support itself. 
11.  The pruning of parking lot trees early in order to train their growth is encouraged. 
12.  Tree care should be performed under the supervision of a certified arborist. 
13.  If a tree is removed, it must be replaced with a tree of equivalent size and value. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.34 - SIGNS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1922, § 1, adopted July 6, 2016, repealed the former Ch. 17.34, §§ 17.34.010—17.34.130, and enacted a new Ch. 17.34 as set out herein. The former Ch. 17.34 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1869, § 2, adopted February 20, 2013. 
 
17.34.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
The city finds that signage, regardless of content or purpose, draws the visual attention of the public, and thereby creates a traffic safety hazard and degrades the aesthetic quality of the environment. The regulations established by this chapter are intended to address these issues by regulating the placement, quality, materials, size, and number of signs allowed within the city, and to require the proper maintenance of signs. The purposes of these limitations and requirements are to: 
A.  Enhance commerce within the community by providing for signs that will allow the public to easily identify uses and premises, and regulating signs on the basis of their physical design, location, and proportions; 
B.  Preserve and enhance the aesthetic, traffic safety, and environmental values of the community, and commercial, office, and industrial districts, while at the same time providing a channel of communication to the public; 
C.  Limit commercial signage to on-site locations to keep the proliferation of this signage to a more aesthetic proportion, and protect existing businesses from visual encroachment from new signage on neighboring properties; 
D.  Avoid traffic safety hazards to motorists and pedestrians caused by visual distractions and obstructions; 
E.  Promote the aesthetic quality of the community by providing for signs that enhance the attractiveness of the city as a place to live, work, and shop; and 
F.  Safeguard and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Signs Regulated. The requirements and development standards in this chapter shall apply to all signs in all zoning districts except signs that are less than thirty-three percent of a window surface. 
B.  Applicability to Sign Content. The provisions of this chapter do not regulate the message content of signs (sign copy), regardless of whether the message content is commercial or noncommercial. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.030 - Sign permit requirements. 
No sign shall be installed, constructed, or altered unless it is first approved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Fees and Plans Required. An application for a sign permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.50 (Application Filing and Processing). The application shall also include architectural elevations and plans of all proposed signs drawn to scale, with all dimensions noted, and include any additional information and materials as required by the department. 
B.  Design Review and Approval. The director shall review all sign permit applications and approve only those found to be in substantial conformance with the design review criteria provided in Section 17.34.050 (General Requirements for All Signs). The director may require conditions of approval as are reasonably necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter. 
The director may refer sign permit applications to SPARC for action, either on the individual sign permit, or as part of a development project that is otherwise subject to SPARC review. 
C.  Master Sign Program. 
1.  When Required. A master sign program shall be approved by the director (or by SPARC upon referral by the director) prior to the issuance of any sign permit for: 
a.  A new nonresidential project with four or more tenants; and 
b.  Major rehabilitation work on an existing nonresidential project with four or more tenants that involves exterior remodeling. For the purposes of this chapter, major rehabilitation means adding more than fifty percent to the gross floor area of the building/buildings, or exterior redesign of more than fifty percent of the length of any facade within the project. 
All signs installed or replaced within the nonresidential project shall comply with the approved master sign program. 
2.  Content of Program. A master sign program shall provide standards for the uniform style, size, placement, and color palette of signs within the proposed nonresidential project. 
3.  Revisions. Revisions to a master sign program may be approved by the director if he or she first determines that the revision is minor and that the intent of the original approval, and any applicable conditions are not affected. A new sign permit shall be obtained for revisions that would substantially deviate from the original approval. 
D.  Time Limit for Action. A sign permit or a master sign program shall be approved or disapproved by the review authority within fifteen working days of the application being accepted as complete in compliance with Section 17.38.060 (Initial Application Review). A sign that is submitted in full compliance with an approved master sign program shall be approved within five working days of the application being accepted as complete. 
E.  Signs and Sign Changes Allowed Without a Sign Permit. The following do not require a sign permit, provided that they comply with Section 17.34.050 (General Requirements for All Signs), and any required building permit is obtained. 
1.  Nonstructural Modifications and Maintenance. 
a.  Modifications or replacement to a face of a cabinet sign. 
b.  Nonstructural modifications of the face, design, or color of an existing sign, provided that the modifications comply with any applicable master sign program approved in compliance with subsection C of this section. 
c.  The normal maintenance of signs. 
2.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs in compliance with Section 17.34.070(D). 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.040 - Prohibited signs. 
The following types of signs and devices shall be specifically prohibited: 
A.  A sign in conjunction with a home occupation permit; 
B.  Abandoned signs; 
C.  Animated signs, including electronic message display signs, and variable intensity, blinking, or flashing signs; except time and temp signs (except in accordance with Section 17.34.070(F), (Programmable Electronic Signs); 
D.  Balloons and other inflatable devices; 
E.  Moving signs; 
F.  Permanent off-site signs; 
G.  Pennants, except as allowed for temporary periods by Section 17.34.070; 
H.  Roof signs; 
I.  Because of the city's compelling interest in ensuring traffic safety, signs that simulate in color, size, or design, any traffic control sign or signal, or that make use of words, symbols, or characters in a manner that interferes with, misleads or confuses pedestrian or vehicular traffic; 
J.  Signs attached to or suspended from a vehicle parked within a public right-of-way, or in a location on private property that is visible from a public right-of-way, except a sign painted directly upon, magnetically affixed to, or permanently affixed to the body or other integral part of the vehicle; 
K.  Temporary and portable signs, except as allowed by Section 17.34.070; 
L.  Poorly maintained signs; 
M.  Signs in public right-of-way or affixed to city property; and 
N.  Signs which advertise activities illegal under federal, state, or local laws, rules, or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.050 - General requirements for all signs. 
A.  Sign Area. The measurement of sign area to determine compliance with the sign area limitations of this chapter shall occur as follows: 
1.  The surface area of a sign shall be calculated by enclosing the extreme limits of all framing, writing, logo, representation, emblem, or other display within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles with no more than eight lines. See Figure 3-11. 
  
Figure 3-11 - Sign Area Measurement
2.  Supporting framework or bracing that is clearly incidental to the display itself shall not be computed as sign area. 
3.  For freestanding signs all readable surfaces visible from a public right-of-way shall be counted in sign area calculations. 
4.  Where a sign consists of one or more three-dimensional objects (i.e., balls, cubes, clusters of objects, sculpture or statue-like trademarks), the sign area shall be measured as their maximum projection upon a vertical plane. 
5.  For signs that incorporate time and temperature devices, the area of these devices shall not be included in the total area of the sign. 
B.  Sign Height. Sign height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the finished grade adjacent to the base of the sign structure to the highest point of the structure, where finished grade does not include fill, planters, or other material artificially placed to allow increased sign height. 
C.  Sign Location Requirements. 
1.  All signs identifying an occupant, business, or use shall be located on the same site as the occupant, business, or use, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
2.  Signage allowed on one building or frontage shall not be transferred to another building or frontage. 
3.  Each sign, including a sign located on a temporary or portable building, shall be subject to the requirements of this chapter. 
4.  No sign shall be located within the public right-of-way, except as otherwise allowed by this chapter. 
5.  A sign for the purpose of construction, sales, or leasing are permitted within a required setback area, provided it is: 
a.  Located within a permanently maintained landscaped planter area having an area at least twice that of the sign area; 
b.  Not closer than ten feet from any property line and ten feet from any access driveway; and 
c.  Not within a radius of twenty feet of the intersection of the rights-of-way of two intersecting streets. 
6.  The location of all signs shall be evaluated to ensure: 
a.  That the setback is appropriate for the height and area of a freestanding or projecting sign; 
b.  That flush or projecting signs relate to the architectural design of the building. Signs that cover windows, or that spill over natural boundaries and architectural features shall be discouraged; 
c.  That signs do not unreasonably block the sight lines of existing signs on adjacent properties; and 
d.  Pedestrian and vehicular safety. 
7.  A freestanding sign may be placed only on a site frontage adjoining a public street. 
8.  No freestanding sign shall be closer than seventy-five feet to another freestanding sign, to ensure adequate visibility for all signs. The director may waive this requirement where parcel width and/or the locations of existing signs on adjacent properties would make the seventy-five-foot separation impractical. 
D.  Design Criteria for Signs. The following design criteria shall be used in reviewing the design of individual signs. Substantial conformance with each of the following design criteria shall be required before a sign permit or building permit can be approved. 
1.  Color. Colors on signs and structural members should be harmonious with one another and reflective of the dominant colors of the building or buildings being identified. Contrasting colors may be utilized if the overall effect of the sign is still compatible with the building colors and prevailing colors in the surrounding neighborhood (where a theme can be identified). 
2.  Materials and Structure. 
a.  Sign materials (including those for framing and support) should be representative of the type and scale of materials used on the building or buildings which the sign identifies. Insofar as possible, sign materials should match the materials used on the building and on other signs. 
b.  Materials selected for permanent signs shall be durable and capable of withstanding weathering over the life of the sign with reasonable maintenance. 
c.  The size of the structural members (e.g. columns, crossbeams, and braces) should be proportional to the sign panel they are supporting. In general, fewer larger supporting members are preferable to many smaller supports. 
d.  The use of individual letters incorporated into the building design is encouraged, rather than signs with background and framing other than the building wall. 
e.  The use of reflective materials or surfaces may be approved only where the review authority determines that they will not distract motorists or create other hazards, and should be minimized in all cases. 
f.  Wall signs shall not project from the surface upon which they are attached more than required for construction purpose and in no case more than twelve inches. 
g.  Wall signs shall not project above the eave line or the edge of the roof of a building. 
E.  Copy Design Guidelines. The city does not regulate the message content (copy) of signs; however, the following are principles of copy design and layout that can enhance the readability and attractiveness of signs. Copy design and layout consistent with these principles is encouraged, but not required. 
1.  Sign copy should relate only to the name and/or nature of the business or commercial center. 
2.  Permanent signs that advertise continuous sales, special prices, etc. should be avoided. 
3.  Information should be conveyed briefly or by logo, symbol, or other graphic manner. The intent should be to increase the readability of the sign and thereby enhance the identity of the business. 
4.  Freestanding signs should contain the street address of the parcel or the range of addresses for a multi-tenant center. 
F.  Illumination of Signs. The artificial illumination of signs, either from an internal or external source, shall be designed to minimize light and glare on surrounding rights-of-way and properties. 
1.  External light sources shall be directed and shielded to limit direct illumination of any object other than the sign. 
2.  The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness that will interfere with the reasonable enjoyment of residential properties. In areas with low ambient nighttime illumination levels (e.g., residential neighborhoods or business districts with little or no illuminated signing) applicants shall be encouraged to use light, illuminated copy against dark or opaque backgrounds. 
3.  Signs shall not have blinking, flashing, or fluttering lights or other illuminating devices that have a changing light intensity, brightness or color, except as otherwise allowed in Section 17.34.070 (Programmable Electronic Signs). 
4.  Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner so as to be confused or construed as traffic control devices. 
5.  Neither the direct nor reflected light from primary light sources shall create a hazard to operators of motor vehicles. 
6.  Incandescent lamps shall not be visible from a public right-of-way or adjacent property. 
7.  Light sources shall utilize energy efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible. 
G.  Maintenance of Signs. Signs and supporting hardware, including temporary signs, shall be maintained in good repair and functioning properly at all times. Repairs to signs shall be of equal or better in quality of materials and design as the original sign. Signs which are not properly maintained and are dilapidated shall be deemed to be a public nuisance, and may be abated in compliance with Lodi Municipal Code. 
When existing signs are removed or replaced, all brackets, poles, and other supports that are no longer required shall be removed. Unpainted areas shall be painted to match the adjacent portion of the building or sign support structure. 
H.  Signs on Public Property. No signs are allowed on public property, except for the following: 
1.  A public sign erected by or on behalf of the city or other public entity to post legal notices, identify public property, convey public information, or direct or regulate pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
2.  An informational sign of a public utility or transit company regarding its poles, lines, pipes, facilities, or routes. 
3.  An emergency warning sign erected by the city or other public entity, a public utility company, or contractor doing authorized or permitted work on public property. 
4.  Signs constructed by the city to direct persons to specific districts, regions, or public facilities. 
5.  Banner signs on city property (e.g., light poles in downtown area or along major corridors). 
6.  Advertising signs on transit, police, parks and other city property (e.g. city facilities, including but not limited to transit shelters, buses, park facilities, and Hutchins Street Square). 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.060 - Zoning district sign standards. 
Only the signs and sign area authorized by this section shall be allowed unless otherwise expressly provided in this section or Section 17.34.070 (Standards for Specific Types of Signs). 
A.  Residential Zoning Districts. Signs within the residential zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Size and Type of Signs Allowed. Each parcel in the residential zoning districts may be permitted signs as follows: 
a.  One nameplate not exceeding one square foot in area identifying the occupant of a residence. No building permit is required; 
b.  One identification sign for apartment and institutional use, not exceeding forty-eight square feet in area; 
c.  One unlighted sign not exceeding six square feet in area that advertises the sale or rental of the premises. No building permit is required; 
d.  A bulletin board, not exceeding twenty square feet in area, upon the issuance of a use permit by the planning commission; 
e.  One sign not exceeding one hundred square feet in area on the site of a construction project or new subdivision, that indicates the nature of the development or identifies the persons involved in the construction; which may be placed on the site prior to or during the development activities; 
f.  One unlighted, noncommercial sign not exceeding six square feet in area; and 
g.  A warning or no trespassing sign not exceeding six square feet in area. No building permit is required. 
2.  Setback Requirements. Each sign shall be set back at least ten feet from all property lines. 
3.  Height Limit. No building mounted sign shall exceed a height of twenty feet. No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of eight feet, sign plus base. 
B.  Commercial and industrial zoning district sign standards. Each proposed sign shall comply with the following standards for the applicable zoning district. 
1.  CC District. Each sign within the CC zoning district shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  General Specifications and Requirements. 
i.  Sign content should be limited to the tenant's name and primary graphic logo; 
ii.  Notwithstanding the following sign provisions, tenants may utilize standard corporate logos and/or prototypical signage graphics, if used in a majority of the tenant's California stores subject to approval of the city of Lodi; 
iii.  All signage on the building fascia, with exception of certain logo/graphics, shall be of indirectly lit individual channel letters or dimensional letters in accordance with the definitions below. No cabinet signs shall be permitted. Signage illumination shall not include flashing, moving or scintillating effects; 
iv.  Channel letters are to be defined as individual channel letters or as connected channels that may be composed of script letters with connected serifs, or a non-script letters that are connected by heavy outlines into an integrated shape or "channel box". Secondary channel boxes containing a logo mark or underlining the primary text and containing a secondary message shall be permitted. Illumination may be with either LEDs or neon; 
v.  Dimensional letters are to be made of one-half-inch thick clear acrylic or one and one-half-inch thick aluminum; 
vi.  All signs must be dimensional. Signs painted directly onto the building shall not be permitted; 
vii.  Painted wall graphics or murals that are thematic to the overall shopping center and do not provide any specific tenant identification shall be allowed subject to prior approval by the city of Lodi. The thematic wall graphics or murals shall be counted as signs or sign area with respect to the building on which graphic or mural is painted; 
viii.  Signs may not come within one foot of the top, bottom or sides of the building elevation or fascia upon which a sign is located. In no case may a sign extend beyond the roof parapet or adjacent building eave line. Signs are not allowed on or against any roof structures. Architectural tower features on buildings may be considered for tenant identification signs subject to specific sign design approval by the city of Lodi; 
ix.  Exposed channel letter raceways are prohibited. All channel letter signs must be mounted directly to the building surface or be mounted upon a decorative architectural background feature subject to specific sign design approval by the landlord and the city of Lodi; 
x.  Tenant signs will be no larger than seventy-five percent of fascia height, with a maximum width of seventy-five percent of tenant's frontage; 
xi.  All signs are to be laid out so as to be proportionate to the area in which it is placed, as well as comply with the square footage limitations. They should also be centered at the appropriate location on the elevation so it would be balanced with the buildings as a whole. (Not necessarily centered on the tenant space); 
xii.  Each tenant may have signage upon the front and rear elevations subject to size area limitations. End cap tenants may also have signage on their side elevations subject to size area limitations. Pad tenants may have signage on all elevations facing a public street or parking area subject to the size area limitations; 
xiii.  Colors shall be consistent with the theme of the shopping center; 
xiv.  Temporary wall signs, pennants, flags, over-roof signs, inflatable displays, exposed neon, or sandwich boards are prohibited. Temporary banners advertising specials or sales may be allowed in accordance with the city code; and 
xv.  Window signs, other than the permanent window graphics, will not be allowed. These signs include neon signs, fiber optic/neon simulated plastic signs and border neon. 
b.  Freestanding Signs. The design of the multi-tenant pylon signs, multi-tenant monument signs and center identification monument sign shall be commensurate with the architecture of the shopping center. 
i.  Freeway Information Area Signage. 
(A)  One pylon sign, no higher than sixty-five feet, shall be permitted along the freeway frontage. The sign shall identify multiple tenants within the shopping center; and 
(B)  The pylon sign shall have a maximum of seven hundred twenty square feet of tenant identification and thirty-two square feet of shopping center identity. 
ii.  Center Identification Sign. One center identification sign, no higher than eight feet, shall be permitted. The sign shall be a single-sided, identifying the entrance to the center. No tenant names shall be displayed on the identification sign. 
iii.  Monument Signs. 
(A)  One multi-tenant monument sign, no higher than twelve feet, shall be permitted. A shopping center of ten acres or more may have two monument signs. These signs may have two-sided panels to identify multiple tenants within the shopping center; and 
(B)  The monument signs shall have a maximum of eighty-four square feet of tenant identification and eight square feet of shopping center identity. 
c.  Tenant Signage. The sign program regulates the total allowed signage each tenant may have, based upon the frontages of each store. Tenant signage shall not exceed the total allowed maximum signage per tenant. 
i.  Tenants shall be allowed two square feet of signage per lineal foot of frontage for the front elevation and two square feet of signage multiplied by seventy-five percent per lineal foot of frontage for side (end caps) and rear elevations; 
ii.  The signs may either be internally illuminated plex-faced channel letters or halo illuminated fabricated aluminum reverse pan channel letters; and 
iii.  Single pad tenants shall be allowed one wall sign per each business frontage facing a street, pedestrian plaza and/or parking lot. The total allowed sign area shall be two square feet of signage per lineal foot of frontage for the front elevation and two square feet of signage multiplied by seventy-five percent per lineal foot of frontage for side and rear elevations. 
3.  GC and Industrial Districts. Each sign within the GC and industrial zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Size and Type of Signs Allowed. A parcel in the GG or an industrial zoning district may be permitted signs as follows, provided that no sign shall exceed an area of four hundred eighty square feet. 
i.  An individual business adjacent to a public street or streets is allowed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage. 
ii.  An individual business that shares street frontage with other businesses (e.g., within a single building) is allowed one square foot of sign area for each linear foot of building frontage. 
iii.  An individual business located on a corner (i.e., with building frontage or street frontage on two sides) is allowed seventy-five percent of the ratio of two square feet of sign area for each linear foot of street frontage. 
b.  Size and Type of Signs—Parcels with Four or More Businesses. Parcels under one ownership that contain four or more businesses may be permitted one freestanding sign in addition to the signs permitted by subsection (B)(3)(a), provided that the sign shall not: 
i.  Exceed three hundred square feet in area. One hundred fifty square feet of the total sign area may be used for individual identification signs uniform in size, shape, and lettering; and 
ii.  Contain a reader board. 
c.  Off-premises Signs. Off-premises signs are prohibited, with the exception of those that legally existed prior to the adoption of this development code. 
d.  Setback Requirements. Each sign shall be set back at least two feet from the property line. 
e.  Height Limit. No sign shall exceed the following height limits, as applicable. 
i.  Building-mounted Signs. A building-mounted sign shall not exceed the height limit of the building or thirty-five feet, whichever is less. 
ii.  Freestanding Signs. A freestanding sign shall not exceed the height of the tallest building on the site. 
iii.  Freeway Information Area. 
(A)  A freeway information (FI) area is established to include an area bounded: on the west by a line drawn fifty feet west of the west right-of-way line or Cherokee Lane or five hundred feet west of the west right-of-way line of the U.S. Highway 50-99 freeway, whichever is greater; and on the east by a line drawn five hundred feet east of the east right-of-way line of the U.S. Highway 50-99 freeway; and on the north and south by the then-current city limits. 
(B)  A sign within the FI area shall not exceed a height of seventy-five feet. 
4.  O District. Each sign within the O zoning district shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  Size and Type of Signs Allowed. 
i.  Signs shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each two linear feet of street frontage, up to a maximum sign area of two hundred square feet. The maximum allowable area of signs for an office use located on a corner parcel shall be calculated by using seventy-five percent of the length of the total street frontage. 
ii.  The size, location, and design of the sign is visually complementary and compatible with the size and architectural style of the primary structures on the site, any prominent natural features of the site, and structures and prominent natural features on adjacent properties on the same street. 
iii.  No sign shall be lighted so that light shines on neighboring properties. 
b.  Setback Requirements. Each sign shall be set back at least ten feet from the property line. 
c.  Height Limit. No building mounted sign shall exceed a height of twenty feet. No freestanding sign shall exceed a height of eight feet, sign plus base. 
C.  Mixed Use Zoning District Sign Standards. The regulation of the location, size, type and number of signs permitted shall be governed by the provisions of this section. 
1.  Downtown Mixed Use and Mixed Use Center Districts. Each sign within the DMU and MCE zoning districts shall comply with the following standards: 
Signs must be more than just a way to relay information; they must be an architectural extension of a building. The objective of the standards and guidelines is not to create uniformity, but to eliminate those elements that result in a cluttered and unattractive physical environment. Few outward features of a business display the owner's confidence and quality as well as signage. These basic parameters provide for creative signs that may still be as varied and different as the businesses they represent. 
a.  Permitted Sign Types. 
i.  Flush-Mounted or Painted Wall Signs. Cabinet "canned" signs shall be prohibited. 
ii.  Projecting Signs. Provided: 
(A)  They leave no less than eight clear above the finished grade, and extend no more than four feet out from the wall; 
(B)  They are not mounted above the first floor. 
iii.  Awning and Canopy Signs. Awnings are primarily for shade and secondarily a sign location. Letters and graphics are limited to vertical surfaces and shall not exceed fifty percent of the surface area. Internally illuminated vinyl awnings are not permitted. 
iv.  Free Standing Signs. Pole-mounted and/or other forms of free standing signs shall not be permitted in the downtown district. Exceptions, subject to city review are: 
(A)  Directory Signs or Kiosks. These may be considered for sidewalk locations; those for private arcades or buildings should be on private property, located in publicly accessible courts, accessways, or passages. 
(B)  Portable Signs. Menu boards for restaurants, etc. provided they are stored indoors after hours of operation and not placed to obstruct the public sidewalk. 
b.  Sign Size. 
i.  Building Mounted Signs. The maximum area for each permitted sign type or any combination thereof shall be one square foot per one linear foot of tenant street frontage. Maximum sign length shall not exceed seventy-five percent of the tenant space frontage. 
ii.  Free Standing Signs. Per city review. 
c.  Exemptions. 
i.  Temporary signs as set forth in Section 17.34.070(D). 
ii.  Permanent Signs. In addition to those permitted above shall be limited to: 
(A)  Existing built-in signs that are integral to the building design. 
(B)  Painted window signs that cover a maximum of twenty-five percent of the window area. 
(C)  Any sign identifying hours of operation that have an area of less than three square feet. 
d.  Sign Maintenance. High levels of maintenance are essential if investment in the downtown is to be encouraged. Because signs are meant to be seen, maintenance is especially important. 
i.  Paint. Signs shall be retained in good condition, with touch-up or repainted as needed. Peeling paint should be replaced promptly. 
ii.  Repair. Damaged signs and poles shall be repaired promptly or removed. 
iii.  Illumination. Bulbs and fixtures shall be replaced promptly if they burn out or are broken. 
iv.  Awnings. Awnings that are damaged and/or faded shall be repaired or replaced promptly. 
e.  Architectural Compatibility. A building's architectural style and overall proportions should guide the design of signs. Signs should be located on the facade in areas designed for this function; e.g. a recessed or framed area between the first and second floor, or a parapet panel between shopfront and roofline. 
f.  Sign Types. 
i.  Flush-mounted and painted wall signs should align with major architectural elements, such as doors and windows. Ornamental elements, such as moldings, pilasters, arches, clerestory windows, roof eaves, or cornice lines should be used as a frame. 
(A)  Relationship to Cornice or Roof Line. Signs should not extend above the cornice line or into or above roof areas, unless they function as an integral part of the roof design. For example: 
(1)  A sign board may extend above the cornice line of an otherwise flat-topped building if it is designed as a parapet in keeping with the style of the rest of the building. 
(2)  A sign board may extend above an existing parapet, if it is located to function as an accent to the basic parapet design. 
ii.  Projecting Signs. 
(A)  Proportion. Projecting signs with vertically-oriented messages should be slender in appearance, with a proportion of at least two to one, height to width. Projecting signs with horizontally-oriented messages may be rectangular or square; if located below an awning or canopy as a hanging "blade" sign, they should also be slender, proportioned two to one width to height. 
(B)  Structural Support. Should be an attractive addition to the overall design of the sign and/or building. Ornamental metal is recommended. Wooden supports are also appropriate if designed to complement the sign; however, undetailed, standard-size lumber should not be used. 
(C)  Relationship to Cornice or Roof Line. Projecting signs should not extend above the cornice line or into the roof area, unless they are an integral part of a completely new facade design or a faithful accent to existing architectural details or forms. Projection signs should not extend above the eave line of a sloped roof. 
iii.  Awning and Canopy Signs. 
(A)  Color. Combinations for awning or canopy signs should be simple. Lettering color and background color should contrast for legibility. Subtle bands of color are appropriate for awnings; more complex patterns or textures should generally not be used. 
(B)  Location of Message—Awnings. Lettering should not appear on the sloped or curved portion. Information may be located on the valance (the front vertical portion). 
(C)  Location of Message—Canopies. Signs on canopies should be in the form of letters or a signboard integrated with the canopy fascia, or freestanding letters mounted on top and extending above the fascia. 
iv.  Other Sign Types. 
(A)  Figurative signs shaped to reflect the silhouette of a particular object (for example, a key, a coffee cup, etc.) are encouraged. These may be wall-mounted or projecting, but should reflect guidelines for the specific type of sign as listed above. 
v.  Not Allowed. 
(A)  "Canned" signs are internally illuminated plastic panels within a sheet metal box enclosure. They should not be used. Inexpensive canned signs use a limited range of colors and lettering types, and tend to have no relationship to the architecture of the building. 
(B)  Illuminated vinyl awning signs are more appropriate for "commercial strip areas" and shall not be used. 
g.  Materials. Recommendations are: 
i.  Signboards of wood or metal, with painted or engraved letters, or mounted letters of wood or metal. 
ii.  Silhouette or Figurative Signs. Three-dimensional letters, symbols, and/or ornamental figures made of wood or metal. 
iii.  Custom Neon. Exterior-mounted on a signboard or metal support frame or enclosure, or interior-mounted behind clerestory or display windows. 
iv.  Fabric awnings such as canvas with painted or applied lettering; plastic or vinyl awnings should not be used. 
h.  Lighting. Recommendations are: 
i.  Backlit with lighting inside and behind projecting lettering. 
ii.  Top or bottom lit with single or multiple spotlights. 
2.  Mixed Use Corridor District. Each sign within the MCO zoning district shall comply with the following standards: 
a.  General Specifications and Requirements. Signs within the MCO zoning district shall comply with the general specifications and requirements identified in development code Section 17.34.060 (B)(1)(a). 
b.  Free-standing Signs. The design of the multi-tenant pylon signs, multi-tenant monument signs and center identification monument sign shall be commensurate with the architecture of the development. 
i.  Center Identification Sign. One center identification sign, no higher than eight feet, shall be permitted. The sign shall be a single-sided, identifying the entrance to the center. No tenant names shall be displayed on the identification sign. 
ii.  Monument Signs. 
(A)  One multi-tenant monument sign, no higher than twelve feet, shall be permitted. A shopping center of ten acres or more may have two monument signs. These signs may have two-sided panels to identify multiple tenants within the shopping center; and 
(B)  The monument signs shall have a maximum of eighty-four square feet of tenant identification and eight square foot of shopping center identity. 
c.  Tenant Signage. The sign program regulates the total allowed signage each tenant may have, based upon the frontages of each store. Tenant signage shall not exceed the total allowed maximum signage per tenant. 
i.  Tenants shall be allowed two square feet of signage per lineal foot of frontage for the front elevation and two square feet of signage multiplied by seventy-five percent per lineal foot of frontage for side (end caps) and rear elevations. 
ii.  The signs may either be internally illuminated plex-faced channel letters or halo illuminated fabricated aluminum reverse pan channel letters. 
iii.  Single pad tenants shall be allowed one wall sign per each business frontage facing a street, pedestrian plaza and/or parking lot. The total allowed sign area shall be two square feet of signage per lineal foot of frontage for the front elevation and two square feet of signage multiplied by seventy-five percent per lineal foot of frontage for side and rear elevations. 
  
Figure 3-12—Examples of Sign Types
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.070 - Standards for specific types of signs. 
Proposed signs shall comply with the following standards where applicable, in addition to the sign area and height limitations, and other requirements of Section 17.34.060 (Zoning District Sign Standards), and all other applicable provisions of this chapter. 
A.  Awning Signs. The following standards apply to awning signs in all zoning districts where allowed by Section 17.34.060 (Zoning District Sign Standards). 
1.  Signs on awnings are limited to ground level and second story occupancies only. 
2.  Awnings shall not be internally illuminated. Indirect lighting may be allowed. Translucent awning materials are prohibited. 
3.  Awnings are primarily for shade and secondarily a sign location. Letters and graphics shall be limited to vertical surfaces and shall not exceed fifty percent of the surface area. Internally illuminated vinyl awnings are not permitted. 
B.  Freeway-adjacent Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
1.  Definitions. For the purposes of this subsection, the terms "advertising structure," "advertising display," "freeway," "highway," "landscaped freeway," "person," "sign," and "to place" shall be defined in compliance with Business and Professions Code Section 5200 et seq. (the California Outdoor Advertising Act). 
2.  Prohibited for Freeway Viewing. No advertising display shall be placed or maintained on property adjacent to a freeway regardless of the applicable zoning district if the advertising display is designed to be viewed primarily by persons traveling on the freeway. 
3.  Exemptions. The prohibition in subsection (C)(2) of this section shall not apply to advertising displays or structures placed upon property for the purpose of advertising the sale or lease of the property upon which the sign is placed. 
4.  Size. The advertising display or structure shall not exceed four hundred eighty square feet. 
C.  Projecting Signs. Projecting signs shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Proportion. Projecting signs with vertically-oriented messages should be slender in appearance, with a proportion of at least two to one, height to width. Projecting signs with horizontally-oriented messages may be rectangular or square; if located below an awning or canopy as a hanging "blade" sign, they should also be slender, proportioned two to one width to height. 
2.  Structural support should be an attractive addition to the overall design of the sign and/or building. Ornamental metal is recommended. Wooden supports are also appropriate if designed to complement the sign; however, undetailed, standard-size lumber should not be used. 
3.  Relationship to Cornice or Roof Line. Projecting signs should not extend above the cornice line or into the roof area, unless they are an integral part of a completely new facade design or a faithful accent to existing architectural details or forms. Projection signs should not extend above the eave line of a sloped roof. 
D.  Temporary Signs. Temporary signs are allowed in all zoning districts subject to the following requirements. Temporary signs include banner signs, paintings, markings and writings. 
1.  Residential Zoning District On-site Signs. 
a.  Maximum Area. Sign area shall not exceed six square feet. 
b.  Number. No more than four temporary on-site signs shall be placed on any parcel. 
c.  Duration. Temporary signs shall be removed within ten days of the termination of the event with which they are associated. Any sign which has been in place longer than a period of six months shall be subject to the applicable standards regulating permanent signage. 
d.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not present a physical danger to persons or property. No temporary sign shall be placed, affixed, painted, marked, or written in a manner that obstructs either vehicular traffic (either by physical obstruction or obstruction of sight lines) or pedestrian traffic. No temporary sign shall be placed, affixed, painted, marked, or written upon any public property or public right-of-way including but not limited to any public building, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, fence, wall, public playground equipment, and/or facilities, street lamp post, utility pole, hydrant, tree, street or traffic signs, parkways (e.g. the area between curb and sidewalk) or medians. 
2.  Commercial and Industrial Zoning District On-site Signs. 
a.  Maximum Area. Sign area shall not exceed thirty-two square feet per sign face. 
b.  Number. Each parcel shall be allowed a minimum of four temporary on-site signs, plus one additional temporary on-site sign for each two hundred feet of lineal street frontage per parcel. Properties with multiple tenants or businesses shall be allowed no more than four additional temporary on-site signs per tenant or business. 
c.  Duration. Temporary signs shall be removed within ten days of the termination of the event with which they are associated. Any sign which has been in place longer than a period of six months shall be subject to the applicable standards regulating permanent signage. 
d.  Placement. Temporary signs shall not present a physical danger to persons or property. No temporary sign shall be placed, affixed, painted, marked, or written in a manner that obstructs either vehicular traffic (either by physical obstruction or obstruction of sight lines) or pedestrian traffic. No temporary sign shall be placed, affixed, painted, marked, or written upon any public property or right-of-way including but not limited to any public building, sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, fence, wall, public playground equipment, and/or facilities, street lamp post, utility pole, hydrant, tree, street or traffic signs, parkways (e.g. the area between curb and sidewalk) or medians. 
E.  Window Signs. The following standards apply to window signs in all zoning districts where allowed: 
1.  Window signs shall be allowed only on windows located on the ground level and second story of a building frontage. 
2.  Permanent and temporary signs shall not occupy more than twenty percent of the total window area. 
3.  Signage shall consist of individual letters, logos, or symbols applied to the glass surface; however, neon signs with transparent backgrounds may be hung inside the window glass line. 
F.  Programmable Electronic Signs. The following standards apply to programmable electronic signs: 
1.  Programmable electronic signs are only permitted upon the issuance of a use permit by the planning commission. As part of the use permit review, the planning commission shall consider the following: 
a.  Area of programmable electronic signage; 
b.  Location of programmable electronic signage; 
c.  Height of programmable electronic signage; 
d.  Intensity of light due to programmable electronic signage; and 
e.  Frequency of message change on the programmable electronic sign. 
2.  Programmable electronic signs shall comply with the size, location, and height requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
3.  Programmable electronic signs shall be limited to one-third the area of the sign to which it is permitted to be attached. 
4.  The content of programmable electronic signs shall be limited to non-commercial or on-site commercial messages, in any combination, but may not be used for off-site commercial messages. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.080 - Exceptions to sign area standards. 
The director or other applicable review authority may grant an administrative deviation to the allowed area of a sign in compliance with Section 17.40.050 (Variations and Administrative Deviations) if it is first determined that: 
A.  The position or setback of the building on the site requires additional area for effective signing. The exception may increase the allowed sign area by up to twenty-five percent; or 
B.  The exceptional size of the structures, uses, or site requires additional sign area for effective identification from major approaches to the site. The exception may increase the allowed sign area by up to twenty-five percent; or 
C.  The name of the business or use to be identified is exceptionally long, so that sign readability would be impaired by crowding words into the allowable sign area. The exception may increase the allowed sign area by up to twenty-five percent; or 
D.  Signing proposed is indistinguishable from the architecture itself (supergraphic design) or achieves the level of sculptural art. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.090 - Sign maintenance. 
All signs within the city shall be maintained in good condition and repair, as follows: 
A.  Awnings. Awnings that are damaged and/or faded shall be promptly repaired or replaced. 
B.  Illumination. Bulbs and fixtures shall be promptly replaced if they burn out or are broken. 
C.  Paint. The paint on each sign shall be maintained in good condition, with touch-up or repainting as needed. Peeling paint should be promptly replaced. 
D.  Repair. A damaged sign and/or pole shall be promptly repaired, or removed from the site. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.100 - Nonconforming signs. 
A nonconforming sign is any permanent or temporary sign that was legally established and maintained in compliance with the provisions of all applicable laws in effect at the time of original installation but that does not now comply with the provisions of this development code. 
A.  General Requirements. A nonconforming sign may not be: 
1.  Changed to another nonconforming sign; 
2.  Structurally altered to extend its useful life; 
3.  Expanded; 
4.  Re-established after a business is discontinued for sixty days; or 
5.  Re-established after damage or destruction to fifty percent or more of the value of the sign, or its components, as determined by the building official. 
B.  Abatement. Signs not conforming to the provisions of this chapter shall be brought into compliance or removed upon the following circumstances: 
1.  Abandonment. Any discontinuance or abandonment of a nonconforming sign shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of the sign. 
2.  Modification. Any proposed modification to the non-conforming sign structure or copy shall result in a loss of legal nonconforming status of the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.110 - Violations and abatement. 
A.  Public Nuisance Declared by Director. Any sign erected or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter may be declared to be a public nuisance by the director and proceedings for its removal may take place in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Enforcement). 
B.  Removal of Abandoned Sign, Sign Shell, and Support Structures. A sign, sign shell, and support structures shall be removed by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the sign is located when the business that it advertises is no longer conducted on the premises. If the owner or lessee fails to remove the sign and sign shell, the director shall give the owner thirty days written notice to remove it. Upon failure to comply with the notice, the director may have the sign removed at the owner's expense. Proceedings for the removal of signs and/or support structures shall comply with Chapter 17.76 (Enforcement). 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.120 - Judicial review. 
Any permit issued or denied in compliance with this chapter shall be subject to expedited judicial review in accordance with the time limits set forth in Code of Civil Procedure, Section 1094.8 et seq. 
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
17.34.130 - Sign design guidelines. 
The following guidelines should be considered in the design of all signs within Lodi. These guidelines are intended to complement other requirements in the previous sections of this chapter: 
A.  Design Compatibility. 
1.  Creative Design Encouraged. Signs should make a positive contribution to the general appearance of the street and commercial area in which they are located. A well-designed sign can be a major asset to a building. 
2.  Proportionate Size and Scale. The scale of signs should be appropriate for the building on which they are placed and the area in which they are located. The size and shape of a sign should be in proportion with the scale of the structure. 
3.  Integrate Signs with the Building. Signs should not obscure architectural features. Their design should be integrated with the design of the building. A well-designed building facade or storefront is created by the careful coordination of sign and architectural design and over-all color scheme. Signs in multiple tenant buildings should be designed to complement or enhance the other signs in the building. 
  
Figure 3-13—Design Compatibility
4.  Reduce Sign Impact. Because residential and commercial uses generally exist in close proximity, signs should be designed and located so that they have little or no impact on adjacent residential neighborhoods. 
  
Figure 3-14—Reduce Sign Impact
5.  Sign Placement. Place wall signs to establish facade rhythm, scale and proportion where facade rhythm does not otherwise exist. On buildings that have a monolithic or plain facade, signs can establish or continue appropriate design rhythm, scale, and proportion. 
  
Figure 3-15—Sign Placement
6.  Pedestrian-oriented Signs are Encouraged. It is desirable and encouraged to include a pedestrian-oriented sign as one of the permitted signs for a business. Pedestrian-oriented signs are signs that are designed for and directed toward pedestrians so that they can easily and comfortably read the sign as they stand adjacent to the business. 
  
Figure 3-16—Pedestrian-Oriented Sign
7.  Use Individual Letters. As an alternative to an attached sign, lettering may be painted directly on the building facade. However, signs should not be painted directly over ornamental and architectural features or over brick and stone surfaces of buildings. 
B.  Color. 
1.  Select Colors Carefully. Color is one of the most important aspects of visual communication. It can be used to catch the eye or to communicate ideas or feelings. Colors should be selected to contribute to legibility and design integrity. Even the most carefully thought out sign may be unattractive and a poor communicator because of poor color selection. Too many colors used thoughtlessly can confuse and negate the message of a sign. 
2.  Use Contrasting Colors. Contrast is an important influence on the legibility of signs. A substantial contrast should be provided between the color and material of the background and the letters or symbols to make the sign easier to read in both day and night. Light letters on a dark background or dark letters on a light background are most legible. 
  
Figure 3-17—Contrasting Letters and Background
3.  Avoid Using Too Many Colors. Colors or color combinations that interfere with legibility of the sign copy or that interfere with viewer identification of other signs should be avoided. Small accents of several colors may make a sign unique and attractive, but the competition of large areas of many different colors often decreases readability. 
4.  Use Complementary Colors. Sign colors should complement the colors used on the structures and the project as a whole. 
C.  Materials. 
1.  Sign Materials. The following sign materials are recommended: 
a.  Wood (carved, sandblasted, etched, and properly sealed, primed and painted, or stained). 
b.  Metal (formed, etched, cast, engraved, and properly primed and painted or factory-coated to protect against corrosion). 
c.  High density pre-formed foam or similar material. New materials may be very appropriate if properly designed in a manner consistent with these guidelines, and painted or otherwise finished to compliment the architecture. 
d.  Custom neon tubing, in the form of graphics or lettering, may be incorporated into several allowed sign types. 
2.  Compatibility of Materials. Sign materials should be compatible with the design of the face of the facade where they are placed. The selected materials should contribute to the legibility of the sign. For example, glossy finishes are often difficult to read because of glare and reflections. 
3.  Appropriate Materials. Paper and cloth signs are not suitable for exterior use (except on awnings) because they deteriorate quickly. Paper and cloth signs are appropriate for interior temporary use only. The use of interior signs on paper or cloth should be the result of careful thinking about readability and the image of the business. 
D.  Sign Legibility. An effective sign should do more than attract attention, it should communicate a message. Usually, this is a question of the readability of words and phrases. The most significant influence on legibility is lettering. 
1.  Pedestrian-oriented Signs. Make signs smaller if they are oriented to pedestrians. The pedestrian-oriented sign is usually read from a distance of fifteen to twenty feet; the vehicle-oriented sign is viewed from a much greater distance. The closer a sign's viewing distance, the smaller that sign need be. See Table 3-3. 
TABLE 3-3 

Lettering Size for Pedestrian-oriented Signs 
Minimum Character 
Size (inches) 	Intended Reading 
Distance (feet) 
3.5 	60 
4.0 	70 
4.5 	80 
5.0 	90 
5.5 to 6.0 	100 
 
2.  Use a Brief Message. A brief message should be used whenever possible. The fewer the words, the more effective the sign. A sign with a brief, succinct message is easier to read and looks more attractive. Evaluate each word. If the word does not contribute directly to the basic message of the sign, it detracts from it and probably should be deleted. 
3.  Space Letters and Words Carefully. Letters and words should not be spaced too closely. Crowding of letters, words or lines will make any sign more difficult to read. Conversely, over-spacing these elements causes the viewer to read each item individually, again obscuring the message. As a general rule, letters should not occupy more than seventy-five percent of sign panel area. 
4.  Use Symbols and Logos. Symbols and logos can be used in place of words wherever appropriate. Pictographic images will usually register more quickly in the viewer's mind than a written message. 
  
Figure 3-18—Use of Symbols/Logos
  
Figure 3-19—Letter Spacing
5.  Limit the Number of Letter Styles. The number of lettering styles should be limited in order to increase legibility. A general rule to follow is to limit the number of different letter types to no more than two for small signs and three for larger signs. Intricate typefaces and symbols that are difficult to read reduce the sign's ability to communicate. 
E.  Sign Illumination. The possible illumination of a sign should be carefully considered. Like color, illumination can provide more effective visual communication, or can confuse the message. Imaginative and innovative lighting techniques for signs are encouraged. 
1.  Use Illumination Only if Necessary. Consider if the sign needs to be lighted at all. Lights in the window display may be sufficient to identify the business. This is particularly true if good window graphics are used. Often, nearby street lights provide ample illumination of a sign after dark. 
  
Figure 3-20—Use of Existing Illumination
2.  Use a Direct Light Source. If the sign can be illuminated by a direct source of light (e.g., spotlight), this is usually the best arrangement because the sign will appear to be better integrated with the building's architecture. Light fixtures supported in front of the structure cast light on the sign and generally a portion of the face of the structure as well. Direct lighting emphasizes the continuity of the structure's surface, and signs become an integral part of the facade. Direct lighting is also appropriate because it produces a more intimate ambiance on the street. The lighting of signs should be considered as an element in a building's overall lighting design. 
3.  Shield the Light Source. Whenever direct lighting fixtures are used (fluorescent or incandescent), care should be taken to properly shield the light source to prevent glare from spilling over into residential areas and any public right-of-way. Signs should be lighted only to the minimum level required for nighttime readability. 
  
Figure 3-21—Shielded Light Source
4.  Back-lighted Signs. Back-lighted, solid letters are encouraged. Signs consisting of opaque individually cut letters mounted directly on a structure (push-through letters) can often use a distinctive element of the structure's facade as a backdrop, thereby providing a better integration of the sign with the structure. 
  
Figure 3-22—Back-Lighted Signs
(Ord. No. 1922, § 1, 7-6-2016)  
Chapter 17.36 - STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES 
 
17.36.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides site planning and development standards for land uses that are allowed by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards) in individual or multiple zoning districts, and for activities that require special standards to mitigate potential impacts. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.020 - Applicability. 
Land uses and activities covered by this chapter shall comply with the provisions applicable to the specific use, in addition to all other applicable provisions of this development code. 
A.  Where Allowed. The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter shall be located in compliance with the requirements of Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). 
B.  Land Use Permit Requirements. The uses that are subject to the standards in this chapter shall be authorized by the land use permit required by Article 2, except where a land use permit requirement is established by this chapter for a specific use. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.030 - Child day care facilities. 
This section provides location and operational standards for child day care facilities, in compliance with state law and in a manner that recognizes the needs of child care operators and minimizes effects on ad-joining properties. These standards apply in addition to the other provisions of this development code and the requirements of the California Department of Social Services. Licensing by the Department of Social Services is required for all facilities. 
The establishment of a child day care facility shall comply with Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), and the following criteria and standards: 
A.  Small family day care homes (eight or fewer children). Allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district. 
B.  Large family day care homes (nine to fourteen children). Allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district subject to a minor use permit. The review of the minor use permit will be based upon compliance with the following standards: 
1.  The facility shall comply with all applicable state and fire codes. 
2.  Location Requirements. A separation of three hundred feet shall be required from any other large family day care home. 
3.  Fencing. A six-foot high fence or wall shall be constructed on all property lines or around the outdoor activity areas, except in the front yard or within a traffic safety visibility area. 
4.  Noise Standards. The facility shall not exceed city noise limits as established by the city's general plan. 
5.  Outdoor Lighting. On-site exterior lighting shall be allowed for safety purposes only, shall consist of low wattage fixtures, and shall be directed downward and shielded. 
6.  Parking. Parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.32 (Parking Standards). 
7.  Swimming Pools/Spas Prohibited. No swimming pool/spa shall be installed on the site after establishment of the family day care center, due to the high risk and human safety considerations. Any pool/spa existing on the site prior to application for approval of a family day care center shall be removed prior to establishment of the use, unless the director determines that adequate, secure separation exists between the pool/spa and the facilities used by the children. 
C.  Child Day Care Centers (Fifteen or More Children). Allowed in the zoning districts determined by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), subject to use permit approval, in compliance with Section 17.40.040 and the following standards: 
1.  Standards for Child Day Care Centers. The following standards shall apply to child day care centers: 
a.  Size. The minimum parcel size for a child day care center shall be ten thousand square feet; 
b.  Parking. Off-street parking shall be as determined through use permit approval, but shall be a minimum of one space per employee, plus one space for each five children. 
c.  Pick-up and Drop-off Zone. A safe area for picking up and dropping off children shall be provided. This activity shall only be allowed in a driveway, in an approved parking area, or in an area with direct access to the facility. 
d.  Noise. Potential noise sources shall be identified during the use permit process, and noise attenuation and sound dampening shall be addressed. Noise levels shall be in compliance with the most recent guidelines of the noise element of the general plan. 
e.  Outdoor Lighting. On-site exterior lighting shall be allowed for safety purposes only, shall consist of low wattage fixtures, and shall be directed downward and shielded. 
f.  Fencing. A six-foot high fence or wall shall be constructed on all property lines or around the outdoor activity areas, except in the front yard or within a traffic safety visibility area. 
g.  Alternative Standards. Alternatives to the standards of this section may be authorized through the use permit approval if the review authority determines that: 
i.  The intent of these standards is met; and 
ii.  There will be no detriment to surrounding properties or residents. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.040 - Residential care facilities and senior apartments. 
A.  Applicability. Residential care facilities shall be allowed as follows: 
1.  Residential Care Facility with Six or Fewer Residents. Allowed within a single-family residence located in a residential zoning district. 
2.  Residential Care Facility with Seven or More Residents. Allowed as described in Article 2 (Land Use, General Development Standards, Design Guidelines) subject to a use permit. The review of the use permit will be based upon compliance with the following standards: 
a.  Limitation on Impacts. The use shall not create impacts on surrounding properties neighborhoods that are no more significant than would be caused by standard multi-family rental projects. 
b.  Parking Reduction. The review authority may grant a reduction in off-street parking requirements for a residential care facility, provided that the project shall include the following when a parking reduction is proposed: 
i.  A minimum of five percent of the total indoor floor area shall be devoted to educational, recreational, and social facilities (e.g., library, multi-purpose common room, recreation room, TV room); and 
ii.  Common laundry facilities of sufficient number and accessibility, consistent with the number of living units. 
c.  Location Requirements. A separation of three hundred feet shall be required from any other residential care facility. 
3.  Project Changes. If a residential care facility approved in compliance with this section is changed to another use (for example, the project converts to a conventional unrestricted multi-family project), the project shall be modified to meet all applicable standards of this development code. 
B.  Senior Apartments and Independent Living Centers. Senior apartments and independent living centers are multi-family residential projects reserved for senior citizens, where common facilities may be provided (for example, recreation areas), but where each dwelling unit has individual living, sleeping, bathing, and kitchen facilities. 
1.  General Design Standards. Senior apartments and independent living centers shall comply with the provisions of Chapter 17.18 (Residential Zoning Districts), except as otherwise provided by this section. 
2.  Off-street Parking. Off-street parking shall comply with Chapter 17.32 (Off-Street Parking and Loading). The review authority may restrict the total number of resident cars to be parked on-site or designate specified on-site parking spaces for employee or visitor parking only. 
3.  Additional Uses. Additional facilities, including skilled nursing and/or intermediate care facilities, and personal services (for example, beauty salon, physical therapy) may be allowed through use permit approval, without requiring additional parking, provided that these facilities shall only be for the private use of project residents. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.050 - Residential density bonus. 
A.  Purpose. The residential density bonus provisions of this code are adopted pursuant to the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65915—65918. The purpose of adopting this chapter is to encourage affordable housing by providing the incentive of increased density and such other incentives provided by this chapter. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Approving authority" is as defined in this development code. 
2.  "Child care facility" means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school-age child care centers. 
3.  "Density bonus" means an increase in density over the otherwise maximum allowable residential density under the applicable general plan designation as of the date of filing of an application for density bonus with city. 
4.  "Development" standard means the site, development, or construction standards and/or conditions of approval that apply to a residential development. 
5.  "Housing development" means one or more groups of projects for residential units constructed within a large lot parcel. For the purposes of this chapter, "housing development" also includes a subdivision or common interest development as defined in Section 1351 of the Civil Code and consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots. 
6.  "Incentive" means a reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed the minimum building standards approved by the California Building Standards Commission. An incentive can be requested by the applicant for purposes of reducing the cost of development to make the project financially feasible. The term "incentive" includes the term "concession" as that term is used in California Government Code Sections 65915—65918. 
7.  "Low income" is defined as less than eighty percent of the area median income, as defined by Section 50079.5 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
8.  "Low income unit" is defined as a unit with an affordable rent or payment that does not exceed thirty percent of sixty percent of area median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
9.  "Moderate income" is defined as less than one hundred twenty percent of the area median income, as defined in Section 50093 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
10.  "Moderate income unit" is defined as a unit with an affordable rent or payment that does not exceed thirty-five percent of one hundred ten percent of area median income adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
11.  "Very low income" is defined as less than fifty percent of the area median income, as defined in Section 50105 of the California Health and Safety Code. 
12.  "Very low income unit" is defined as a unit with an affordable rent or payment that does not exceed thirty percent of fifty percent of the area median income, adjusted for family size appropriate for the unit. 
13.  "Senior citizen housing development" is defined as a housing project where residency is restricted to persons sixty-two years of age or older, or fifty-five years of age or older in a Senior Citizen Housing Development per Sections 51.3 and 51.12 of the California Civil Code. 
C.  Application Requirements. A density bonus may be approved pursuant to a request for approval of a density bonus, provided the request complies with the provisions of this chapter. Each application for a density bonus request shall be accompanied by the following: 
1.  A site plan that identifies all units in the project including the location of the affordable units and the bonus units. 
2.  A narrative briefly describing the housing development and shall include information on: 
a.  The number of units permitted under the general plan; 
b.  The total number of units proposed in the project; 
c.  The number of affordable and/or senior units; 
d.  The number of bonus units requested based on Table 3-5; 
e.  A breakdown of units proposed for very low, low, moderate income, senior citizen, and/or market rate units; and 
f.  Any requested incentive(s), including an explanation as to why the incentive(s) is required for the housing development. 
3.  Information indicating that appropriate and sufficient infrastructure capacity is available to serve the bonus units. 
4.  Any such additional information in support of a request for a density bonus as may be requested by the director. 
D.  Eligibility for Bonus. A developer of a housing development containing five or more units may qualify for a density bonus and at least one other incentive as provided by this chapter if the developer does one of the following: 
1.  Agrees to construct and maintain at least five percent of the units dedicated to very low income households; 
2.  Agrees to construct and maintain at least ten percent of the units dedicated to lower income households; 
3.  Agrees to construct and maintain at least ten percent of the units in a common interest development (as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code) dedicated to Moderate Income households, provided that all units in the development are offered to the public for purchase; 
4.  Agrees to construct and maintain a senior citizen housing development as defined in Section 17.36.040 of this chapter; 
5.  Includes a qualifying child care facility as described in Section 17.36.030 of this chapter in addition to providing housing as described in subsections (D)(1)—(D)(3) of this section. 
E.  Density Bonus Calculation and Allowance. 
1.  State Law Preemption. Pursuant to state law, the granting of a density bonus or the granting of a density bonus together with an incentive(s) shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, specific plan amendment, rezone, or other discretionary approvals. 
2.  Density Bonus Calculation. An applicant must choose a density bonus from only one applicable affordability category in below subsection 3 and may not combine categories with the exception of child care facilities, which may be combined with an affordable housing development, for an additional density bonus up to a combined maximum of thirty-five percent. 
3.  Density Bonus Allowance. In calculating the number of units required for very low, low and moderate income households, the density bonus units shall not be included. In no event shall a density bonus exceed thirty-five percent. A housing development that satisfies all applicable provisions of this chapter shall be allowed the density bonuses as described in Table 3-4: 
TABLE 3-4 
Density Bonus Category 	Minimum Affordability 
Required 	Density Bonus Permitted 	Increase in Density Bonus Permitted 
Very Low Income 	At least 5% of the total units of a housing development are restricted for very low income households 	20 to 35% 	An additional 2.5% density bonus increase for each additional 1% increase in very low income units above the initial 5% threshold 
Low Income 	At least 10% of the total units of a housing development are restricted for low income households 	20 to 35% 	An additional 1.5% density bonus increase for each additional 1% increase in low income units above the initial 10% threshold 
Moderate Income 	At least 10% of the total dwelling units in a common interest development are restricted for persons/families of moderate income 	5 to 35% 	An additional 1% density bonus increase for each additional 1% increase in moderate income units above the initial 10% threshold 
Senior 	No affordability requirement 	20% 	No affordability requirement 
Child Care 	Incorporation of a child care facility as part of a project that is eligible for a density bonus 	As determined by the director 	N/A 
 
F.  Eligibility and Application Requirements for Incentives. 
1.  Available Incentives. A housing development qualifying for a density bonus may be entitled to at least one incentive. Incentives may include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A reduction in site development standards such as: 
i.  Reduced minimum lot sizes and/or dimensions; 
ii.  Reduced minimum lot setbacks; 
iii.  Reduced minimum outdoor and/or private outdoor living area; 
iv.  Increased maximum lot coverage; 
v.  Increased maximum building height and/or stories; 
vi.  Reduced on-site parking requirements; 
vii.  Reduced street standards. 
b.  A reduction in architectural design requirements. 
c.  A density bonus greater than the amount required by this chapter. 
d.  Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer or the city, which result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions. 
e.  If an applicant qualifies for a density bonus pursuant to this chapter, the applicant may request, in addition to any requested incentive(s), a reduced parking requirement be applied to the project in place of the city's current parking requirements. The parking requirement is inclusive of handicapped and guest parking for the entire housing development, but shall not include on-street parking spaces in the count towards the parking requirement. 
G.  Child Care Facilities. 
1.  Child Care Facility Density Bonus. When an applicant proposes to construct a housing development that is eligible for a density bonus under this chapter and California Government Code Section 65917.5, and includes a child care facility that will be located on the premises or adjacent to the housing development, the city shall grant either: 
a.  An additional density bonus that is an amount determined by the director; or 
b.  An additional incentive that contributes significantly to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility. 
2.  Child Care Facility Requirements. The city shall require, as a condition of approving the housing development, that the following occur: 
a.  The Child care facility shall remain in operation for a period of time that is as long as or longer than the period of time during which the affordable units are required to remain affordable per this chapter; and 
b.  Of the children who attend the child care facility, the children of very low income households, low income households or families of moderate income households shall equal a percentage that is equal to or greater than the percentage of affordable units in the housing development that are required for very low, low or families of moderate income households. 
3.  Child Care Facility Criteria. The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or incentive for a child care facility if it finds, based upon substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. 
H.  General Guidelines. 
1.  Location of Bonus Units. As required by California Government Code Section 65915(g), the location of density bonus units within the qualifying housing development may be at the discretion of the developer, and need not be in the same area of the project where the units for the low income households are located as long as the density bonus units are located within the same housing development. 
2.  Infrastructure and Supply Capacity. Criteria to be considered in analyzing the requested bonus will include the availability and capacity of infrastructure (water, sewer, storm drain, road capacity, etc.) and water supply to accommodate the additional density. 
I.  Findings for Approval for Density Bonus and/or Incentive(s). 
1.  Density Bonus Approval. The following finding shall be made by the approving authority in order to approve a density bonus request: 
a.  The density bonus request meets the requirements of this chapter. 
2.  Density Bonus Approval with Incentive(s). The following findings shall be made by the approving authority in order to approve a density bonus and incentive(s) request: 
a.  The density bonus request meets the requirements of this chapter; 
b.  The incentive is required in order to provide affordable housing; and 
c.  Approval of the incentive(s) will have no specific adverse impacts upon health, safety, or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to very low, low, and moderate income households. 
3.  Denial of a Request for an Incentive(s). The approving authority shall make the following findings prior to disallowing an incentive (in the case where an accompanying density bonus may be approved, or in the case of where an incentive(s) is requested for senior housing or child care facility): 
a.  That the incentive is not necessary in order to provide for affordable housing costs or for rents for the targeted units to be set as specified in this chapter. 
b.  That the incentive would result in specific adverse impacts upon health, safety, or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to very low, low, and moderate income households. 
J.  Affordable Housing Agreement Required. 
1.  Agreement Required. In approving a density bonus, the associated permit or tentative map shall require that an affordable housing agreement, or other form of agreement as approved by the city attorney, effectuating the terms of affordability of the development be executed prior to effectuation of the permit or recordation of the final map or issuance of a building permit. 
2.  Continued Availability. The density bonus request shall include the procedures proposed by the developer to maintain the continued affordability of all affordable income density bonus units and shall be evidenced by an affordable housing agreement as follows: 
a.  An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure, continued affordability of all very low and low income units that qualified the applicant for the award of the density bonus for thirty years or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program. Rents for the lower income density bonus units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in Section 17.36.050(B) of this chapter. Owner-occupied units shall be available at an affordable housing cost as defined in Section 17.36.050(B) of this chapter. 
b.  An applicant shall agree to, and the city shall ensure that, the initial occupants of the moderate income units are directly related to the receipt of the density bonus in the common interest development as defined in Section 1351 of the California Civil Code, are persons and families of moderate income, as defined in Section 17.36.050(B) of this chapter and that the units are offered at an affordable housing cost, as that cost is defined in Section 17.36.050(B) of this chapter. The city shall enforce an equity-sharing agreement unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law. The following apply to the equity-sharing agreement: 
i.  Upon resale, the seller of the unit shall retain the value of any improvements, the down payment, and the seller's proportionate share of appreciation. The city shall recapture any initial subsidy and its proportionate share of appreciation, which shall then be used within three years for any of the purposes described in subdivision (e) of Section 33334.2 of the California Health and Safety Code that promote homeownership. 
ii.  For purposes of this subdivision, the city's initial subsidy shall be equal to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale minus the initial sale price to the moderate-income household plus the amount of any down payment assistance or mortgage assistance. If upon resale the market value is lower than the initial market value, then the value at the time of the resale shall be used as the initial market value. 
iii.  For purposes of this subdivision, the city's proportionate share of appreciation shall be equal to the ratio of the initial subsidy to the fair market value of the home at the time of initial sale. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.060 - Home occupations. 
The following standards for home occupations are intended to provide reasonable opportunities for employment within the home, while avoiding changes to the residential character of a dwelling that accommodates a home occupation, or the surrounding neighborhood, where allowed by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards): 
A.  Business License Required. A home occupation shall require a city business license. 
B.  Limitations on Use. The following are examples of business activities that may be approved as home occupations, and uses that are prohibited as home occupations: 
1.  Uses allowed as Home Occupations. The following and other uses determined by the director to be similar may be approved by the director in compliance with this section: 
a.  Art and craft work (ceramics, painting, photography, sculpture, etc.); 
b.  Tailors, sewing, etc.; and 
c.  Office-only uses, including an office for an architect, attorney, consultant, counselor, insurance agent, planner, tutor, writer, etc., and electronic commerce. 
2.  Uses Prohibited as Home Occupations. The following are examples of business activities that are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities, and are, therefore, prohibited as home occupations: 
a.  Adult entertainment activities/businesses; 
b.  Animal hospitals and boarding facilities; 
c.  Automotive and other vehicle repair and service (body or mechanical), painting, storage, or upholstery, or the repair, reconditioning, servicing, or manufacture of any internal combustion or diesel engines, or of any motor vehicle, including automobiles, boats, motorcycles, or trucks; 
d.  Contractor's and other storage yards; 
e.  Dismantling, junk, or scrap yards; 
f.  Fitness/health facilities (except that one-on-one personal trainers may be allowed); 
g.  Medical clinics, laboratories, or doctor's offices; 
h.  Personal services as defined in Article 7 (Definitions), except that licensed massage therapy and physical therapy may be allowed as home occupations in compliance with this section; 
i.  Parking on, or dispatching from the site any vehicle used in conjunction with an automobile wrecking or towing service, or with a taxi or similar passenger or delivery service, whether based on the site or elsewhere; 
j.  On-site sales, except that mail order businesses may be allowed where there is no stock-in-trade on the site; 
k.  Uses that require explosives or highly combustible or toxic materials; 
l.  Welding and machine shop operations; 
m.  Wood cutting businesses; 
n.  Barber/beauty/nail shops; 
o.  Dance/night clubs; 
p.  Food preparation for commercial purposes; 
q.  Fortune telling (psychics); 
r.  Photography studios (not including photo processing); 
s.  Plant nursery; 
t.  Retail or wholesale sales of products stored at the residence, except that mail order businesses may be allowed where there is no stock-in-trade on the site; and 
u.  Other uses the director determines to be similar to those listed above. 
C.  Operating Standards. Home occupations shall comply with all of the following operating standards: 
1.  Accessory Use. The home occupation shall be clearly secondary to the full-time use of the property as a residence. 
2.  Location of Home Occupation Activities. All home occupation activities shall be confined to one room within the primary dwelling, which shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent of the gross floor area of the ground floor. A garage or other enclosed accessory structure may be used for home occupation purposes only if required off-street parking spaces are continually maintained. Horticulture activities may be conducted outdoors, but only on the rear one-third of the site. 
3.  Visibility. The use shall not require any exterior modification to the structure not customarily found in a dwelling, nor shall the home occupation activity be visible from a public right-of-way, or from neighboring residential properties. 
4.  Signs. No signs are permitted in conjunction with the use, other than one name plate, not exceeding one square foot in area, and only if attached flush to a wall of the structure. There shall be no advertising signs. 
5.  Safety. Activities conducted and equipment or material used shall not change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. The use shall not employ the storage of explosive, flammable, or hazardous materials beyond those normally associated with a residential use. 
6.  Off-site Effects. No home occupation activity shall create dust, electrical interference, fumes, gas, glare, light, noise, odor, smoke, toxic/hazardous materials, vibration, or other hazards or nuisances as determined by the director. 
7.  Outdoor Display or Storage. There shall be no window display or outdoor storage or display of equipment, materials, or supplies associated with the home occupation. Tools or equipment connected with the business shall be operated so as to be imperceptible at or beyond the property line. 
8.  Employees. A home occupation shall have no on-site employees other than full-time residents of the dwelling. 
9.  Client/customer visits. The home occupation shall involve no on-site clients except for: 
a.  Home occupations in live/work units; 
b.  Tutoring or instruction of children by appointment; and 
c.  Applicants with a demonstrated mobility handicap. 
10.  Motor Vehicles. There shall be no motor vehicles used or kept on the premises, except residents' passenger vehicles, and/or one pickup truck, van, or similar vehicle not exceeding one and one-half-ton carrying capacity. The home occupation shall not involve the use of commercial vehicles for delivery of materials to or from the premises in a manner different from normal residential usage, except for FedEx, UPS, or USPS-type home deliveries/pick-ups. The commission may authorize other types and/or additional vehicles with use permit approval. 
11.  Utility Service Modifications. No utility service to the dwelling shall be modified solely to accommodate a home occupation, other than as required for normal residential use. 
D.  Home Working Operations. Small-scale commercial wood and metal working may be authorized by minor use permit as a home occupation, provided that the review authority may require conditions of approval limiting hours of operation, noise levels, and/or any other aspect of the operation, to ensure compatibility with on-site and adjacent residential uses. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.070 - Mobile home parks. 
A proposed mobile home park shall comply with the following minimum standards. The review authority may impose additional, more restrictive, requirements in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare, to the extent allowed by state law. 
A.  Overall Mobile Home Park Site Standards. The site for the mobile home park shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Minimum Site Area: Twenty acres. 
2.  Maximum Density: Ten units per acre. 
3.  Boundary Landscape Building Setback. Each park shall provide a building setback and a planting strip of at least ten feet in width where trees shall be planted and where general screening and/or a fence shall be provided. Where any portion of the park fronts on a public street or right-of-way, the setback shall be twenty-five feet. 
4.  Perimeter Wall/Fence. A six-foot high solid masonry wall shall be provided around the entire perimeter of the mobile home park subject to the setback requirements of this section. 
5.  Parking. Parking shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading). 
6.  Recreational Vehicle Parking. A supplemental parking area for recreational vehicles may be allowed as part of the use permit approval for the project. 
7.  Accessory Uses. A mobile home park may contain accessory retail and service uses for the convenience of the residents provided that these uses shall be specifically authorized by the park use permit. 
B.  Individual Mobile Home Site Standards. Each individual mobile home site shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Minimum Site Area. Individual mobile home sites and contiguous public walkway areas shall contain a minimum of three thousand square feet of area for a single-wide mobile home unit and four thousand square feet for a double-wide mobile home. 
2.  Parcel Dimensions. Individual mobile home parcels shall be a minimum of forty feet in width and seventy feet in length. 
3.  Setbacks. Individual mobile homes shall be set back five feet from all lot lines, including front and rear, except for any side or rear line abutting the mobile home park property line, in which case the minimum setback shall be twenty-five feet. 
4.  Carport. Each mobile home site shall be provided an individual carport, with its location and design as approved through the mobile home park use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.080 - Outdoor display and retail activities. 
A.  Accessory Outdoor Display. Outdoor displays incidental and complementary to an allowed use on commercially or publicly zoned parcels shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  An outdoor display shall be: 
a.  Appropriately located and designed in a manner and color to be compatible with the adjacent structures; 
b.  Approved with a defined fixed location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, parking spaces, or any public right-of-way except in the DMU zone with encroachment permit approval. No display shall obstruct traffic safety sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic; 
c.  Directly related to a business occupying a permanent structure on the site; 
d.  Limited to on-site locations; provided that a display within the DMU zone may extend into or enter over any public sidewalk by a maximum of two feet, where authorized by an encroachment permit; 
e.  Managed so that display structures and goods are maintained at all times in a clean and neat condition, and in good repair; 
f.  Placed so that the clear space for the passage of pedestrians is not reduced to less than six feet. Any placement on a public sidewalk or otherwise within a public right-of-way shall be prohibited, except within the downtown where such placement shall require encroachment permit approval; 
g.  Placed to not block structure entrances and on-site driveways; and 
h.  Portable and removed from public view at the close of each business day. 
2.  Outdoor displays shall not be: 
a.  Placed so as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of the store front windows for display purposes; and 
b.  Placed in front of a business that does not normally sell the items on display. 
3.  Signs. The outdoor display shall not involve signs other than those normally allowed for the subject use by Chapter 17.34 (Signs). 
B.  Newsstands and Flower Stands. 
1.  Location Requirements. News and flower stands shall: 
a.  Be located parallel and adjacent to the wall of a structure, and shall not extend over any public sidewalk except within the DMU zoning district. Freestanding news and flower stands are allowed only as roofed kiosks; 
b.  Not be located: 
i.  Within three feet of a display window of any structure abutting the sidewalk, or so as to interfere with or restrict the reasonable use of the window for display purposes; 
iii.  Within one thousand feet of another news or flower stand, or florist, provided that this requirement may be reduced by the director if the proposed use is determined not to be detrimental to public safety and welfare. 
2.  Design and Construction Requirements. 
a.  Stands shall be soundly constructed of wood, metal, or other suitable permanent material, and designed in a manner and color to be compatible with the adjacent structures whether opened or closed. Security doors shall be designed as an integral part of the structure. 
b.  Shelving shall not exceed eight feet in height nor two feet in depth. 
3.  Maintenance. The news or flower stand shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair, at all times. 
4.  Signs. 
a.  Stands shall not be used for advertising or publicity purposes. Signs shall be for identification only, with size and design in compliance with Chapter 17.34 (Signs). 
b.  The owners or operators of the outdoor news or flower stand shall display, in a place readily visible to the public, a telephone number and address where the owners may be reached. 
5.  Parking. In approving an outdoor news or flower stand, the director shall determine that some on-site parking or adequate on-street or other public parking is available in a commercial zoning district within a reasonable distance of the stand. 
6.  Additional Product Sales. In addition to the sale of newspapers, magazines, and other periodicals, for newsstands, and flowers and plants, for flower stands, the owners or operators may sell other related accessory products, not to exceed ten percent of the total merchandise displayed. 
7.  Encroachment Permit. If a news or flower stand is proposed within a public right-of-way, the owners or operators shall apply for an encroachment permit from the public works department before applying for approval of the stand by the department. 
8.  Hours of Operation. Hours of operation of news and flower stands shall be determined by the director and shall be posted on-site. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.090 - Outdoor storage. 
This section provides standards for the establishment of outdoor storage areas, in compliance with Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). 
A.  Location. Storage areas shall be limited to areas not designated for parking, setbacks, or landscaping. 
B.  Enclosure Required. An outdoor area used for storage shall be completely enclosed by a solid masonry wall and solid gate. The director may allow the substitution of a fence or hedge, after determining that the substitution will adequately comply with the provisions of this section. The required fence or wall shall: 
1.  Be not less than six feet; 
2.  Incorporate design elements to limit easy climbing and access by unauthorized persons; 
3.  Walls abutting a right-of-way shall comply with Section 17.14.100 (Walls, Fences, and Hedges); and 
4.  Be subject to approval by the director. 
C.  Operations. All raw materials, equipment, or finished products stored or displayed shall: 
1.  Be stored in a manner that they cannot be blown by wind from the enclosed storage area; 
2.  Except in the M zoning district, not be stored above the height of the enclosing wall or fence within ten feet of the wall or fence (fence height shall comply with Section 17.14.100); 
3.  Not be placed or allowed to remain outside the enclosed storage area; and 
4.  Be stored on a surface paved with asphalt or concrete. 
D.  Maintenance. All portions of outside storage and display areas shall have provisions for adequate drainage, and shall be continuously maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.100 - Recreational vehicle parks. 
The location, development and operation of a recreational vehicle (RV) park shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Minimum Site Area. The site for an RV park shall be a minimum of one acre, when not part of a mobile home park. 
B.  Maximum Density. The number of RV spaces in a park shall not exceed fifteen units per acre of site area. 
C.  Parking Space Area and Width. Each RV space shall be at least one thousand eight hundred square feet in area, and a minimum width of thirty feet. 
D.  Setbacks. Each recreational vehicle space shall be located a minimum of five feet from any side property line and ten feet from any rear property line. 
E.  Screening. A minimum twenty-five-foot wide landscaped buffer area shall be provided along all public streets adjoining the park. A minimum ten-foot wide landscaped buffer area shall be provided along all interior property lines. No RV space shall encroach into the landscaped buffer areas. 
F.  Parking. One parking spur shall be provided for each RV space. The maximum grade for the last twenty-five feet of any spur shall be two percent. At least seventy percent of all spurs shall be designed to accommodate both a motor vehicle (e.g., auto, truck, etc.) and a trailer. Parking spurs shall not be located closer together than forty feet on center. 
G.  Roadways. Each RV space shall abut and have direct access to a roadway of at least twenty-four feet in width, which shall be surfaced with asphaltic concrete, or an appropriate alternative approved by the review authority. 
H.  Signs. 
1.  Sign Program. An overall sign program shall be prepared for each RV park, including any proposed free-standing signs and signs on structures. The plan may also provide for internal signs (those not visible from off-site roadways or adjoining property) that are strictly directional in nature. 
2.  Allowable Signs and Sign Area. An RV park shall be allowed up to eighty square feet of sign area visible from external roadways and adjoining property, consisting of up to two free-standing signs and one wall sign. 
a.  A single sign shall not exceed forty square feet in total area. 
b.  The maximum height of a free-standing sign shall be twenty-five feet. 
I.  Accessory Commercial Uses. An RV park may provide commercial uses for the convenience of campers as approved by the review authority, provided that the uses shall not occupy more than five hundred square feet for each fifty spaces. 
J.  Manager's Quarters. Living quarters may be provided for the use of a caretaker or manager. The living quarters may be either a mobile home or permanent dwelling unit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.110 - Recycling facilities. 
This section provides locational and operational standards for the establishment of various types and sizes of commercial recycling facilities, in compliance with Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). Recycling facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
A.  Reverse Vending Machines. Reverse vending machines shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Accessory Use Only. The machines shall be installed as an accessory use in compliance with the applicable provisions of this development code, and shall not require additional parking. 
2.  Location Requirements. If located outside of a structure, the machines shall not occupy required parking spaces, and shall be constructed of durable waterproof and rustproof materials. 
3.  Maximum Size. When located outdoors, the area occupied by the machines shall not exceed fifty square feet, including any protective enclosure, nor eight feet in height. 
4.  Signs. Signs shall not exceed a maximum area of four square feet for each machine, exclusive of operating instructions. 
5.  Hours of Operation. The machines shall have operating hours which are consistent with the operating hours of the primary use. 
6.  Lighting. The machines shall be illuminated when needed to ensure comfortable and safe operation. 
B.  Small Collection Facilities. Small collection facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location Requirements. Small collection facilities shall: 
a.  Not be located within fifty feet of any parcel zoned or occupied for residential use; and 
b.  Be set back at least ten feet from any public right-of-way, and not obstruct vehicular or pedestrian circulation. 
2.  Maximum Size. A small collection facility shall not occupy more than three hundred fifty square feet nor three parking spaces, not including space that would be periodically needed for the removal of materials or exchange of containers. 
3.  Appearance of Facility. Collection containers and site fencing shall be of a color and design that is compatible and harmonious with the surrounding uses and neighborhoods. 
4.  Operating Standards. Small collection facilities shall: 
a.  Not use power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines; 
b.  Accept only glass, metal or plastic containers, paper, and reusable items; and 
c.  Use containers that are constructed with durable waterproof and rustproof material(s), secured from unauthorized removal of material, and shall be of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and the collection schedule. 
5.  Signs. Signs may be provided as follows: 
a.  Identification signs are allowed with a maximum area of fifteen percent for each side of the structure or twelve square feet, whichever is greater. In the case of a wheeled facility, the side shall be measured from the ground to the top of the container; 
b.  Signs shall be both compatible and harmonious with the character of their location; and 
c.  Directional signs, consistent with Chapter 17.34 (Signs) and without advertising message, may be approved by the director if found necessary to facilitate traffic circulation, or if the facility is not visible from the public right-of-way. 
6.  Parking Requirements. 
a.  No additional parking space shall be required for customers of a small collection facility located in the established parking lot of the main use. One space shall be provided for the attendant, if needed. 
b.  Mobile recycling units shall have an area clearly marked to prohibit other vehicular parking during hours when the mobile unit is scheduled to be present; and 
c.  Use of parking spaces by the patrons and the attendant shall not reduce available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the main use unless a parking study shows that existing capacity is not fully utilized during the time the recycling facility would be on the site. 
C.  Large Collection Facilities. A collection facility that is larger than three hundred fifty square feet, or on a separate parcel not accessory to a primary use, shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location Requirements. The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned for residential use. 
2.  Container Location. Any containers provided for "after hours" donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least one hundred feet from any residential zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof material(s), have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of materials; and 
3.  Screening. The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure. 
4.  Setbacks, Landscaping. Structure setbacks and landscaping shall be provided as required for the applicable zoning district. 
5.  Outdoor Storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage, excluding truck trailers, shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls. 
6.  Operating Standards. 
a.  The site shall be maintained clean, sanitary, and free of litter and any other undesirable materials, and shall be cleaned of loose debris on a daily basis; 
b.  Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels. 
D.  Processing Facilities. Processing facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
1.  Location Requirements. The facility shall not abut a parcel zoned or occupied for residential use. 
2.  Limitation on Use. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding, and sorting of source-separated recyclable materials and repairing of reusable materials. 
3.  Maximum Size. 
a.  A light processing facility shall not exceed forty-five thousand square feet of floor or ground area, may have up to an average of two outbound truck shipments of material each day, and shall not bale, compact, or shred ferrous metals, other than beverage and food containers; 
b.  A heavy processing facility exceeds the standards for a light processing facility, and may perform functions not allowed at light processing facilities. 
4.  Container Location. Containers provided for "after hours" donation of recyclable materials shall be permanently located at least one hundred feet from any residential zoning district, constructed of sturdy, rustproof materials, have sufficient capacity to accommodate materials collected, and be secured from unauthorized entry or removal of the materials. 
5.  Screening. The facility shall be screened from public rights-of-way, by solid masonry walls or located within an enclosed structure. 
6.  Outdoor Storage. Exterior storage of material shall be in sturdy containers or enclosures that are secured and maintained in good condition. Storage, excluding truck trailers, shall not be visible above the height of the required solid masonry walls. 
7.  Operating Standards. Dust, fumes, odor, smoke, or vibration, above ambient levels, shall not be detectable on adjoining parcels. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.120 - Residential accessory uses and structures. 
Where allowed in the applicable zoning district by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), residential accessory uses and structures shall comply with the following criteria and standards: 
A.  Relationship of Accessory Use or Structure to the Main use. Accessory uses and structures shall be incidental to and not alter the main use or character of the site. 
B.  Timing of Installation. An accessory structure shall be constructed concurrent with or subsequent to the construction of a main structure on the property unless a use permit is first obtained in compliance with Section 17.40.040 (Use Permits). 
C.  Location. The location of all accessory structures shall comply with all applicable California Building Code standards, and the following requirements: 
1.  A structure greater than thirty inches in height above finished grade and attached to a main structure shall comply with the requirements for the main structure. A detached structure (deck or patio) greater than thirty inches in height shall not be constructed in a required setback unless director approval is first obtained; 
2.  An accessory structure greater than one hundred twenty square feet shall not be closer than three feet to any other accessory structure on the same property, and shall comply with all other requirements of the applicable zoning district. An accessory structure shall not be located within a required front yard setback and shall maintain side and rear setbacks of at least five feet; 
3.  An accessory structure that is one hundred twenty square feet or less shall not be located closer than three feet to a rear or side property line; 
4.  An accessory structure shall not be located in a required front yard, except that decorative garden structures (e.g., small trellis or archway) shall be allowed. 
D.  Maximum Number of Accessory Structures. A maximum of two accessory structures shall be allowed on any residentially zoned or residentially used property unless site plan and architectural approval is first obtained. 
E.  Height Limitations. 
1.  The height of an accessory structure that is one hundred twenty square feet or less shall not exceed eight feet unless site plan and architectural approval is first obtained in compliance with Section 17.40.020 (Site Plan and Architectural Approval). The height of an accessory structure with a floor area greater than one hundred twenty square feet shall comply with the height limits of the applicable zoning district; 
2.  An accessory structure that is primarily a narrow, vertical element (e.g., flag pole, ham radio antenna, etc.) may be allowed to exceed the six foot height limit within the front or rear yard setback. 
F.  Coverage and Size Limitations. Accessory structures may occupy up to a maximum of twenty-five percent of a required side yard and up to a maximum of thirty percent of a required rear yard; provided that the aggregate site coverage for all structures on a parcel shall not exceed the maximum allowed in the applicable specific zoning district by Section 17.18.040 (Residential Zoning District General Development Standards). 
G.  Prohibited Uses and Activities. 
1.  Outdoor Vehicle Repair. No vehicle repair activities shall be conducted outdoors within a residential zone. 
2.  Electrical Service. A parcel developed with a single-family dwelling shall have only one electrical service panel. Separate electrical service shall not be provided any accessory structure or guest house. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.130 - Second dwelling units. 
A.  Minimum Site Area. A second dwelling unit may be permitted only on a parcel that complies with the minimum lot area requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
B.  Number of Units Allowed. One second dwelling unit shall be allowed on a parcel in a single-family or multi-family zoning district developed with a main dwelling, but shall not be allowed on a parcel developed with two or more dwellings. 
C.  Location on Site. A second unit may be located on the site to be within, attached to, or detached from the existing main dwelling. A second unit may also be located above a detached garage. 
D.  Setbacks. An attached second unit shall be subject to the same front, sides, and rear setback requirements applicable to the main dwelling. A detached second unit, including a unit placed over a detached garage, shall not be located within a required front yard setback, shall maintain side and rear yard setbacks of at least five feet, and shall maintain a six-foot separation from other accessory structures and the main dwelling unit. More restrictive setbacks may be required through site plan and architectural approval. 
E.  Floor Area Limitations. The habitable floor area of a second unit shall not be less than three hundred square feet. The maximum square footage shall not exceed six hundred forty square feet or thirty percent of the existing living area of the primary residence, whichever is less. 
F.  Architectural Compatibility. The second unit shall be architecturally compatible with the main dwelling unit and comply with all height and lot coverage requirements of the underlying zoning district. 
G.  Parking. The second unit shall be provided with one off-street parking space in addition to that required for the main dwelling unit. 
H.  Illegal Second Units. This section shall not validate any existing illegal second unit. The standards and requirements for the conversion of an illegal second unit to a legal, conforming unit, shall be the same as for a new second unit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.36.140 - Telecommunications facilities. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to provide for the establishment of wireless communication facilities to protect the public health, safety, the general welfare and quality of life. These regulations are intended to supersede applicable provisions of the Lodi Municipal Code pertaining to wireless communication facilities and to establish flexible requirements for their governance which recognize the unique land use distribution and aesthetic characteristics of the city of Lodi. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Antenna" means a device used in communications which transmits or receives radio signals. 
2.  "Building-mounted" means mounted to the side of a building to the facade of a building, or to the side of another structure such as a water tank, church steeple, freestanding sign, or similar structure, but not to include the roof or any structure. 
3.  "California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)" means the government agency which regulates the terms and condition of public utilities in the state of California. 
4.  "Cell site" means a geographical area with a radius of two to eight miles that contains both transmitting and receiving antennas. 
5.  "Cellular" means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains antennas. 
6.  "Certificate of public convenience and necessity" means a certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission. 
7.  "Co-location" means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single building-mounted, roof-mounted or ground-mounted wireless communication facility. 
8.  "Ground-mounted" means mounted to a pole, monopole, lattice tower or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna. 
9.  "Monopole" means a structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas or related equipment. 
10.  "Mounted" means attached or supported. 
11.  "Personal communication services" means digital low-power, high-frequency wireless radio communication technology that has the capacity for multiple communications services and will provide a system in which calls will be routed to individuals, regardless of location. 
12.  "Public wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity or a wireless registration number by the CPUC. 
13.  "Roof-mounted" means mounted above the eave line of a building. 
14.  "Stealth facility" means any communication facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a building or other concealing structure, and shall include and mean any concealed antenna. 
15.  "Wireless communication facility" means a structure that supports commercial antennas, microwave dishes and/or other related equipment that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. 
C.  Applicability. All wireless communication facilities shall be required to comply with the regulations and guidelines contained herein. 
D.  Development Regulation and Criteria. 
1.  General Policy. As part of the application process, applicants for wireless communication facilities shall provide written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort to locate facilities in accordance with the following guidelines: 
a.  Where possible, the applicant shall use stealth facilities or antennas that are architecturally integrated with a building or structure so as not to be recognized as an antenna. 
b.  Faculties should be located where existing vegetation, buildings, or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. 
c.  Ground-mounted wireless facilities should be located in close proximity to existing above-ground utilities, such as electrical substations, utility poles, light poles, water tanks, or trees of comparable height. 
d.  Wireless communication facilities shall be located in the following order of preference: 
i.  Co-located with other wireless communication providers on existing poles. 
ii.  Located on an existing structure such as a building or tower. 
iii.  Located in an industrially zoned district. 
2.  Locational Criteria. 
a.  Wireless communication facilities shall be allowed within the M zone subject to the review and approval of a minor use permit. 
b.  Wireless communication facilities shall be allowed within the CC and GC zones subject to the review and approval of a use permit. 
c.  In no case may a wireless communication facility be established within two hundred feet of any property used for residential purpose or two hundred feet from any residentially zoned property. 
3.  Development and Design Standards. 
a.  Height. All zoning requirements relative to height shall apply to a wireless communication facility. However, a ten-foot height bonus may be permitted to provide for co-locations. 
b.  Facilities shall be located to minimize views from the public right-of-way by siting them behind tall buildings or placing them near existing tall trees. 
c.  Wireless communication facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other required seals or legally required signs. 
d.  All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a facility shall be located within a building enclosure or underground vault subject to city approval. If the equipment is to be located above ground, it shall be visually compatible with surrounding buildings and include sufficient landscaping to screen the structure from public view. 
e.  Wireless communication facilities shall have subdued colors and use non-reflective materials which blend with surrounding materials and colors. 
f.  Poles shall be designed to prevent unauthorized climbing. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 4. - LAND USE AND DEVELOPMENT PERMIT PROCEDURES  
Chapter 17.38 - APPLICATION FILING AND PROCESSING 
 
17.38.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, and processing of applications for the land use permits required by this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.020 - Authority for land use and zoning decisions. 
Table 4-1 (Review Authority) identifies the city official or body responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application, land use permit, and other approvals required by this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.030 - Concurrent permit processing. 
When a single project incorporates different land uses or features so that this development code requires multiple land use permit applications, the applicable review authority may choose to require that all applications be reviewed, and approved or disapproved, by the highest level review authority assigned by Table 4-1 to any of the required applications. 
TABLE 4-1 
Review Authority 
Type of Decision 	See 
Section 	Role of Review Authority (1) 
		Director 	SPARC 
(2) 	Planning Commission 	City 
Council 
Administrative and Amendments 
 General Plan amendments 	17.70 			Recommend 	Decision 
 Interpretations 	17.02 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Zoning text amendments 	17.70 			Recommend 	Decision 
 Zoning Map amendments 	17.70 			Recommend 	Decision 
Land Use Permits and other Development Approvals 
 Administrative Deviations 	17.40.050 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Certificates of Occupancy 	17.40.070 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Home Occupation Permits 	17.36.060 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Planned Development Permit 	17.40.060 			Decision 	Appeal 
 Sign Permits 	17.34.030 	Decision (3) 	Decision 		
 Density Bonus 	17.36.050 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 
 Site Plan and Architectural Approval for multiple single family homes 	17.40.020 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
 Site Plan and Architectural Approval, for Commercial and Industrial buildings 	17.40.020 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
 Temporary Use Permits 	17.40.030 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Minor Use Permits 	17.40.040 	Decision (3) 		Appeal 	Appeal 
 Use Permits 	17.40.040 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 
 Variances 	17.40.050 	Recommend 		Decision 	Appeal 
 
Notes: 
(1)  "Recommend" means that the review authority makes a recommendation to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(2)  SPARC means the Site Plan and Architectural Approval Committee. (See Section 17.66.050) 
(3)  The Director may defer action on permit applications and refer the items to the Commission for the final decision. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.040 - Application preparation and filing. 
The preparation and filing of applications for land use permits, amendments (e.g., General plan, zoning map, and development code), and other matters pertaining to this development code shall comply with the following requirements: 
A.  Pre-application Review. 
1.  A prospective applicant or agent is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application review with the department before completion of project design and the formal submittal of a permit application. 
2.  A request by an applicant for pre-application review, accompanied by preliminary project plans and designs and the required filing fee, will be reviewed by affected city departments and other selected agencies. 
3.  The reviewing city staff members will inform the applicant of requirements as they apply to the proposed development project, provide a preliminary list of issues that will likely be of concern during formal application review, suggest possible alternatives or modifications to the project, and identify any technical studies that may be necessary for the environmental review process when a formal application is filed. 
4.  Neither the preapplication review nor information and/or pertinent policies provided by the department shall be construed as a department recommendation for approval or disapproval of the application/project. 
B.  Application Contents and Fee. Applications shall include the forms provided by the Department, and all information and materials required by the application content requirements handout provided by the department for the specific type of application (e.g., use permit, variance, or others), and the filing fee required by the council's fee resolution. 
C.  Eligibility, Filing. All land use permit and other applications required by this development code shall be filed with the department. Applications may be made by: 
1.  The owner of the subject property; or 
2.  Any other person, agent, or representative, with the written consent of the property owner. 
D.  Filing Date. The filing date of an application shall be the date on which the department receives the last submission, map, plan, or other material required as a part of that application by subsection B of this section, including appropriate filing fees, in compliance with Section 17.38.060 (Initial Application Review) and deemed complete by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.050 - Application fees. 
A.  Filing Fees Required. 
1.  The council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for amendments, entitlements, and other matters pertaining to this development code, referred to as the council's fee resolution. 
2.  The schedule of fees may be changed only by resolution of the council. 
3.  The city's processing fees are cumulative. For example, if an application for a parcel map also requires an administrative deviation, both fees shall be charged. 
4.  Processing shall not commence on an application until all required fees have been paid. 
5.  Without the application fee the application shall not be deemed complete. 
6.  The city is not required to continue processing any application unless additionally required fees are paid in full. 
7.  Failure to pay the applicable fees is grounds for disapproval of the application. 
B.  Refunds and Withdrawals. 
1.  Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover city costs of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing applications, no refunds due to a disapproval are allowed. 
2.  In the case of a withdrawal, the director may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to-date and determination of the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.060 - Initial application review. 
All applications filed with the department in compliance with this development code shall be initially processed as follows: 
A.  Completeness Review. The Director shall review all applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete in compliance with Section 17.38.040(B) (Application Contents and Fees), above. 
1.  Notification of Applicant. The applicant shall be informed in writing within thirty days of submittal, either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, shall be provided. All additional information needed shall be identified in the letter providing notice of an incomplete application. 
2.  Appeal of Determination. Where the director has determined that an application is incomplete, and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
3.  Environmental Information. The director may require the applicant to submit additional information needed for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 17.38.070 (Environmental Assessment), below. 
4.  Expiration of Application. If the applicant does not provide the additional information required in compliance with subsection (A)(1), above, within one hundred twenty days after the date of the letter requesting the additional information, the director may consider the application withdrawn if the director determines that reasonable progress toward completion of the application has not occurred. Application processing shall not resume thereafter until a new application is filed, including fees, plans, exhibits, and other materials that are required for any project on the same site. 
5.  Criteria for Acceptance. An application shall not be accepted as complete unless or until the director determines that it: 
a.  Is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan; development agreement, or previously approved use permit; 
b.  Is in compliance with zoning district requirements applicable to the site, except for a zoning map amendment or prezoning filed in compliance with Chapter 17.72 (Amendments); and 
c.  Includes all information and materials required by Section 17.38.040(B) (Application Contents and Fees). 
6.  Violations on the Site. 
a.  The director shall not find the application complete, and/or shall not process or approve the application, if conditions exist on the site in violation of this development code or any permit or other approval granted in compliance with this development code, other than an application for the approval, entitlement, or permit, if any, needed to correct the violation. 
b.  The director's authority under this subsection shall apply whether: 
i.  The current applicant was the owner of the subject property at the time the violation occurred; or 
ii.  The applicant is the current owner of the subject property with or without actual or constructive knowledge of the violation at the time of acquisition of the subject property. 
c.  The Director's decision may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
B.  Referral of Application. At the discretion of the director, or where otherwise required by this development code, state, or federal law, any application filed in compliance with this development code may be referred to any public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed land use activity. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.070 - Environmental assessment. 
After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed as required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.38.080 - Staff report and recommendations. 
A.  Staff Evaluation. The director shall review all applications filed in compliance with this chapter to determine whether they comply with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the municipal code, and the general plan. 
B.  Staff Report Preparation. 
1.  The department staff shall prepare a staff report that describes conclusions about the proposed land use and any development as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of this development code, other applicable provisions of the municipal code, the general plan, and any applicable specific plan. 
2.  The staff report shall include recommendations on the approval, approval with conditions, or disapproval of the application, based on the project evaluation, and consideration of information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report. 
C.  Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to the applicants at the same time as they are provided to the review authority before the public hearing on the application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.40 - PERMIT APPROVAL OR DISAPPROVAL 
 
17.40.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
A.  Permit Review Procedures. This chapter provides procedures for the final review, and approval or disapproval of the land use permit applications established by this development code. 
B.  Subdivision Review Procedures. Procedures and standards for the review and approval of subdivision maps are found in Article 5 (Subdivisions). 
C.  Application Filing and Initial Processing. Where applicable, the procedures of this chapter are carried out after those described in Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing), for each application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.40.020 - Site plan and architectural approval. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes procedures for the city's review of the design aspects of proposed development (for example, building design, landscaping, site planning and development, and signs). These procedures are not intended to restrict imagination, innovation, or variety in design, but rather to focus on design issues and solutions that will have the greatest effect on community character and aesthetics, to encourage imaginative solutions and high-quality urban design. The purposes of this section are, therefore, to: 
1.  Recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics and encourage the orderly and harmonious appearance of development within the community; 
2.  Ensure that new uses and structures enhance their sites and are compatible with the highest standards of improvement in the surrounding neighborhoods; 
3.  Better protect the increasing values, standards, and importance of land and development in the community; 
4.  Retain and strengthen the visual quality of the community; 
5.  Assist project developers in understanding the public's concerns for the aesthetics of development; and 
6.  Ensure that development complies with all applicable city standards and guidelines, and does not adversely affect community health, safety, aesthetics, or natural resources. 
B.  Applicability. Table 4-2 identifies when site plan and architectural approval is required, and the responsible review authority. 
TABLE 4-2 
Applicability of Site Plan and Architectural Approval 
Type of Project 	Site Plan and Architectural 
Approval Requirement 
	Exempt 	Director 
Review 	SPARC 
Review 
Individual single-family homes and accessory structures, including additions and alterations, under individual applications in the R-1, R-1E, and R-2 zoning districts. 	? 		
Ground floor additions and alterations deemed visually or functionally insignificant by the director. 	? 		
Multiple single-family detached homes and accessory structures in the R-1, R-1E, and R-2 zoning districts. (1) 			? 
Multi-family dwellings and accessory structures in the RMD and RHD zoning districts. (4) 			? 
Temporary structures that will be removed within one year. (2) 			? 
Additions and alterations in all zoning districts, except the R-1, R-1E, R-2, RMD, and RHD zones, that do not meet the specific criteria above. (2), (3) 			? 
Nonresidential development containing up to 10,000 square feet of total gross structure area. (3) 			? 
Nonresidential development containing 10,000 square feet or more of total gross structure area. (3) 			? 
All other land uses. 			? 
 
Notes: 
(1)  Only where the same basic design will be used more than once in the same subdivision. 
(2)  Landscaping plans may be required. 
(3)  Site plan and architectural approval shall be required for new structures and addition or reconstruction projects that are equal to fifty percent or greater of the floor area of the existing structures on the site and where the cumulative square footage of a development project exceeds ten thousand square feet, even though individual structures may be less than ten thousand square feet. 
(4)  Site plan and architectural approval shall be required for new multi-family projects on vacant parcels and new construction, additions or reconstruction projects that are equal to fifty percent or greater of the floor area of the existing structures on a developed site. 
C.  Timing of Site Plan and Architectural Approval. When required, site plan and architectural approval shall be granted before the issuance of the building permit or the establishment of a temporary open lot use. 
D.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval process. The site plan and architectural approval process shall be conducted as follows: 
1.  Application preparation, filing, initial processing. An application for site plan and architectural approval shall be prepared, filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
2.  Application Contents. The application shall be made on forms furnished by the department, and shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for site plan and architectural approval applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by subsection E (Findings and Decision), below. 
3.  Evaluation of Proposal. The review authority shall consider the design, location, site layout, and the overall effect of the proposed project upon surrounding properties and the city in general. The review shall compare the proposed project to applicable development standards, design guidelines, and other city regulations. 
4.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval by the Director. Decisions of the director on site plan and architectural approval applications shall comply with subsection E; conditions of approval may be imposed in compliance with subsection F. 
a.  Meeting. A meeting shall not be required unless requested in writing by an interested party before the director's action. 
b.  Director's Action. Specified applications for site plan and architectural approval, as identified in Table 4-2 (Applicability of Site Plan And Architectural Approval), above may be approved or disapproved by the director. 
c.  Referral to SPARC. The director may defer action on a site plan and architectural approval application and instead refer the matter to the SPARC for review and decision. 
5.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval by the SPARC. 
a.  SPARC's Decision. Decisions of the SPARC on site plan and architectural approval applications shall comply with subsection E and conditions of approval may be imposed in compliance with subsection F, below. 
b.  Notice and Meeting. Notice of the SPARC meeting shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
c.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval. An application for site plan and architectural approval shall be considered by the SPARC following approval of the project's land use entitlement by the applicable review authority. 
E.  Findings and Decision. The applicable review authority may approve a site plan and architectural approval application only after first finding that: 
1.  The design and layout of the proposed project would: 
a.  Be consistent with the development and design standards/guidelines of the applicable zoning district; 
b.  Not interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring existing or future developments, and not create traffic or pedestrian hazards; 
c.  Maintain and enhance the attractive, harmonious, and orderly development contemplated by this development code; and 
d.  Provide a desirable environment for its occupants, neighbors, and visiting public through good aesthetic use of durable materials, texture, and color. 
2.  The proposed development: 
a.  Would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the vicinity; and 
b.  Has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
F.  Conditions of Approval. In granting site plan and architectural approval, the review authority shall impose conditions as necessary to ensure compatibility with surrounding uses, and to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare. The conditions may include requirements regarding buffers, colors and materials, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc., deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will comply with the findings required by subsection E (Findings and Decision), above. 
G.  Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation that are identified in Article 6 (Development Code Administration), and those identified in Chapter 17.42 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the decision on a site plan and architectural approval application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. 1920, § 1, 6-1-2016)  
17.40.030 - Temporary use permits. 
A.  Purpose. This section establishes procedures for the granting of temporary use permits that allow short-term activities that may not meet the normal development or use standards of the applicable zoning district, but may be acceptable because of their temporary nature. 
B.  Applicability. Temporary land uses shall not be established, operated, or conducted in any manner without the approval and maintenance of a valid temporary use permit in compliance with this section. The following two categories of temporary uses identify the level of permit required, if any, based on the proposed duration, size, and type of use: 
1.  Exempt temporary uses are identified in subsection C (Exempt Temporary Uses), below; or 
2.  Temporary Use Permits are identified in subsection D (Allowed Temporary Activities), below. 
C.  Exempt Temporary Uses. The following minor and limited duration temporary uses are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall comply with subsection D (Allowed Temporary Activities), below. 
1.  Car Washes for Fund Raising. Car washes, limited to a maximum of two days each month for each sponsoring organization, on non-residential properties. Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious, or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax exempt organizations in compliance with 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and Taxation Code. 
2.  Construction Yards—On-site. On-site contractors' construction yards, in conjunction with an approved construction project on the same site. The construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs. 
3.  Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities. 
4.  Garage Sales. Garage sales are exempt from the requirement for a temporary use permit provided that sales occur no more often than two times per year per residence, for a maximum of three consecutive days each, or one time per year, for a maximum of six consecutive days each. 
D.  Allowed Temporary Activities. The following temporary uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a temporary use permit by the director. Uses that do not fall within the categories defined below shall comply with the use and development regulations and land use permit review provisions that otherwise apply to the property. 
1.  Construction Yards—Off-site. Off-site contractors' construction yards, in conjunction with an approved construction project. The permit shall expire and the construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project, or the expiration of the companion building permit authorizing the construction project, whichever first occurs. (See also subsection D.11., below, regarding temporary work trailers.) 
2.  Events. Outdoor events on private property including the following: 
a.  Amusement rides, arts and crafts exhibits, auctions, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs, farmer's markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, rodeos, rummage sales, second hand sales, swap meets, and tent revivals for ten consecutive days or less, or six two-day weekends, within a twelve-month period. 
b.  Outdoor meetings, group activities, or sales within parking areas, for seven consecutive days or less, within a one hundred eighty-day period. 
3.  Outdoor Displays/Sales. The temporary outdoor display/sales of merchandise (e.g., parking lot and sidewalk sales), in compliance with Section 17.36.080 (Outdoor Display and Retail Activities) shall be allowed only if the merchandise displayed is regularly sold on the same site. These activities shall be located immediately adjacent to the structure, and their duration shall not exceed three consecutive days within a ninety-day period. Any sales activity proposed within a public right-of-way shall require an encroachment permit. 
4.  Outdoor Sales of Flowers and Produce. The temporary outdoor sales of items (e.g., flowers, fruits, grapes, vegetables, etc.) grown on the subject property, in compliance with Section 17.36.080 (Outdoor Display and Retail Activities) which shall be allowed only if the property is engaged in agricultural production for the duration of the temporary use. The maximum duration shall not exceed one hundred eighty consecutive days, within a one-year period. 
5.  Residence. A mobile home as a temporary residence of the property owner when a valid building permit for a new single-family dwelling is in force, or for temporary caretaker quarters during the construction of a subdivision, multi-family, or non-residential project. The permit may be approved for a specified duration, or upon expiration of the building permit, whichever first occurs. 
6.  Seasonal Sales Lots. Seasonal sales activities (for example, pumpkins, Christmas trees, etc.) including temporary residence/security trailers, on non-residential properties, for forty-five days or less for each seasonal product, within a twelve-month period. 
7.  Temporary Model Homes. Temporary model homes and related facilities may be established within the area of an approved residential subdivision project, solely for the first sale of homes. 
8.  Temporary Real Estate Sales Offices. A temporary real estate sales office may be established within the area of an approved development project, solely for the first sale of homes. 
9.  Temporary Structures. A temporary classroom, office, or similar portable structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved, for a maximum time period of twenty-four months, as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project, in the commercial and industrial zoning districts. 
10.  Temporary Work Trailers. 
a.  A trailer or mobile home may be used as a temporary work site for employees of a business: 
i.  During construction of a subdivision or other development project when a valid building permit is in force; or 
ii.  Upon demonstration by the applicant that the temporary work site is a short-term necessity, while a permanent work site is being obtained. 
b.  A permit for temporary work trailers may be granted for up to twenty-four months. 
11.  Temporary Outdoor Sales. Temporary outdoor sales events (e.g., car sales) may be allowed only when directly related to an approved "point of sale" within the city that will ensure that the city receives its appropriate sales tax. 
12.  Similar Temporary Uses. Similar temporary uses which, in the opinion of the director, are compatible with the zoning district and surrounding land uses, and are necessary because of unusual or unique circumstances beyond the control of the applicant. 
E.  Application Filing, Processing, and Review. An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the department and processed in the following manner: 
1.  Application Contents. The application shall be made on forms furnished by the department, and shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for temporary use permit applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by subsection G. (Findings and Decision), below. 
2.  Time for Filing. An application for a temporary use permit shall be submitted for approval at least ten days before the date that the proposed use is scheduled to take place. 
3.  Public Hearing Not Required. A public hearing shall not be required for a decision on a temporary use permit. 
F.  Standards. Standards for floor areas, heights, landscaping, parking, setbacks, and other structure and property development standards that apply to the category of use or the zoning district of the subject site shall be used as a guide for determining the appropriate development standards for temporary uses. 
1.  Adjustment of Standards. The director may authorize an adjustment from the specific standards deemed necessary or appropriate consistent with the temporary nature of the use. 
2.  Removal of Materials and Structures Associated with the Temporary Use. All materials and structures associated with the temporary use shall be removed within ten days from the actual termination of operations, or after the expiration of the temporary use permit, whichever first occurs. 
3.  Other Permits Required. Temporary uses may be subject to additional licenses, inspections, or permits required by applicable local, state, or federal requirements. 
G.  Findings and Decision. 
1.  A temporary use permit may be approved, modified, conditioned, or disapproved by the director, without the requirement for a noticed pubic hearing. 
2.  The director may defer action and refer the application to the commission for review and decision at a scheduled public hearing. 
3.  The director may approve or conditionally approve a temporary use permit application, only after first finding that: 
a.  The establishment, maintenance or operation of the use would not, under the circumstances of the particular case, be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the proposed use; 
b.  The use, as described and conditionally approved, would not be detrimental or injurious to property and improvements in the neighborhood or to the general welfare of the city; 
c.  Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this development code; and 
d.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
H.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a temporary use permit, the director may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by subsection G (Findings and Decision), above. 
I.  Condition of Site Following Temporary Use. Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, or any other evidence of the temporary use upon completion or removal of the use, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this development code. The review authority may require appropriate security before initiation of the use to ensure proper cleanup after the use is finished. 
J.  Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation that are identified in Article 6 (Development Code Administration), and those identified in Chapter 17.42 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the decision on a temporary use permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.40.040 - Use permits and minor use permits. 
A.  Purpose. A use permit or minor use permit provides a process for reviewing uses and activities that may be appropriate in the applicable zoning district, but whose effects on a site and surroundings cannot be determined before being proposed for a specific site. The procedures of this section provide for the review of the configuration, design, location, and potential impacts of the proposed use, to evaluate the compatibility of the proposed use with surrounding uses and the suitability of the use to the site. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  A use permit or minor use permit is required to authorize proposed land uses and activities identified by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards) as being allowable in the applicable zoning district subject to the approval of a use permit or minor use permit; and 
2.  A use permit is required to allow the extension of a use for not more than fifty feet into a more restricted zoning district where the boundary line divides a "parcel of record" as defined in Article 7 (Definitions). 
C.  Review Authority. 
1.  Use Permits. Use permits shall be approved or disapproved by the commission. 
2.  Minor Use Permits. Minor use permits shall be approved or disapproved by the Director. 
a.  The director may choose to refer any minor use permit application to the commission for hearing and decision. 
b.  A minor use permit application shall be determined exempt from the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) in compliance with state law and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines or it shall be processed as a use permit. 
D.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for a use permit or minor use permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
E.  Project Review, Notice, and Hearing. Each application shall be reviewed by the director to ensure that the proposal complies with all applicable requirements of this development code. 
1.  Use Permit. The commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a use permit before a decision on the application. Notice of the hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
2.  Minor Use Permit. Before a decision on a minor use permit, the public notice shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings), and as follows: 
a.  Public Notice. The notice shall state that the director will decide whether to approve or disapprove the minor use permit application on a date specified in the notice, and that a public hearing will be held only if requested in writing by any interested person before the specified date for the decision. 
b.  Hearing. When a hearing is requested, notice of the hearing shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.74, and the director shall conduct the public hearing before a decision on the application in compliance with Chapter 17.74. 
F.  Findings and Decision. Following a public hearing, the commission may approve or disapprove an application for a use permit. The commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The commission may approve a use permit only after first finding that: 
1.  The proposed use is allowed with a use permit within the applicable zoning district and complies with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  The proposed use is consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
3.  The location, size, design and operating characteristics of the use or development is compatible with and shall not adversely affect or be materially detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the area, or be detrimental or injurious to public or private property or improvements; 
4.  The location, size, design, and operating characteristics of the proposed use would be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity; and 
5.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
G.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a use permit, the commission may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by subsection F (Findings and Decision), above. 
H.  Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation that are identified in Article 6 (Development Code Administration), and those identified in Chapter 17.42 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the decision on a use permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.40.050 - Variances and administrative deviations. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section allow for variances from the development standards of this development code. 
1.  Special Privileges Prohibited. 
a.  A variance may only be granted when, because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions, the strict application of this development code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts, or creates an unnecessary, and non-self created, hardship or unreasonable regulation which makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development standards. 
b.  A variance shall not be granted that would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts, or which is contrary to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare. 
2.  Does Not Extend to Uses. The power to grant variances does not extend to allowable land uses; flexibility in allowable land uses is provided in Section 17.40.040 (Use Permits). 
B.  Review Authority. Variances may be granted in compliance with the following: 
1.  Director. The director may grant administrative deviations, or may defer action and refer the application to the commission, in compliance with subsection D, below, and state law (Government Code Section 65901). 
2.  Commission. The commission may grant variances in compliance with subsection D. 
C.  Allowable Administrative Deviations. The director may approve an application for an administrative deviation from the development standards identified in Table 4-3, below, and for the sign standards of Chapter 17.34 (Signs) as provided in Section 17.34.080 (Exceptions to Sign Area Standards). 
TABLE 4-3 
Allowable Administrative Deviations 
Types of Administrative Deviations Allowed 	Maximum 
Adjustment 
1.  Area Requirements. A decrease in the minimum area requirements. (Not including minimum parcel area requirements — see number 6., below.) 	15 percent 
2.  Fence or Wall Height. An increase in the maximum allowable height of a fence or wall, in compliance with Section 17.30.080 (Walls, Fences, and Hedges). 	Up to a 2-foot increase 
3.  Floor Area Ratio (FAR). An increase in the maximum allowable FAR. 	10 percent 
4.  Landscaping Area. A decrease in the minimum landscaping area requirements. 	20 percent 
5. A decrease in the number of required loading spaces, but not exceeding two spaces. 	30 percent 
6.  Parcel Area. A decrease in the minimum required parcel area. 	10 percent 
7.  Parcel Coverage. An increase in the maximum allowable parcel coverage. 	10 percent 
8.  Parcel Depth or Width. A decrease in the minimum required parcel depth or width, only when the total parcel area requirements are met. 	10 percent 
9.  Parking. A decrease in the number of required parking spaces (Not exceeding 2 spaces). 	25 percent 
10.  Parking Lot Standards. A decrease in the minimum parking lot standards (e.g., aisle, driveway, and space widths). 	30 percent 
11.  Projections. An increase in the allowable projection of canopies, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, landings, masonry chimneys, overhangs, raised porches, stairways, and steps into required setback areas, but no closer than 3 feet to any property line. 	20 percent 
12.  Setback Areas. A decrease in the required setbacks. 
   Front setback: But no closer to the front property line than 10 feet. 	40 percent 
   Side setbacks: But no closer to the side property lines than 3 feet. 	40 percent 
   Rear setback: But no closer to the rear property line than 5 feet. 	30 percent 
13.  Signs. An increase in the maximum allowable sign area or height. 	10 percent 
14.  Structure Height. An increase in the maximum allowable structure height, but not to exceed an increase of five feet. 	30 percent 
15.  Other Standards. The director shall also be allowed to vary other standards including minor operational/performance standards relating to dust, glare, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise, etc. 	25 percent 
16.  Required Variance. A request which exceeds the limitations identified in this subsection shall require the filing of a variance application in compliance with subsection D, below. 	
 
D.  Variances. The commission may grant an adjustment from the requirements of this development code governing only the following development standards: 
1.  Development Standards. Any development standard identified in subsection C (Allowable Administrative Deviations), above where the requested adjustment exceeds the maximum limits for an administrative deviation; 
2.  Dimensional Standards. Dimensional standards including distance-separation requirements, fence and wall requirements, landscape and paving requirements, lighting, loading spaces, parcel area, parcel dimensions, parking areas, open space, setbacks, structure heights, etc.; 
3.  Numerical Standards. Number of off-street parking spaces, loading spaces, landscaping, etc.; 
4.  Signs. Sign regulations (other than prohibited signs); 
5.  Alteration, Enlargement, or Reconstruction of Nonconformities. To allow the alteration or enlargement of a nonconforming use, or the alteration, enlargement, or reconstruction of a structure in which a nonconforming use is conducted, when the changes (e.g., alteration, enlargement, or reconstruction) would be of distinct benefit to the zoning district in which the use or structure is located; and 
6.  Other. Other standards including operational/performance standards relating to dust, glare, hours of operation, landscaping, light, noise, number of employees, etc. 
E.  Application Requirements. An application for a variance shall be filed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filling and Processing). The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for variance applications. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by subsection G (Findings and Decision), below. 
F.  Notice and Hearings. 
1.  Administrative Deviations. A public hearing shall not be required for the director's decision on an administrative deviation. 
2.  Variances. 
a.  A public hearing shall be required for all variances, which shall be considered by the commission. 
b.  A public hearing shall be scheduled once the director has determined the application complete. 
c.  Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
G.  Findings and Decision. The applicable review authority shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. Following a public hearing, if required, the review authority may approve a variance application, with or without conditions, only after first finding that: 
1.  There are special circumstances applicable to the subject property (e.g., location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions), so that the strict application of this development code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts or creates an unnecessary and non-self created hardship or unreasonable regulation which makes it obviously impractical to require compliance with the development standards; 
2.  Granting the variance would: 
a.  Be necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of substantial property rights possessed by other property owners in the same vicinity and zoning district, and denied to the subject property owner; 
b.  Be consistent with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
c.  Not allow a use or activity which is not otherwise expressly authorized by the regulations governing the subject parcel and will not constitute a grant of special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and in the same zoning district; and 
d.  Not be materially detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in such vicinity and land use district in which the property is located. 
3.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
H.  Compliance with Findings. In approving a variance, the review authority may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to: 
1.  Compliance with Section. Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this section, and the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
2.  Special Privileges Prohibited. Ensure that the variance does not grant special privileges inconsistent with the limitations on other properties in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; 
3.  Compliance with Findings. Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by subsection G (Findings and Decision), above; and 
4.  Protect Interests. Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood. 
I.  Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation that are identified in Article 6 (Development Code Administration), and those identified in Chapter 17.42 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the decision on a variance application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.40.060 - Planned development permits. 
A.  Purpose. Planned development permits are intended to promote and encourage flexibility in the city's residential, commercial, and industrial zoning districts relating to property development, design, and open space areas, while protecting the public health, safety, general welfare, integrity, and character of the city, and ensuring consistency with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
1.  Projects proposed through planned development permit applications are encouraged and expected to produce a comprehensive development of greater quality than that normally resulting from more traditional development. 
2.  Project review shall determine whether the planned development permit should be approved by weighing the public need for, and the benefits to be derived from, the proposed project against the potential negative effects it may cause. 
B.  Applicability. An application for a planned development permit shall be considered by the commission and shall be available, at the discretion of the applicant, for development within all zoning districts of the city. 
1.  Land Use Activity. A planned development permit may not authorize a land use activity that is not allowed in the subject zoning district. 
2.  General Plan Compliance. Strict compliance with the purpose and intent of the general plan and any applicable specific plan shall be required. 
3.  Modify Standards. 
a.  The permit may adjust or modify, where necessary and justifiable, all applicable development standards (e.g., building envelope [coverage, height, and setbacks], fence and wall heights, landscaping, off-street parking [design and ratios], open space, street layout, etc.) identified in this development code, with the exception of an increase in the applicable density/intensity provisions. 
b.  Residential development projects with increased density or intensity standards may only be approved by the council in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65915). 
C.  Application Filing and Processing. An application for a planned development permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
D.  Project Review, Notice, and Hearing. 
1.  Each planned development permit application shall be analyzed by the director to ensure that the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this section. The director shall submit a staff report and recommendation to the commission for their consideration. 
2.  The commission shall conduct a public hearing on an application for a planned development permit before the approval or disapproval of the permit. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
E.  Findings and Decision. Following a public hearing, the commission may approve or disapprove an application for a planned development permit. The commission shall record the decision and the findings upon which the decision is based. The commission may approve a planned development permit only after first finding that: 
1.  The proposed development is: 
a.  Allowed within the subject base zoning district; 
b.  Generally in compliance with all of the applicable provisions of this development code relating to both on- and off-site improvements that are necessary to accommodate flexibility in site planning and property development and to carry out the purpose, intent, and requirements of the respective base zoning district, including prescribed development standards and applicable design guidelines; and 
c.  Consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
2.  The proposed project would produce a comprehensive development of superior quality (e.g., appropriate variety of structure placement and orientation opportunities, appropriate structure sizes, high quality architectural design, increased amounts of landscaping and open space, improved solutions to the design and placement of parking facilities, etc.) than which might otherwise occur from more traditional development applications and would provide a clear benefit to the city; 
3.  The design, location, shape, size, operating characteristics, and the provision of public and emergency vehicle access and public services and utilities (e.g., drainage, fire protection, sewers, water, etc.), would ensure that the proposed development would not endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and base zoning district in which the property is located; 
4.  The subject site is: 
a.  Physically suitable for the type and density/intensity of development being proposed; 
b.  Adequate in shape and size to accommodate the use and all fences and walls, landscaping, loading, open space, parking, yards, and other features generally required by this development code and necessary to support the proposed development; and 
c.  Served by streets adequate in width and pavement type to carry the quantity and type of traffic expected to be generated by the proposed development. 
5.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
F.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a planned development permit, the commission may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, off-site improvements, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by subsection E (Findings and Decision), above. 
G.  Post Approval Procedures. The procedures relating to appeals, changes, expiration, performance guarantees, and revocation that are identified in Article 6 (Development Code Administration), and those identified in Chapter 17.42 (Permit Implementation, Time Limits, and Extensions), shall apply following the decision on a planned development permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.40.070 - Certificates of occupancy. 
A.  Purpose. The provisions of this section allow for issuance of a certificate of occupancy authorizing the use of land or structures in compliance with this development code. 
B.  Applicability. Vacant land shall not be used or occupied, except for agricultural purposes, and no structure shall be altered, erected, moved, occupied, or used until a certificate of occupancy has been issued by the director or his designee. 
C.  Procedural Requirements. 
1.  A certificate of occupancy for the use of vacant land or for a change in the character of the use of land, as provided in this section, except for agricultural purposes, shall be applied for before the land is occupied or used. 
2.  The certificate of occupancy shall be issued within five days after the application has been made; provided, the use is in compliance with the provisions of this development code. 
3.  A certificate of occupancy for a new structure or the alteration, conversion, or reconstruction of an existing structure shall be applied for together with the application for building permit. The certificate shall be issued, if after inspection it is found that the structure complies with the provisions of this development code and all other the applicable requirements of law or ordinance. 
4.  A temporary certificate may be issued for the temporary use of a portion of the structure before the completion and occupancy of the entire structure. However, the temporary certificate shall only be issued under restrictions and provisions that will adequately ensure the safety of the occupants. 
5.  The certificate of occupancy shall state that the structure or proposed use of a structure or land is in compliance with all applicable city, state, and federal laws and regulations. 
6.  Copies of all certificates shall be kept on file in the community development department for public inspection, with copies of a certificate furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenant interest in the structure. 
7.  Fees shall not be charged for a certificate of occupancy. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.42 - PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS 
 
17.42.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides requirements for the implementation or "exercising" of the permits required by this development code, including time limits, and procedures for extensions of time. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.020 - Effective dates. 
The approval of a land use permit (e.g., site plan and architectural approval, planned development permit, temporary use permit, use permit, or variance) shall become effective on the 11th business day following the date of application approval by the appropriate review authority, where no appeal of the review authority's action has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.030 - Performance guarantees. 
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval or by action of the director to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance and proper completion of any approved work, and/or compliance with conditions of approval imposed by the review authority. The provisions of this section apply to performance guarantees for projects authorized by any of the land use permits required by this development code. 
A.  Form and Amount of Security. The required security shall be in a form approved by the director, upon recommendation of the city attorney. The amount of security shall be as determined by the director to be necessary to ensure proper completion of the work and/or compliance with conditions of approval. 
B.  Security for Maintenance. In addition to any improvement security required to guarantee proper completion of work, the director may require security for maintenance of the work, in an amount determined by the director to be sufficient to ensure the proper maintenance and functioning of improvements. 
C.  Duration of Security. Required improvement security shall remain in effect until final inspections have been made and all work has been accepted by the director, or until any warranty period required by the director has elapsed. Maintenance security shall remain in effect for one year after the date of final inspection. 
D.  Release or Forfeit of Security. 
1.  Upon satisfactory completion of work and the approval of a final inspection (or after the end of the required time for maintenance security), the improvement and/or maintenance deposits or bonds shall be released. 
2.  Upon failure to complete the work, failure to comply with all of the terms of any applicable permit, or failure of the completed improvements to function properly, the city may do the required work or cause it to be done, and collect from the permittee or surety all the costs incurred by the city, including the costs of the work, and all administrative and inspection costs. 
3.  Any unused portion of the security shall be refunded to the funding source after deduction of the cost of the work by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.040 - Time limits and extensions. 
A.  Time Limits. 
1.  Unless conditions of approval or other provisions of this development code establish a different time limit, any permit or approval granted in compliance with Chapter 17.40 (Permit Approval or Disapproval) that is not exercised within two years of its approval shall expire and become void, except where an extension of time is approved in compliance with subsection B, below. 
2.  The permit shall not be deemed "exercised" until the permittee has commenced actual construction (after obtaining any required construction permit) or has actually commenced the allowed use on the subject site in compliance with the conditions of approval. 
3.  For the purposes of this development code, actual construction shall mean the placing of construction materials in a permanent manner, excavation of a basement, or demolition of existing structures preparatory to rebuilding; provided, that in all cases construction work shall be diligently pursued until completion of the subject structure(s). 
4.  The land use permit shall remain valid after it has been exercised as long as a building permit is active for the project, or a final building inspection or certificate of occupancy has been granted. 
5.  If a project is to be developed in approved phases, each subsequent phase shall be exercised within two years from the date that the previous phase was exercised, unless otherwise specified in the permit, or the permit shall expire and be deemed void. If the project also involves the approval of a tentative map, the phasing shall be consistent with the tentative map and the permit shall be exercised before the expiration of the tentative map, or the permit shall expire and be deemed void. 
B.  Extensions of Time. Upon request by the applicant, the review authority may extend the time for an approved permit to be exercised in the following manner: 
1.  The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the department at least ten days before the expiration of the permit, together with the filing fee required by the council's fee resolution. 
2.  The burden of proof is on the permittee to establish with substantial evidence that the permit should not expire. If the review authority determines that the permittee has proceeded in good faith and has exercised due diligence in complying with the conditions in a timely manner, the review authority may grant a time extension for up to an additional one year from the date of the decision to extend the permit, provided that the review authority first finds that: 
a.  The proposed extension is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan, and the overall project remains consistent with those plans as they exist at the time the extension request is being considered; and 
b.  There are adequate provisions for public services and utilities (e.g., access, drainage, fire protection, sewers, water, etc.), to ensure that the proposed change would not endanger, jeopardize, or otherwise constitute a hazard to the public health, safety, or general welfare, or be injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and applicable zoning district. 
3.  No more than one time extension shall be granted. 
C.  Hearing on Expiration. At the request of the applicant, the review authority may hold a hearing on any proposed expiration of a permit, in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.050 - Changes to an approved project. 
A new development project or land use authorized through a permit granted in compliance with this development code shall be established only as approved by the review authority and subject to any conditions of approval, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section. 
A.  Request for Change. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request. Changes may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use. 
B.  Minor Changes. The director may approve changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved use if the changes: 
1.  Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this development code; 
2.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed in, or was a basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project; 
3.  Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically addressed in, or was a basis for conditions of approval for the project or that was a specific consideration by the review authority in the approval of the permit; and 
4.  Do not expand the approved floor area or any outdoor activity area by ten percent or more over the life of the project. 
C.  Major Changes. Changes to the project that do not comply subsection B, above, shall only be approved by the review authority through a new permit application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.060 - Permits to run with the land. 
A land use permit granted in compliance with this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership (e.g., of the site, structure, or use that was the subject of the permit application), provided that the use remains in compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code and any conditions of approval. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.070 - Resubmittals. 
A.  Resubmittals Prohibited within Twelve Months. For a period of twelve months following the disapproval or revocation/modification of a discretionary land use permit, entitlement, or amendment granted in compliance with this development code, no application for the same or substantially similar discretionary permit, entitlement, or amendment for the same site shall be filed. 
B.  Director's Determination. The director shall determine whether the new application is for a discretionary land use permit or other approval which is the same or substantially similar to the previously disapproved or revoked permit, entitlement, or amendment. 
C.  Appeal. The determination of the director may be appealed to the commission, in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
D.  Council Waiver. The council may waive the prohibition in subsection A, above if the council finds that by reason of changed legal, physical, or sociological circumstances, reconsideration would be in the best interests of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.42.080 - Covenants of easements. 
A.  Applicability. When necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city, the city may require a property owner holding property in common ownership to execute and record a covenant of easement in favor of the city, in compliance with Government Code Sections 65870 et seq. 
1.  A covenant of easement may be required to provide for emergency access, landscaping, light and air access, ingress and egress, parking, solar access, or for open space. 
2.  The covenant of easement may be imposed as a condition of approval by the review authority. 
B.  Form of Covenant. The form of the covenant shall be approved by the city attorney, and the covenant of easement shall: 
1.  Describe the real property to be subject to the easement; 
2.  Describe the real property to be benefited by the easement; 
3.  Identify the city approval or permit granted which relied on or required the covenant; and 
4.  Identify the purpose(s) of the easement. 
C.  Recordation. The covenant of easement shall be recorded in the county recorder's office. 
D.  Effect of Covenant. From and after the time of its recordation, the covenant of easement shall: 
1.  Act as an easement in compliance with state law (Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Civil Code), except that it shall not merge into any other interest in the real property. Civil Code Section 1104 shall be applicable to the conveyance of the affected real property; and 
2.  Impart notice to all persons to the extent afforded by the recording laws of the state. Upon recordation, the burdens of the covenant shall be binding on, and the covenant shall benefit, all successors-in-interest to the real property. 
E.  Enforceability of Covenant. The covenant of easement shall be enforceable by the successors-in-interest to the real property benefited by the covenant and the city. Nothing in this section creates standing in any person, other than the city, and any owner of the real property burdened or benefited by the covenant, to enforce or to challenge the covenant or any requested amendment or release. 
F.  Release of Covenant. The release of the covenant of easement may be effected by the commission, or the council on appeal, following a noticed public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
1.  The covenant of easement may be released by the city, at the request of any person, including the city or an affected property owner, on a finding that the covenant, on the subject property, is no longer necessary to achieve the land use goals of the city. 
2.  A notice of the release of the covenant of easement shall be recorded by the director with the county recorder's office. 
G.  Fees. The city shall impose fees to recover the city's reasonable cost of processing a request for a release. Fees for the processing shall be established by the council's fee resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.44 - DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS 
 
17.44.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter is adopted in compliance with the provisions of California Government Code Sections 65864 through 65869.5. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.020 - Application requirements. 
A.  Eligibility to Apply. Only a qualified applicant may file an application to enter into a development agreement. A qualified applicant is a person who has legal or equitable interest in the real property that is the subject of the development agreement. The director may require an applicant to submit proof of the applicant's interest in the real property and of the authority of any agent to act for the applicant. Before processing the application, the director may obtain the opinion of the city attorney as to the sufficiency of the applicant's interest in the real property to enter into the agreement. 
B.  Application Content. The director shall prescribe the form for each application along with a processing fee as adopted by the city council. The director may require an applicant to submit such information and supporting data as the director considers necessary to process the application. 
C.  Form of Agreement. Each application shall be accompanied by the form of standard development agreement established by the city and approved by the council with any additional alternatives, modifications or changes proposed by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.030 - Hearing notice. 
The director shall give notice of the city's intention to consider adoption of a development agreement in conjunction with any other public hearing required by law or this title, at least ten days prior to the hearing date. The form, content, and method of providing notice shall be consistent with notice requirements in Section 17.74.020 of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.040 - Review by planning commission. 
After a hearing by the planning commission, which may be held in conjunction with other required hearings for the project including amendments to the general plan, rezonings, subdivision maps, or conditional use permits, the planning commission shall make its recommendation in writing to the council. The recommendation shall include consideration of the following: 
A.  Consistency with the objectives, policies, general land uses and programs specified in the general plan and any applicable specific plan; 
B.  Consistency with the provisions of this development code; 
C.  Conformity with public health, safety and general welfare; 
D.  The affect on the orderly development of property or the preservation of property values; and 
E.  Whether the provisions of the agreement shall provide sufficient benefit to the city to justify entering into the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.050 - Council hearing. 
Following notice as provided by Section 17.44.030 above, the council shall hold a public hearing. It may accept, modify or disapprove the recommendation of the planning commission. The council shall not approve the development agreement unless it finds that the provisions of the agreement are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. If the council approves the development agreement, it shall do so by the adoption of an ordinance. After the ordinance approving the development agreement takes effect, the city may enter into the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.060 - Amendment or cancellation. 
Either party may propose an amendment to, or cancellation in whole or in part, of an executed development agreement. If proposed by the developer, the procedure for proposing and adoption of an amendment to or cancellation in whole or in part of the development agreement shall be the same as the procedure for entering into an agreement in the first instance. However, where the city initiates the proposed amendment to or cancellation of the development agreement, it shall first give at least thirty days notice to the property owner of its intention to initiate such proceedings in advance of the giving of public notice of hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.070 - Recordation of agreement, amendment or cancellation. 
A.  Within ten days after the city enters into the development agreement, the city clerk shall have the agreement recorded with the county recorder. 
B.  If the parties to the agreement or their successors in interest amend or cancel the agreement as provided in Government Code Section 65865.1 for failure of the application to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the agreement, the city clerk shall likewise have record notice of such action with the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.44.080 - Periodic review. 
The city shall review the development agreement every twelve months from the date the agreement is entered into. 
A.  The director shall begin the review proceeding by giving notice that the city intends to undertake a periodic review of the development agreement to the property owner. The director shall give the notice at least thirty days before the date when the matter shall be considered by the council. 
B.  The council shall receive the director's report at a regularly scheduled city council meeting. A public hearing may be held but is not required. At the meeting, the property owner must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement. The burden of proof on this issue is upon the property owner. If a public hearing is held, notice of the hearing shall be given as provided above by Section 17.44.030 above. 
C.  The council shall determine whether or not the property owner has, for the period under review, complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement. 
D.  If the council finds and determines that the property owner has complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the review for that period is concluded. If the council finds and determines that the property owner has not complied in good faith with the terms and conditions of the agreement during the period under review, the council shall order the property owner to cure the default within sixty days. If the property owner fails to do so, the council may modify or terminate the agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 5. - SUBDIVISIONS  
Chapter 17.46 - APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION OF SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS 
 
17.46.010 - Purpose of article. 
The provisions of this article constitute the city of Lodi Subdivision Regulations. These provisions are intended to supplement, implement, and work with the Subdivision Map Act, Sections 66410 et seq. of the California Government Code (hereafter referred to as the "Map Act"). This article is not intended to replace the Map Act, and must be used in conjunction with the Map Act in the preparation of subdivision applications, and the review, approval, and improvement of proposed subdivisions. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.46.020 - Authority. 
This article is adopted in compliance with the Map Act as a local ordinance, as the term is used in the Map Act. All provisions of the Map Act and future amendments to the Map Act not incorporated in this article shall, nevertheless, apply to all subdivision maps and proceedings under this article. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.46.030 - Applicability. 
A.  Subdivision Approval Required. All subdivisions within the city shall be authorized through a map or other approval in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Subdivision Map Approval Requirements), and all other applicable provisions of this article. 
B.  Conflicts with Map Act. In the event of any conflicts between the provisions of this article and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control. 
C.  Compliance with Other Regulations Required. The approval or conditional approval of a subdivision map shall not authorize or be deemed to authorize an exception or deviation from any zoning regulation in this development code, or as an approval to proceed with any development in violation of other applicable provisions of the municipal code or other applicable ordinances or regulations of the city. 
D.  Exceptions. This part shall not apply to the following: 
1.  The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar spaces within apartment, commercial, or industrial structures, mobile home parks, or trailer parks (Section 66412(a)); 
2.  Gas, mineral, or oil leases (Section 66412 (b)); 
3.  Boundary line or exchange agreements to which the State Lands Commission or a local agency holding a trust grant of tide and submerged lands is a party (Section 66412(e)); 
4.  Any separate assessment in compliance with State Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2188.7 (Section 66412(f)); 
5.  The leasing of or the granting of an easement to a parcel of land or any portion(s) of the land, in conjunction with the erection, financing, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the city (Section 66412(i)); 
6.  The financing or leasing of any parcel of land, or any portion of the land, in conjunction with the construction of commercial or industrial structures on a single parcel, unless the project is not subject to review under other city ordinances regulating design and improvements (Section 66412.1(a)); 
7.  The financing or leasing of existing separate commercial or industrial structures on a single parcel (Section 66412.1(b)); 
8.  The construction, financing, or leasing of a second dwelling unit under Government Code Sections 65852.1 and 65852.2, but this development code shall apply to the sale or ownership transfer of the second dwelling unit (Section 66412.2); 
9.  Leasing of agricultural land for agricultural purposes (e.g., the cultivation of food or fiber, and grazing or pasturing of livestock) (Section 66412(k)); 
10.  Subdivisions of four parcels or less for the construction of removable commercial structures having a floor area of less than one hundred square feet (Section 66412.5); 
11.  The subdivision of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation (defined in Public Utilities Code Section 230) which is created by a short-term lease (terminable by either party on not more than thirty days notice in writing) (Section 66428); 
12.  Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for right-of-way, unless a showing is made in individual cases, upon substantial evidence, that public policy necessitates a parcel map. "Land conveyed to or from a governmental agency" includes a fee interest, a leasehold interest, an easement, or a license (Sections 66428 and 66426.5); and 
13.  The leasing or licensing of a portion of a parcel, or the granting of an easement, use permit, or similar right to a telephone corporation exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, if the action is subject to discretionary action by the city (Section 66412(j)). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.46.040 - Responsibility for administration. 
The community development director and public works director are authorized and directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this article and applicable provisions of the Map Act for subdivisions within the city, except as otherwise provided by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.46.050 - Advisory agency. 
A.  Advisory Agency Established. The advisory agency for subdivision review shall be the planning commission. 
B.  Authority and Duties. The advisory agency shall perform the following duties, and as further detailed in Section 17.46.060 (Authority for Subdivision Decisions). 
1.  Approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove all tentative maps; 
2.  Recommend modifications of the requirements of this article; 
3.  Review and make recommendations concerning proposed subdivisions in adjacent cities, and in the unincorporated areas of San Joaquin County in compliance with the Map Act when the advisory agency has elected to do so; 
4.  Perform additional duties and exercise additional authorities as prescribed by law and by this article. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.46.060 - Authority for subdivision decisions. 
Table 5-1 (Authority for Subdivision Decisions) identifies the city official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of subdivision application and other decision required by this article. 
TABLE 5-1 - AUTHORITY FOR SUBDIVISION DECISIONS 
Type of Subdivision 
Application or Decision 	Role of Review Authority (1) 
	Community Development Director 	Public Works Director 	Commission 	Council 
Amendments to Approved Tentative and Tentative Parcel Maps and Conditions 	Decision 		Decision/Appeal 	Appeal 
Amendments to Recorded Maps 		Decision 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Certificate of Compliance 	Decision 	Recommend 	Appeal 	Appeal 
Condominiums (with Final Maps) 
 Non-Residential Condominiums 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
 Residential Condominiums 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Condominiums Conversions 
 Non-Residential Condominiums 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
 Residential Condominiums 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 
Extensions of Time — Tentative and Tentative Parcel Maps 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Final Map 	Recommend 	Recommend 		Decision 
Final Parcel Map 		Decision 		
Improvement Agreements 		Decision 		Appeal 
Lot Line Adjustment 	Decision 	Recommend 	Decision (2) 	Appeal 
Merger 	Decision 	Recommend 	Decision (2) 	Appeal 
Reversion to Acreage Maps 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Subdivision Improvement Plans 		Decision 		Appeal 
Tentative Map, Vesting Tentative Map 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Tentative Parcel Map 	Recommend 	Recommend 	Decision 	Appeal 
Wavier of Parcel Maps 		Decision 		
 
Notes: 
(1)  "Recommend means that the review authority makes a recommendation on the approval or disapproval of the request to a higher decision-making body; "Decision" means that the review authority makes the final decision on the matter; "Appeal" means that the review authority may consider and decide upon appeals to the decision of an earlier decision-making body, in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(2)  The community development director may refer the matter to the commission for review and decision. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.48 - SUBDIVISION MAP APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.48.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter determines when city approval of a tentative map, parcel or final map is required. In general, the procedure for subdivision first requires the approval of a tentative map, and then the approval of a parcel map (for four or fewer parcels) or a final map (for five or more parcels) to complete the subdivision process. The tentative map review process is used to evaluate the compliance of the proposed subdivision with the adopted city standards, and the appropriateness of the proposed subdivision design. Parcel and final maps are precise engineering documents that detail the location and dimensions of all parcel boundaries in an approved subdivision and, after approval, are recorded in the office of the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.48.020 - Type of subdivision approval required. 
Any subdivision of an existing parcel into two or more parcels shall require approval by the city in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
A.  Tentative Map Requirements. Any subdivision or resubdivision of land within the city shall require the filing and approval of a tentative map in compliance with Map Act Section 66426, except as otherwise provided by the Map Act. 
B.  Parcel and Final Map Requirements. A parcel or final map shall be required as follows: 
1.  Parcel Map. A parcel map shall be prepared and filed in compliance with Chapter 17.54 for a subdivision creating four or fewer parcels when required by the Map Act, except where Map Act Section 66426 exempts a subdivision from this requirement. 
2.  Final Map. The filing and approval of a final map (Chapter 17.54) shall be required for a subdivision of five or more parcels. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.48.030 - Applications deemed approved. 
Any subdivision application deemed approved in compliance with Government Code Section 65956 or Map Act Article 2, Chapter 3 (Government Code Sections 66452 et seq.), shall be subject to all applicable provisions of this article which shall be satisfied by the subdivider before any building permits or land use permits are issued. Parcel or final maps filed for record after their tentative map is deemed approved shall remain subject to all the mandatory requirements of this article and the Map Act, including Map Act Sections 66473, 66473.5 and 66474. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.48.040 - Exceptions to subdivision standards. 
An exception to any of the provisions of this article may be requested by a subdivider in compliance with this section. An exception shall not be used to waive or modify provisions of the Map Act, or any provision of this article that is duplicated or paraphrased from the Map Act. 
A.  Application. An application for an exception shall be submitted on forms provided by the department together with the required filing fee. The application shall include a description of each standard and requirement for which an exception is requested, together with the reasons why the subdivider believes the exception is justified. 
B.  Filing and Processing. A request for an exception may be filed with the tentative map application to which it applies, or after approval of the tentative map. An exception shall be processed and acted upon in the same manner as the tentative map, concurrently with the tentative map if the exception request was filed at the same time. The approval of an exception shall not constitute approval of the tentative map and shall not extend the time limits for the expiration of the map established by Section 17.52.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits, Expirations, and Time Extensions). 
C.  Approval of Exception. The planning commission shall have the authority to approve or deny exception requests in compliance with this section. The commission shall not grant an exception unless all the following findings are first made: 
1.  There are exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions applicable to the proposed subdivision, including size, shape, topography, location, or surroundings; 
2.  The exceptional or extraordinary circumstances or conditions are not due to any action of the subdivider subsequent to the enactment of this article; 
3.  The exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the vicinity and zoning district and denied to the proposed subdivision; 
4.  Granting the exception will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare nor injurious to the property or improvements in the vicinity and zoning district in which the property is located; and 
5.  The exception will not affect the consistency of the proposed subdivision with the general plan or any applicable specific plan. 
D.  Conditions of Approval. In granting an exception, the commission shall secure substantially the same objectives of the regulations for which the exception is requested and shall impose whatever conditions it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, general welfare and convenience, and to mitigate any environmental impacts in compliance with CEQA. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.50 - SUBDIVISION DESIGN AND IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS 
 
17.50.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes standards for the design and layout of subdivisions, and the design, construction or installation of public improvements within subdivisions. The purpose of these standards is to ensure, through careful site evaluation and design, the creation of new usable parcels that are consistent with the general plan and any applicable specific plan. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.020 - Applicability of design and improvement standards. 
The requirements of this chapter apply to subdivisions, and applicable requirements of this article, as follows: 
A.  Extent of Required Improvements. All subdivisions shall provide the improvements required by this article, and any additional improvements required by conditions of approval. 
B.  Applicable Design Standards, Timing of Installation. The subdivider shall construct all on- and off-site improvements according to standards approved by the public works director. No final map shall be presented to the council or parcel map to the public works director for approval until the subdivider either completes the required improvements, or enters into an agreement with the city for the work. 
C.  Subdivision Improvement Standards—Conditions of Approval. The applicable subdivision improvement and dedication requirements of this article and any other improvements and dedications required by the review authority in compliance with Section 17.52.070 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval), shall be described in conditions of approval adopted for each approved tentative map (Section 17.52.080). The design, construction or installation of all subdivision improvements shall comply with the requirements of the public works director. 
D.  Conflicting Provisions. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and other provisions of this development code, or other provisions of the municipal code, the most restrictive provisions shall control. In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the Map Act, the Map Act shall control. 
E.  Extent of Improvements Required—Four or Fewer Parcels. Improvements required for subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be limited to those allowed by Map Act Section 66411.1. 
F.  Oversizing of Improvements. The oversizing of the improvements required to be installed by the subdivider for the benefit of the subdivision may be required in compliance with the Map Act. 
G.  City Construction. The city may install or construct certain improvements, such as street signs, water tie-ins, water and sewer taps, etc., which shall be at the expense of the subdivider as shown in the improvement agreement. 
H.  Exceptions. Exceptions to the provisions of this article may be requested and considered in compliance with Section 17.48.040 (Exceptions to Subdivision Standards). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.030 - Access, circulation, streets. 
Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide adequate access from each new parcel to a city street, in compliance with this section. 
A.  General Access and Circulation Requirements. The subdivider shall provide a comprehensive circulation system, designed and constructed in compliance with this section, the city's public improvement design standards and construction specifications, and with the circulation element of the general plan. 
1.  Public streets shall be required when: 
a.  The street is shown as an arterial or collector in the circulation element of the general plan, or any specific plan; 
b.  The street will be used by the general public as a through access route; or 
c.  A public street is necessary for special needs including but not limited to bus routes, public service access, bicycle routes and pedestrian access. 
2.  Private streets are allowed only in compliance with subsection F, following. 
B.  Alternative Standards. The review authority may consider and approve proposed access and street design solutions that differ from the provisions of this section, and the city's improvement standards where deemed necessary to properly address the characteristics of adjacent land uses and/or anticipated traffic volumes, or to maintain neighborhood character. The use of alternative standards shall be authorized through the exception procedure in Section 17.48.040. 
C.  Access to Subdivision. Every subdivision shall be designed to have access to a city street. Access shall be provided by: 
1.  The subdivision abutting a city street, where the length of the subdivision along the street, the street right-of-way, and the width of the right-of-way will accommodate the construction of all road improvements required by this section; or 
2.  The subdivision being connected to a city street by a non-exclusive right-of-way easement for street, utility, and appurtenant drainage facilities purposes, where the easement shall be: 
a.  Offered for dedication; 
b.  Unencumbered by any senior rights that might serve to restrict its proposed use; and 
c.  Of a width and location to accommodate the construction of all improvements required by this section and the city's public improvement design standards and construction specifications. 
D.  Access to New Parcels. Parcels within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access as follows: 
1.  City Street Access Required. Each parcel within a proposed subdivision shall be provided access by being located on an existing city street or a new city street designed and improved in compliance with subsection C, or to a private street if allowed by subsection F. 
2.  Frontage Roads. When lots are proposed to front on a major arterial or state highway, the review authority may require the subdivider to dedicate and improve a service or frontage road separate from the arterial or highway. 
3.  Waiver of Direct Street Access. Whenever the review authority finds a safety hazard would be created as the result of direct access, the review authority may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to the street from any property shown on a final map as abutting the street, and that if the dedication is accepted, the waiver shall become effective in compliance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. The review authority may also require waivers of access to an existing, already dedicated street that abuts the subdivision. 
E.  Design and Improvement of Proposed Streets. New streets proposed or required within a new subdivision or adjacent to a new subdivision shall be located and designed in compliance with adopted city policies, and in compliance with the city's public improvement design standards and construction specifications. 
1.  Access to Unsubdivided Property. When a proposed subdivision abuts vacant land that is designated by the general plan for future subdivision and development, the review authority may require that streets to be constructed with the proposed subdivision be extended to the boundary of the property to provide access to the future development. 
2.  Improvements to Existing Streets. 
a.  The subdivider shall dedicate and improve all streets, including curbs, gutters, sidewalks and street pavement in accordance with adopted city policies. 
b.  If street improvements exist that do not meet existing city standards or are inadequate or a hazard to the general public, then these improvements shall be reconstructed to current city standards. 
3.  Reimbursement for Excess Street Width. The subdivider or developer may be reimbursed for excess width street construction and right-of-way or for construction or permanent improvements which front adjacent property. Reimbursement shall be made by private reimbursement agreement in accordance with Chapter 17.62. For purposes of this section excess width streets are defined as: 
a.  New streets over sixty-eight feet in width; 
b.  Widenings of existing street in excess of one-half of the adjacent side of the right-of-way. 
F.  Private Streets. Private roads are allowed as provided in this section. Private streets shall not be permitted except where the commission determines that a private street system will adequately serve the proposed subdivision, will not be a substantial detriment to adjoining properties and will not disrupt or prevent the establishment of an orderly circulation system in the vicinity of the subdivision. 
1.  Maintenance Requirements. Provisions satisfactory to the public works director and city attorney shall be made for lot owners association or other organization to assume responsibility for the maintenance of private streets and ownership of the street right-of-ways of any subdivision. 
2.  Security and Conditions. The commission and/or council may require any guarantees and conditions it deems necessary to carry out the provisions of this article pertaining to private streets. Private streets and easements providing access to parcels within a subdivision shall be located and shown on the parcel or final map. 
G.  Alternative Circulation Systems. Proposed subdivisions shall be designed to provide rights-of-way for pedestrian paths, bikeways and multiple use trails consistent with the circulation element of the general plan, and/or other applicable general plan provisions. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. No. 1883, § 1, 9-4-2013)  
17.50.040 - Energy conservation. 
The design of a subdivision for which a tentative and final map are required by this article shall provide, to the extent feasible, for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities in the subdivisions, in compliance with Map Act Section 66473.1. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.050 - Grading. 
Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a grading plan prepared and signed by a registered civil engineer shall be submitted to the public works director. For subdivisions requiring a public improvement plan, a grading plan shall be provided with the improvement plan. 
A.  Grading Plan Content. Grading plans shall show: The elevations of the natural ground at all lot corners; the finished grade at corners; the finished pad elevation; finished floor elevations; rates and directions of all drainage swales; finished sidewalk elevations at all front lot lines; and existing topographic elevations and drainage direction a minimum of one hundred feet outside the boundary of proposed project area and/or map. 
B.  Minimum Slopes. The minimum rate of grade of all drainage swales on lots shall be one-half of one percent. 
C.  Pad Elevation, Residential. The building pad elevation of residential lots shall be established at a minimum of ten inches above the design sidewalk elevation at the low side of the lot. The finished floor elevation of slab floor houses shall be a minimum of sixteen inches above the sidewalk elevation. The pad elevation of all residential lots shall be established at least one foot above the water surface in an adjacent storm drain channel or the ponded surface in an adjacent sump for collection of storm drain waters. 
D.  Lot Drainage. No inter-lot or a cross drainage shall be permitted. All lots shall drain their own water to the public street or public drainage facility without passing through or across an adjacent lot. No lot shall drain water over the bank of a flood control channel. 
E.  Grading Exceptions. Specific exceptions to the above requirements may be authorized at the discretion of the public works director. Exceptions are considered to be the case of an individual lot or at most a tier of lots and are not to be construed as extending to an entire subdivision. 
F.  As-built Grading Plan. Upon completion of grading operations the owner shall furnish to the public works director two prints of an as-built grading plan prepared by the owner's engineer. In case no grading plan had been prepared and no grading permit had been granted, the subdivider shall furnish to the public works director two prints of a map signed by the owner's engineer and certifying that no fills had been made on the lots or else two prints of a map prepared by the owner's engineer showing the location and depth of all compacted or uncompacted fills that had been made. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.060 - Erosion and sediment control. 
New subdivisions shall be designed so that all proposed grading incorporates appropriate erosion and sediment control measures in compliance with the city's grading and water pollution control regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.070 - Landscaping. 
A.  Landscaping Requirements. Landscaping shall be provided as follows, and in compliance with Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping), where applicable. 
1.  Residential Subdivisions. Residential subdivisions shall be provided landscaping in the form of street trees on each proposed parcel that is not a flag lot, landscaping with irrigation facilities for any common areas or other open space areas within the subdivision, and any additional landscaping required by the review authority. Proposed street trees shall be as required by the public works director, and the plantings shall comply with the city's standard specifications. 
2.  Nonresidential Subdivisions. Nonresidential subdivisions shall be provided landscaping as required by the review authority. 
B.  Plant Materials, Irrigation. All proposed and/or required trees, shrubs, ground covers, vines, turf, and other plant materials shall be of a type approved by the community development director and, to the greatest extent practicable, shall be of drought-resistant and drought-tolerant types or varieties. Plant materials and irrigation systems shall comply with the requirements of Chapter 17.30 (Landscaping) of this development code. The subdivider shall provide a mechanism or system for the permanent maintenance of any common area or open space landscaping. 
C.  Deferral of Installation. The installation of required landscaping may be deferred until the development of the subdivided lots through the provisions of Section 17.60.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), provided that interim erosion and sediment control measures are first installed in compliance with Section 17.50.060 above (Erosion and Sediment Control). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.080 - Monuments. 
The subdivider shall install monuments in compliance with Chapter 17.64 (Surveys and Monuments), and the Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.090 - Parcel and block design. 
The size, shape and arrangement of proposed parcels shall comply with this section, or with any general plan policy, applicable specific plan requirement, or other municipal code provisions applicable to a proposed subdivision. 
A.  Parcel Area. The minimum area for new parcels shall be as required by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), except as otherwise provided by this section. 
1.  Calculation of Area. When calculating the area of a parcel to determine compliance with this section, Article 2, or the general plan, the following shall be deducted from the gross area of any parcel, regardless of whether they may be used by the general public or are reserved for residents of the subdivision. 
a.  A vehicular or non-vehicular access easement through the parcel; 
b.  An easement for an open drainage course, whether a ditch, natural channel or floodway; or 
c.  The "flag pole" (access strip) of a flag lot. 
2.  Minimum Lot Area Requirements for Common Interest Projects. The minimum lot area requirements of Article 2 shall not apply to condominiums and condominium conversions, planned developments, townhouses, zero lot line, and similar projects, but shall apply to the creation of the original parcel or parcels that are the location of the common interest development. 
3.  Flag Lots. The "flag pole" (access strip) portion of a flag lot shall not be less than sixteen feet wide nor longer than one hundred feet from the public street right-of-way to the buildable portion of the flag lot. 
B.  Dimensions. The dimensions of new parcels shall comply with the applicable provisions of Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards), or as otherwise required by the review authority. Lots shall be measured at right angles to the street on straight street and shall be approximately radial on curved streets. 
C.  Driveway Standards. Proposed parcels shall be designed to accommodate driveways designed in compliance with Section 17.32.080 (Driveways and Site Access) of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.100 - Public utilities and utility easements. 
Each approved parcel shall be provided connections to public utilities, including electricity, gas, water, wastewater, and telecommunications services, which shall be installed as part of the subdivision improvements as provided by this section, and by Section 17.50.130 (Wastewater). 
A.  Underground Utilities Required. Utilities in new subdivisions shall be installed underground, as follows. These requirements do not apply to utility lines which do not serve the area being subdivided: 
1.  When Undergrounding is Required. All existing and proposed utility distribution facilities (including electric, telecommunications and cable television lines) installed in and for the purpose of supplying service to any subdivision shall be installed underground. Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, including transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts, shall also be located underground, unless otherwise approved by the review authority based on the recommendations of the public works director and the community development director. 
The subdivider is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section and shall make the necessary arrangements with the affected utility companies for facility installation. The review authority may waive the requirements of this section if topographical, soil, or other site conditions make underground installation infeasible or impractical. 
2.  Location of Installation. Underground utility lines may be installed within street rights-of-way or along a lot line, subject to appropriate easements being provided if necessary. When installed within street rights-of-way, their location and method of installation, insofar as it affects other improvements within the street right-of-way, shall be subject to the approval of the public works director. 
B.  Overhead Lines. When overhead utility lines are approved by the review authority, easements shall be located at the rear of lots where practical, and along the side of lots where necessary. 
C.  Timing of Installation. All underground utilities, water lines, sanitary sewers, and storm drains installed in streets, shall be constructed before the streets are surfaced. Connections to all underground utilities, water lines, and sanitary sewers shall be laid to sufficient lengths to avoid the need for disturbing the street improvements when service connections are made. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.110 - Residential density. 
The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within a proposed subdivision shall not exceed the density established by the general plan for the site and the maximum number of dwelling units permitted by the applicable zoning district. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.120 - Public water system. 
With the filing of the improvement plans for the first unit of any subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a master water plan conforming to the city's master water plan for the entire area covered by the tentative map. The subdivider shall install fire hydrants in compliance with the requirements of the city fire chief. Hydrants may be required outside the limits of the subdivision for the purpose of serving the subdivision. If the subdivider is required to install water mains that may serve or benefit properties other than the proposed development, the city may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider as outlined in Chapter 17.62 (Reimbursements for Construction). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.130 - Wastewater. 
With the filing of the improvement plans for the first unit of any subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a master sanitary sewer plan conforming to the city's design standards and master sanitary sewer plan for the entire area covered by the tentative map. If the subdivider is required to install sanitary sewers that may serve or benefit properties other than the proposed development, the city will enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider as outlined in Chapter 17.62 (Reimbursements for Construction). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.140 - Storm drains. 
A.  With the filing of the improvement plans for the first unit of any subdivision, the subdivider shall submit a master storm drainage plan for the entire area covered by the tentative map. The drainage system shall be designed in compliance with city design standards and the city master storm drainage plan. 
B.  All storm drains and drainage facilities not part of the city's master drainage program are the responsibility of the subdivider. The subdivider shall receive credits, as established by the council from time-to-time by resolution, for all storm drain lines and manholes constructed by the subdivider. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.50.150 - Street lighting. 
The subdivider shall install electrical facilities and street lights in accordance with city policy. All plans shall be approved by the city electric utility department. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.52 - TENTATIVE MAP FILING AND PROCESSING 
 
17.52.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval or disapproval of tentative maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.020 - Tentative map preparation, application contents. 
Tentative map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the community development department and the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.030 - Tentative map filing, initial processing. 
A.  General Filing and Processing Requirements. Tentative map applications shall be submitted to the community development department for processing, be reviewed for completeness and accuracy, referred to affected agencies, reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) where applicable, and evaluated in a staff report in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
B.  Referral to Affected Agencies. In addition to the procedures outlined in Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing), a tentative map application shall be referred to the agencies outlined in this subsection as required by the Map Act, as well as any other city department, county, state or federal agency, or other individual or group that the community development director believes may be affected by the subdivision, or may have information useful to the city about issues raised by the proposed subdivision. 
1.  Time Limits for Referrals. As required by Map Act Sections 66453 through 66455.7, referral shall occur within five days of the tentative map application being determined to be complete in compliance with Section 17.38.060 (Initial Application Review) of this development code. An agency wishing to respond to a referral shall provide the department with its recommendations by the due date set by the community development director after receiving the tentative map application. 
2.  Required Referrals. The community development director shall refer tentative map applications for review and comment to any of the following agencies that will be expected to provide service to the proposed subdivision. 
a.  City departments; 
b.  County agencies; 
c.  Other cities and local agencies; 
d.  Public utilities; and 
e.  State agencies. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.040 - Evaluation of application. 
After completion of the initial processing and the application being deemed complete in compliance with Section 17.38.060, the community development director shall: 
A.  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this article, the general plan, any applicable specific plan, and the Map Act; 
B.  Review the tentative map in compliance with CEQA; 
C.  Determine the extent to which the proposed subdivision complies with the findings in Section 17.52.070 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval); and 
D.  Prepare a staff report to the review authority in compliance with Section 17.52.060 (Tentative Map Public Hearings), describing the conclusions of the evaluations of the map, and recommending to the review authority the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.050 - Review and decision. 
After review of a tentative map in compliance with Section 17.38.060, the commission shall: 
A.  Conduct a public hearing on a proposed tentative map in compliance with Section 17.52.060 (Tentative Map Public Hearings), and consider the recommendations of the community development director, any agency comments on the map, and any public testimony; 
B.  Review and evaluate each tentative map as to its compliance and consistency with applicable provisions of this article, the general plan, any specific plan, and the Map Act. The review authority's evaluation shall be based on the staff report (Section 17.38.080), information provided by an initial study or environmental impact report (EIR), where applicable, and any public testimony received; and 
C.  Within thirty days after the filing of the report and recommendation of the community development director with the review authority, approve, conditionally approve or deny the tentative map. 
Approval or conditional approval of a tentative map shall be granted only after the commission has first made all findings required by Section 17.52.070 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval). The commission may impose conditions of approval in compliance with Section 17.52.080 (Conditions of Approval). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.060 - Tentative map public hearings. 
When a public hearing is required by this article for a tentative map, the hearing shall be scheduled and conducted in compliance with this section, with public notice being provided in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings) of this article. 
A.  Scheduling of Hearing, Action. After a tentative map application has been deemed complete, a public hearing on the tentative map shall be scheduled, and action shall be taken, within the time limit specified by Map Act Section 66452.1. 
B.  Distribution of Staff Report. The staff report on the tentative map shall be mailed to the subdivider (and each tenant of the subject property, in the case of a condominium conversion) at least three days before any hearing or action on the tentative map by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.070 - Tentative map approval or disapproval. 
In order to approve a tentative map and conditions of approval, or to disapprove a tentative map, the commission shall first make the findings required by this section. In determining whether to approve a tentative map, the city shall apply only those ordinances, policies, and standards in effect at the date the department determined that the application was complete in compliance with Section 17.52.030 (Tentative Map Filing, Initial Processing), except where the city has initiated changes to the general plan, an applicable specific plan, or this development code, and provided public notice as required by Map Act Section 66474.2. 
A.  Required Findings for Approval. The commission may approve a tentative map only when it shall first find that the proposed subdivision, together with the provisions for its design and improvement, is consistent with the general plan, and any applicable specific plan, and that none of the findings for denial in subsection C can be made. The findings shall apply to each proposed parcel as well as the entire subdivision, including any parcel identified as a designated remainder in compliance with Map Act Section 66424.6. 
B.  Supplemental Findings. The commission shall make the following findings, when they are applicable to the specific subdivision proposal. 
1.  Construction of Improvements. It is in the interest of the public health and safety, and it is necessary as a prerequisite to the orderly development of the surrounding area, to require the construction of road improvements within a specified time after recordation of the parcel map, where road improvements are required. 
2.  Condominiums. Any applicable findings required by the Map Act for condominium conversions. 
3.  Dedications or Exactions. Any applicable findings required by Section 17.58.030 (Findings Required for Dedications or Exactions), if dedications or exactions are required. 
4.  Waiver of Parcel Map. The findings required by Section 17.54.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map), if waiver of a parcel map has been requested with the tentative map application. 
C.  Findings Requiring Denial. A tentative map shall be denied if the commission makes any of the following findings: 
1.  The proposed subdivision including design and improvements is not consistent with the general plan or any applicable specific plan; 
2.  The site is not physically suitable for the type or proposed density of development; 
3.  The design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or injure fish or wildlife or their habitat; 
4.  The design of the subdivision or type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health or safety problems; 
5.  The design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. This finding may not be made if the commission finds that alternate easements for access or use will be provided, and that they will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public. This finding shall apply only to easements of record, or to easements established by judgment of a court of competent jurisdiction, and no authority is hereby granted to the review authority to determine that the public at large has acquired easements of access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision; 
6.  The discharge of wastewater from the proposed subdivision into the community wastewater system would result in violation of existing requirements prescribed by the California Regional Water Quality Control Board; 
7.  Information available to the city indicates adverse soil or geological conditions and the subdivider has failed to provide sufficient information to the satisfaction of the public works director or the commission that the conditions can be corrected in the plan for the development; or 
8.  The proposed subdivision is not consistent with all applicable provisions of this title, any other applicable provision of the municipal code, and the Subdivision Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.080 - Conditions of approval. 
Along with the approval of a tentative map, the adoption of conditions of approval shall occur in compliance with this section, provided that all conditions shall be consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. 
A.  Mandatory Conditions. The commission shall adopt conditions of approval that will: 
1.  Require that parcels, easements or rights-of-way be provided for streets, water supply and distribution systems, wastewater facilities, solid waste disposal, and public utilities providing electric, gas and communications services, as may be required to properly serve the subdivision; 
2.  Mitigate or eliminate environmental problems identified through the environmental review process, except where a statement of overriding considerations has been adopted in compliance with CEQA; 
3.  Carry out the specific requirements of this article; 
4.  Secure compliance with the requirements of this article and the general plan; 
5.  Require that any designated remainder parcels not be subsequently sold or further subdivided unless a certificate or conditional certificate of compliance (Section 17.56.040) is obtained in compliance with this article; and 
6.  Require the dedication of additional land for bicycle paths, local transit facilities, (including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, etc.), sunlight easements, and school sites, in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 3, where required by the general plan. 
B.  Optional Conditions. The commission may also require as conditions of approval: 
1.  The waiver of direct access rights to any existing or proposed streets; 
2.  The reservation of sites for public facilities, including schools, and fire stations, libraries, parks, and other public uses in compliance with Map Act Chapter 4, Article 4; 
3.  Time limits or phasing schedules for the completion of conditions of approval, when deemed appropriate; or 
4.  Any other conditions deemed necessary by the review authority to achieve compatibility between the proposed subdivision, its immediate surroundings, and the community, or to achieve consistency with city ordinances or state law. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.090 - Effective date of tentative map approval. 
The approval of a tentative map shall become effective for the purposes of filing a parcel or final map, including compliance with conditions of approval, immediately after the adoption of the resolution of decision by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.100 - Changes to approved tentative map or conditions. 
A subdivider may request changes to an approved tentative map or its conditions of approval before recordation of a parcel or final map in compliance with this section. Changes to a parcel or final map after recordation are subject to Section 17.54.120 (Amendments to Recorded Maps). 
A.  Limitation on Allowed Changes. Changes to a tentative map that may be granted at the discretion of the director in compliance with this section and include major adjustments to the location of proposed lot lines and improvements, and reductions in the number of approved lots (but no increase in the number of approved lots), and any changes to the conditions of approval, consistent with the findings required by subsection D of this section. Other changes shall require the filing and processing of a new tentative map. 
B.  Application for Changes. The subdivider shall file an application and filing fee with the department, using the forms furnished by the department, together with the following additional information: 
1.  A statement identifying the tentative map number, the features of the map or particular conditions to be changed and the changes requested, the reasons why the changes are requested, and any facts that justify the changes; and 
2.  Any additional information deemed appropriate by the department. 
C.  Processing. Proposed changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall be processed in the same manner as the original tentative map, except as otherwise provided by this section. 
D.  Findings for Approval. The commission shall not modify the approved tentative map or conditions of approval unless it shall first find that the change is necessary because of one or more of the following circumstances, and that all of the applicable findings for approval required by Sections 17.52.070(A) and (B) can still be made: 
1.  There was a material mistake of fact in the deliberations leading to the original approval; 
2.  There has been a change of circumstances related to the original approval; or 
3.  A serious and unforeseen hardship has occurred, not due to any action of the applicant subsequent to the enactment of this article. 
E.  Effect of Changes on Time Limits. Approved changes to a tentative map or conditions of approval shall not be considered as approval of a new tentative map, and shall not extend the time limits provided by Section 17.52.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits, Expiration, and Time Extensions). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.110 - Completion of subdivision process. 
A.  Compliance with Conditions, Improvement Plans. After approval of a tentative map pursuant to this article, the subdivider shall proceed to fulfill the conditions of approval within any time limits specified by the conditions and the expiration of the map and, where applicable, shall prepare, file and receive approval of improvement plans in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Improvement Plans and Agreements), before constructing any required improvements. 
B.  Parcel or Final Map Preparation, Filing and Recordation. 
1.  A parcel map for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision, unless a parcel map has been waived in compliance with Section 17.54.030 (Waiver of Parcel Map). 
2.  A final map for a subdivision of five or more parcels shall be prepared, filed, processed and recorded as set forth in Chapter 17.54 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps), to complete the subdivision. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.52.120 - Vesting tentative maps. 
This section establishes procedures to implement the vesting tentative map requirements of state law, Sections 66498.1 et seq. of the Map Act. 
A.  Applicability. Whenever this article requires that a tentative map be filed, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed, provided that the vesting tentative map is prepared, filed and processed in compliance with this section. A vesting tentative map may be filed for residential, commercial or industrial developments. 
B.  Procedures for Processing a Vesting Tentative Map. A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form, have the same contents and accompanying data and reports and, shall be processed in the same manner as set forth by this article as a tentative map, except as follows: 
1.  Application Content. In addition to the information required by Section 17.52.020 (Tentative Map Preparation, Application, Contents), a vesting tentative map shall include: 
a.  A grading plan in conformance with the city grading ordinance and design standards. The grading plan shall contain precise grading of the entire subdivision and shall include all existing and proposed topography. The proposed topography shall include, but not be limited to, the elevations on all building pads, street grades and elevations at all lot corners; 
b.  Complete sanitary sewer plans accompanied by a sewer area study; 
c.  Complete water plans; 
d.  Complete storm drain plans; 
e.  Complete street plans; 
f.  Complete landscape plans; 
g.  Any geological studies, if required; 
h.  A complete drainage study. The study shall include, but not be limited to, a ten year drainage study along with the one-hundred-year drainage study. The one-hundred-year study shall show the hydraulic grade line (HGL) at critical locations for each subdivision unit; 
i.  A complete site plan showing the buildings and exterior features of each lot. For single-family detached lots the site plan shall show the typical building envelopes. It shall also show all building setbacks, building heights, number of stories, driveway locations, landscaped areas and all other improvements proposed to be installed (this may be waived at the discretion of the city engineer and/or planning director); 
j.  Any engineering calculations and cost estimates for all improvement plans; 
k.  A tree preservation plan; 
l.  A soils report prepared by a soils engineer; and 
m.  Any and all other studies, reports, plans, specifications or additional information required by the city engineer or the community development director. 
2.  Findings for Approval. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall not be granted unless the commission first determines that the intended development of the subdivision is consistent with the zoning regulations applicable to the property at the time of filing, in addition to all other findings required for tentative map approval by Section 17.52.070 (Tentative Map Approval or Disapproval). 
C.  Expiration of Vesting Tentative Map. An approved vesting tentative map shall be subject to the same time limits for expiration as are established for tentative maps by Sections 17.52.130 (Tentative Map Time Limits, Expiration, and Time Extensions). 
D.  Changes to Approved Map or Conditions. The subdivider may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map or conditions of approval at any time before the expiration of the vesting tentative map. An amendment request shall be considered and processed through the same procedures as a new application, in compliance with this section and pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act Section 66498.2. 
E.  Development Rights Vested. The approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer the rights specified by Map Act Section 66498.1 et seq. 
F.  Duration of Vested Rights. The development rights vested by this section shall be subject to the time limits specified in Map Act Section 66498.5. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. No. 1896, § 1, 8-20-2014)  
17.52.130 - Tentative map time limits, expiration, and time extensions. 
The processing of a tentative map shall be completed, and an approved tentative map shall be subject to the time limits for expiration and procedures for extension as follows: 
A.  Expiration of Approved Tentative Map. An approved tentative map is valid for twenty-four months after its effective date (Section 17.66.130), except as otherwise provided by Map Act Sections 66452.6, 66452.11, 66452.13, or 66463.5. At the end of twenty-four months, the approval shall expire and become void unless: 
1.  A parcel or final map has been filed with the public works director in compliance with Chapter 17.54 (Parcel Maps and Final Maps); or 
2.  An extension of time has been granted in compliance with subsection B. 
Expiration of an approved tentative map or vesting tentative map shall terminate all proceedings. The application shall not be reactivated unless a new tentative map application is filed. 
B.  Extensions of Time for a Tentative Map. When a subdivider has not completed all tentative map conditions of approval and filed a parcel or final map with the city within the time limits established by this section, time extensions may be granted as follows. Extension requests shall be in writing and shall be filed with the community development department on or before the date of expiration of the approval or previous extension, together with the required filing fee: 
1.  Tentative Maps and Vesting Tentative Maps. The commission may grant extensions to the initial time limit for one year at a time, up to a maximum total of three years, only after finding that: 
a.  There have been no changes to the provisions of the general plan, any applicable specific plan or this article applicable to the project since the approval of the tentative map; 
b.  There have been no changes in the character of the site or its surroundings that affect how the policies of the general plan or other standards of this article apply to the project; and 
c.  There have been no changes to the capacities of community resources, including but not limited to water supply, sewage treatment or disposal facilities, roads or schools so that there is no longer sufficient remaining capacity to serve the project. 
2.  Tentative Maps with Multiple Final Maps. Where a subdivider is required to expend more than the amount specified in Map Act Section 66452.6 and multiple final maps are filed covering portions of a single approved tentative map, each filing of a final map shall extend the expiration of the tentative map by an additional thirty-six months from the date of its expiration, or the date of the previously filed final map, whichever is later. Provided that the total of all extensions shall not extend the approval of the tentative map more than ten years from its approval. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.54 - PARCEL MAPS AND FINAL MAPS 
 
17.54.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes requirements for the preparation, filing, approval and recordation of parcel and final maps, consistent with the requirements of the Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.020 - Parcel maps. 
As required by Sections 17.48.020 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), and 17.52.110 (Completion of Subdivision Process), a parcel map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of four or fewer parcels, except when the requirement for a parcel map is waived as set forth in Section 17.54.030. A parcel map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 17.54.040 through 17.54.060. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.030 - Waiver of parcel map. 
A subdivider may request waiver of a parcel map, and the waiver may be granted consistent with this chapter, and in compliance with the Map Act. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.040 - Parcel map form and content. 
A parcel map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified, registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Parcel map submittal shall include the application forms, and all information and other materials prepared as required by the approved tentative map, public works department, and city design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.050 - Filing and processing of parcel maps. 
A.  Filing with the Public Works Department. The parcel map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.54.040 above shall be submitted to the public works department. The parcel map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this article and the Map Act. 
B.  Review of Parcel Map. The public works director shall: 
1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this article and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and 
2.  Obtain verification from the community development department that the parcel map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed. 
If the parcel map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes and resubmit the parcel map, together with all required data if the tentative map has not expired. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.060 - Parcel map approval. 
After determining that a parcel map is technically correct in compliance with Section 17.54.040, the public works director shall sign. After the signature, the map shall be transmitted to the county recorder for filing in compliance with Map Act Section 66450. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.070 - Final maps. 
As required by Section 17.48.020 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required), a final map shall be filed and approved to complete the subdivision process for a subdivision of five or more parcels. A final map shall be prepared, filed and processed as set forth in Sections 17.54.070 through 17.54.100, and in compliance with the city's design standards. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.080 - Final map form and content. 
A final map shall be prepared by or under the direction of a qualified registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, registered or licensed by the state of California. Final map submittal shall include all information and other materials prepared as required by the public works department and the city's design standards. A final map submittal shall also include a digital copy of the final map, prepared using computer software and standards specified by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.090 - Filing and processing of final maps. 
A.  Filing with Public Works Director. The final map, together with all data, information and materials required by Section 17.54.080 above shall be submitted to the public works director. The final map shall be considered submitted when it is complete and complies with all applicable provisions of this article and the Map Act. 
B.  Review of Final Map. The public works director shall review the final map and all accompanying materials, and shall: 
1.  Determine whether all applicable provisions of this article and the Map Act have been complied with, that the map is technically correct, and that it is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map; and 
2.  Obtain verification from the community development department that the final map conforms to the approved tentative map and that any conditions of approval for which that office is responsible have been completed. 
If the final map does not conform as required above, the subdivider shall be notified, and given the opportunity to make necessary changes prior to tentative map expiration and resubmit the final map, together with all required data. 
C.  Multiple Final Maps. The subdivider may file multiple final maps on the approved tentative map if the subdivider either included a statement of intention with the tentative map or, if after the filing of the tentative map, the community development director approved the request. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.100 - Final map approval. 
After determining that the final map is in compliance and is technically correct in compliance with Section 17.54.080, the public works director shall execute the public works director's certificate on the map in compliance with Map Act Section 66442, and forward the final map to the council for action, as follows: 
A.  Review and Approval by Council. The council shall approve or disapprove the final map at its next regular meeting after the city clerk receives the map, or at its next regular meeting after the meeting at which it receives the map, unless that time limit is extended with the mutual consent of the public works director and the subdivider. 
1.  Criteria for Approval. The council shall approve the final map if it conforms to all the requirements of the Map Act, all provisions of this article that were applicable at the time that the tentative map was approved, and is in substantial compliance with the approved tentative map. 
2.  Waiver of Errors. The council may approve a final map that fails to meet any of the requirements of this article or the Map Act applicable at the time of approval of the tentative map, when the council finds that the failure of the map is a technical or inadvertent error which, in the determination of the council does not materially affect the validity of the map. 
3.  Approval by Inaction. If the council does not approve or disapprove the map within the prescribed time or any authorized extension, and the map conforms to all applicable requirements and rulings, it shall be deemed approved, and the city clerk shall certify its approval on the map. 
B.  Map with Dedications. If a dedication or offer of dedication is required on the final map, the council shall accept, accept subject to improvement, or reject with or without prejudice any or all offers of dedication, at the same time as it takes action to approve the final map. If the city council rejects the offer of dedication, the offer shall remain open and may be accepted by the city council at a later date pursuant to Section 66477.2 of the Map Act. Any termination of an offer of dedication shall be processed in compliance with Section 66477.2 of the Map Act and the street vacation procedure. 
C.  Map with Incomplete Improvements. If improvements required by this article, conditions of approval or by law have not been completed at the time of approval of the final map, the council shall require the subdivider to enter into an agreement with the city as specified in Map Act Section 66462, and Section 17.60.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), as a condition precedent to the approval of the final map. 
D.  Transmittal to Recorder. After action by the council, and after the required signatures and seals have been affixed, the final map shall be transmitted to county recorder for filing. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.110 - Supplemental information sheets. 
In addition to the information required to be included in parcel maps and final maps (Sections 17.54.040 and 17.54.080, respectively), additional information may be required to be submitted and recorded simultaneously with a final map as required by this section. 
A.  Preparation and Form. The additional information required by this section shall be presented in the form of additional map sheets, unless the community development director determines that the type of information required would be more clearly and understandably presented in the form of a report or other document. The additional map sheet or sheets shall be prepared in the same manner and in substantially the same form as required for parcel maps by Section 17.54.040 (Parcel Map Form and Content). 
B.  Content of Information Sheets. Supplemental information sheets shall contain the following statements and information: 
1.  Title. A title sheet, including the number assigned to the accompanying parcel or final map by the public works director, the words "supplemental information sheet;" 
2.  Explanatory Statement. A statement following the title sheet that the supplemental information sheet is recorded along with the subject parcel or final map, and that the additional information being recorded with the parcel or final map is for informational purposes, describing conditions as of the date of filing, and is not intended to affect record title of interest; 
3.  Location Map. A location map, at a scale not to exceed one inch equals two thousand feet. The map shall indicate the location of the subdivision within the city; 
4.  Areas Subject to Flooding. Identification of all lands within the subdivision subject to periodic inundation by water; 
5.  Soils or Geologic Hazards Reports. When a soils report or geological hazard report has been prepared, the existence of the report shall be noted on the information sheet, together with the date of the report and the name of the engineer making the report; and 
6.  Information Required by Conditions of Approval. Any information required by the approval body to be included on the supplemental information sheet(s) because of its importance to potential successors in interest to the property, including any other easements or dedications. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.54.120 - Amendments to recorded maps. 
A recorded parcel or final map shall be modified to correct errors in the recorded map or to change characteristics of the approved subdivision only as set forth in this section. 
A.  Corrections. In the event that errors in a parcel or final map are discovered after recordation, or that other corrections are necessary, the corrections may be accomplished by either the filing of a certificate of correction or an amending map, in compliance with Article 7, Chapter 3 of the Map Act. For the purposes of this section, "errors" include errors in course or distance (but not changes in courses or distances from which an error is not ascertainable from the parcel or final map), omission of any course or distance, errors in legal descriptions, or any other map error or omission as approved by the public works director that does not affect any property right, including but not limited to lot numbers, acreage, street names, and identification of adjacent record maps. Other corrections may include indicating monuments set by engineers or surveyors other than the one that was responsible for setting monuments, or showing the proper character or location of any monument that was incorrectly shown, or that has been changed. 
B.  Changes to Approved Subdivision. In the event that a subdivider wishes to change the characteristics of an approved subdivision, including but not limited to the number or configuration of parcels, location of streets or easements, or the nature of required improvements, the construction of which has been deferred through the approval of an agreement in compliance with Section 17.60.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security), a new tentative and parcel or final map shall be filed and approved as required by Section 17.48.020 (Type of Subdivision Approval Required). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.56 - ADDITIONAL SUBDIVISION PROCEDURES 
 
17.56.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides procedures lot line adjustments, voluntary parcel mergers, and certificates of compliance. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.56.020 - Lot line adjustments. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides procedures for the preparation, filing, processing, and approval or denial of lot line adjustment applications, consistent with the policies of the general plan and the requirements of Map Act Section 66412(d). 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  As provided by Map Act Section 66412(d), the lot line adjustment procedure is for the purpose of relocating lot lines between four or fewer existing adjacent parcels, where land taken from one parcel is added to an adjoining parcel and where no more parcels are created than originally existed. For the purposes of this article, an "adjoining parcel" is one that directly touches at least one of the other parcels involved in the adjustment. 
2.  Parcels combined by encumbrances or encroachments of existing structures shall be considered a single original parcel for purposes of an adjustment in compliance with this article. 
C.  Application and Processing. A lot line adjustment application shall be prepared, filed and processed as follows: 
1.  Application Content. A lot line adjustment application shall include all information and other materials required by the department, and the filing fee required by the city's fee resolution. 
2.  Processing. Lot line adjustment applications shall be submitted to the community development department and shall be processed in compliance with the procedures specified by Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing) of this development code. An environmental review shall not be required, in compliance with the CEQA Guidelines. 
3.  Referral of Application. The department shall distribute copies of the adjustment application to the public works department and other departments and agencies as is deemed advisable by the community development director. Each of these entities shall submit to the department a written report indicating its findings and recommendations. 
D.  Approval or Denial of Lot Line Adjustment. The community development director shall determine whether the parcels resulting from the adjustment will comply with the applicable provisions of this article. The community development director may approve, conditionally approve, or deny the lot line adjustment in compliance with this section. The community development director may also refer the matter to the commission for review and decision. 
1.  Findings Requiring Denial. A proposed lot line adjustment shall be denied if the department finds any of the following: 
a.  The adjustment will have the effect of creating a greater number of parcels than exist before adjustment; 
b.  Any parcel resulting from the adjustment will conflict with any applicable regulations of this development code; or 
c.  The adjustment or any resulting parcel will conflict with the general plan. 
2.  Conditions of Approval. In approving a lot line adjustment, the department shall adopt conditions or exactions only as necessary to conform the adjustment and proposed parcels to the requirements of the general plan, this development code and Chapter 15 (Buildings and Construction) of the municipal code, to reduce the prepayment of rear property taxes prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment, or to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements. 
E.  Completion of Lot Line Adjustment. 
1.  Upon receiving approval of a lot line adjustment, the applicant shall submit for review new legal descriptions prepared, stamped and signed by a registered civil engineer, qualified to practice land surveying per Section 8731 of the Land Surveyors Act, or a licensed land surveyor, along with those items and information which may have been required by the public works department or other city departments and agencies. The legal descriptions shall be approved by the public works director or other designee of the public works department. 
2.  Grant deeds containing the approved legal descriptions shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer or land surveyor and recorded with the county recorder along with the certificate of lot line adjustment issued by the community development director. 
3.  Copies of the recorded grant deeds shall be provided by the applicant. When parcels involved are under separate owners, a combining agreement may be required. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.56.030 - Parcel mergers. 
A.  Merger Not Required. Two or more contiguous parcels or units of land that have been subdivided under the provisions of this article or the Map Act shall not merge by virtue of the fact that the contiguous parcels are held by the same ownership. No further proceedings under this article shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, except as provided by this article. 
B.  Processing of Requested Merger. Upon request of the legal owner of contiguous parcels, the City may approve the merger of the property in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.20 3/4. 
1.  Application Requirements. A request for merger shall include all information and materials required by the department, and the filing fee required by the city's fee resolution. Notwithstanding other provisions of this article, a tentative map or parcel map shall not be required for merger, unless required by the community development director. 
2.  Processing. Merger applications shall be submitted to the department and shall be processed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
3.  Referral of Application. The community development department shall distribute copies of the merger application to the public works department and other departments and agencies as is deemed advisable by the community development director. Each of these entities shall submit to the community development department a written report indicating its findings and recommendations. 
4.  Review and Decision. The community development director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny proposed parcel mergers, provided that the community development director may refer any proposed merger to the commission for review and decision. 
5.  Completion of Merger. Upon receiving approval of a lot merger, the applicant shall submit for review new legal descriptions prepared, stamped and signed by a registered civil engineer, qualified to practice land surveying per Section 8731 of the Land Surveyors Act, or a licensed land surveyor, along with any other information and materials required by the public works department or other city departments and agencies. The legal descriptions shall be approved by the public works director or other designee of the public works department. Grant deeds containing the approved legal descriptions shall be prepared by the applicant's engineer or land surveyor and recorded with the county recorder along with a certificate of lot merger issued by the community development director. Copies of the recorded grant deeds shall be provided by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.56.040 - Certificates of compliance. 
A.  Purpose. This section provides procedures for the filing, processing, and approval or denial of certificates of compliance and conditional certificates of Compliance, consistent with the Map Act. 
B.  Applicability. A certificate of compliance is a recorded document acknowledging that the city considers the subject parcel to be a legal lot of record. A conditional certificate of compliance is used instead of a certificate of compliance to validate a parcel that was not legally subdivided. Any person owning real property, or a purchaser of the property in a contract of sale of the property, may request a certificate of compliance. 
C.  Application Contents. A certificate of compliance application shall include the form provided by the department, the required filing fee, and a chain of title, consisting of copies of all deeds beginning before the division and thereafter, unless the parcels were created through a recorded subdivision map. 
D.  Review and Approval. 
1.  Public Works Director review. The public works director shall review all available information and make a determination whether the real property was divided in accordance with the Map Act, this article, and other applicable provisions of the municipal code. Upon making the determination, the public works director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be filed with the county recorder. In the event that the public works director determines that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this article or the Map Act, the application shall instead be processed as a conditional certificate of compliance (subsection E). 
2.  Form of Certificate. The certificate of compliance shall identify the real property, shall state that the division complies with the provisions of the Map Act and this article, and shall include all information required by Map Act Section 66499.35. 
3.  Effective Date of Certificate. A certificate of compliance shall not become final until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. 
E.  Conditional Certificates of Compliance. A conditional certificate of compliance is used to validate a parcel that was not legally divided. If the current owners are the original subdividers, conditions may be based on current standards. The preparation, filing and processing of a conditional certificate of compliance application shall occur in compliance with this section. 
1.  Application. An application for a conditional certificate of compliance shall be prepared and include the same materials as a certificate of compliance. 
2.  Review and Approval. Upon making a determination that the real property does not comply with the provisions of this article or the Map Act, the public works director shall grant a conditional certificate of compliance, imposing conditions as provided by subsection (E)(3) (Conditions of Approval). 
3.  Conditions of Approval. If the owners of the property for which a certificate is requested are the original subdividers, the public works director may impose any conditions that would be applicable to a current subdivision, as provided by the Map Act and this article, regardless of when the property was divided. If the owners had no responsibility for the subdivision that created the parcel, the public works director may only impose conditions that would have been applicable at the time the property was acquired by the current owners. 
4.  Appeal. A decision to issue a conditional certificate of compliance and/or the conditions imposed by the public works director may be appealed to the commission in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals) of this title. 
5.  Completion of Process. Following expiration of the ten-day appeal period after the determination and imposition of conditions by the public works director, the public works director shall file a conditional certificate of compliance with the county recorder. The certificate shall identify the property, and serve as notice to the property owner or purchaser who applied for the certificate, a grantee of the owner, or any subsequent transferee or assignee of the property that the fulfillment and implementation of the conditions shall be required before subsequent issuance of a permit or other approval for the development of the property. 
6.  Effective Date of Certificate. A conditional certificate of compliance shall not become effective until the document has been recorded by the county recorder. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.58 - DEDICATIONS AND EXACTIONS 
 
17.58.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes standards for subdivider dedications of land or payment of fees, in conjunction with subdivision approval. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.58.020 - Applicability. 
A.  Compliance Required. All proposed subdivisions shall comply with the requirements of this article for dedications, reservations, or the payment of fees. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. The requirements of this article as they apply to a specific subdivision shall be described in conditions of approval adopted by the review authority for the tentative map. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.58.030 - Findings required for dedications and exactions. 
The review authority may require any of the dedications or exactions described in this article through conditions of approval of a proposed tentative map only after first making findings which: 
A.  Identify the purpose for the dedication or exaction; and 
B.  Demonstrate that there is a reasonable relationship between the need for the dedication or exaction and the characteristics and impacts of the subdivision from which the dedication or exaction is required. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.58.040 - School site dedications. 
A.  Dedication Requirement. In compliance with Map Act Section 66478, a subdivider may be required to dedicate land as the review authority determines to be necessary for adequate elementary school facilities for the residents of the subdivision. Dedication may be required only if the subdivider and/or successors in interest to the property: 
1.  Have owned the land being subdivided for less than ten years before filing the tentative map; and 
2.  Develop, or complete the development, of a subdivision of more than four hundred dwelling units within a single school district, within a period of three years or less. 
B.  Tentative Map Approval. If the Lodi Unified School District, as applicable, responds to the referral of the tentative map application (Section 17.52.030) with a report to the city describing the land the district deems necessary and suitable to provide adequate elementary school service to residents of the proposed subdivision, the review authority shall require the dedication of land as a condition of approval of the tentative map. As required by Map Act Section 66478, the dedication requirement shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible, or substantially exceed the amount of land ordinarily allowed under the procedures of the State Allocation Board. 
C.  Timing of Dedication. The required dedication may occur before, concurrently with, or up to sixty days after the filing of a final map on any portion of the subdivision. If the school district accepts the dedication, the district shall pay the subdivider the amounts required by Map Act Section 66478, and shall record the certificate required by Map Act Section 66478. 
D.  Termination of Dedication Requirement. The requirement of dedication shall automatically terminate unless, within thirty days after the requirement is imposed by the review authority, the school district makes a binding commitment to the subdivider agreeing to accept the dedication at any time before the construction of the first four hundred dwelling units. Upon acceptance of the dedication, the school district shall repay to the subdivider and/or successors the costs specified in Business and Professions Code Section 11525.2. 
E.  Judicial Review. Any person who is aggrieved by or fails to agree to the reasonableness of any requirement imposed in compliance with this section may bring a special proceeding in the Superior Court in compliance with Map Act Section 66499.37. 
F.  Reversion of Land—Repurchase. Should the school district find itself unable to accept the dedication for reasons other than specified in the commitment with the subdivider, the dedicated land shall revert to the subdivider. If the dedication is accepted and the school district within ten years from the date of acceptance offers the property or any substantial part thereof for public sale, the subdivider shall have the first option to repurchase the property for the price paid by the district, plus a sum equal to the amount of property taxes which would have been paid during the period of public ownership. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.58.050 - Reservations of land for public facilities. 
As a condition of approval of a tentative map, the city may require the subdivider to reserve sites appropriate in area and location for fire stations, libraries or other public uses, pay an in-lieu fee or both at the option of the city in compliance with this section. 
A.  Standards for Reservation of Land. 
1.  Location of Land. Where a fire station, library, or other public use is shown in the general plan or applicable specific plan, the subdivider may be required by the city to reserve sites as determined by the city in compliance with the standards in the applicable plan. 
2.  Configuration. The reserved area shall be of a size and shape that will permit the balance of the property to develop in an orderly and efficient manner. The amount of land to be reserved shall not make development of the remaining land held by the subdivider economically unfeasible. The land to be reserved shall be in multiples of streets and parcels that will permit an efficient division of the reserved area if it is not acquired within the period determined by subsection B following (Procedure for Reservation of Land). 
B.  Procedure for Reservation of Land. The public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved shall at the time of approval of the parcel or final map enter into a binding agreement with the subdivider to acquire the reserved area within two years after the completion and acceptance of all improvements, unless a longer time is authorized by mutual agreement. 
C.  Purchase Price of Reserved Land. The purchase price shall be the market value of the land at the time the tentative map is filed, plus the property taxes against the reserved area from the date of the reservation, and any other costs incurred by the subdivider in maintaining the reserved area, including interest costs incurred on any loan covering the reserved area. 
D.  Termination of Reservation. If the public agency for whose benefit an area has been reserved does not enter into a binding agreement as described in subsection B above (Procedure for Reservation of Land), the reservation shall automatically terminate. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.58.060 - Right-of-way dedications. 
A.  Offers of Dedication Required. As a condition of tentative map approval, the subdivider shall dedicate or make an irrevocable offer of dedication of all parcels of land within the subdivision that are needed for streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. In addition, the subdivider shall improve or agree to improve all streets, alleys, including access rights and abutters' rights, drainage, public utility easements, and other public easements. 
B.  Improvements. The subdivider shall construct or agree to construct all improvements approved or required for the subdivision, including access rights and abutters' rights, in compliance with the city's improvement standards. 
C.  Rights-of-way, Generally. Rights-of-way shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the required improvements. In addition, where parcels front on a city-maintained road of insufficient width, or when the existing right-of-way is not deeded, the subdivider shall dedicate right-of-way sufficient for the ultimate facility. 
D.  Limited Access Designation. Whenever the review authority finds a safety hazard would be created as the result of direct access, the review authority may impose a requirement that any dedication or offer of dedication of a street shall include a waiver of direct access rights to the street from any property shown on a final map as abutting the street, and that if the dedication is accepted, the waiver shall become effective in compliance with the provisions of the waiver of direct access. The review authority may also require waivers of access to an existing street already dedicated which abuts the subdivision. 
E.  Transit Facilities. Dedications in fee simple or irrevocable offers of dedication of land within the subdivision may be required for local transit facilities including bus turnouts, benches, shelters, landing paths and similar items that directly benefit the residents of the subdivision if deemed necessary by the public works director, and if, in compliance with Map Act Section 66475.2: 
1.  The subdivision as shown on the tentative map has the potential for two hundred dwelling units or more if developed to the maximum density shown in the general plan; and 
2.  The review authority finds that transit services are or will, within a reasonable time period, be available to the subdivision. 
F.  Alternative Transportation Systems. Whenever the subdivision falls within an area designated for the development of bikeways, hiking or equestrian trails in the general plan, parks and recreation or bikeways master plans, applicable specific plan, or implementing legislation, the subdivider shall dedicate land as is necessary to provide for these ways. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.60 - IMPROVEMENT PLANS AND AGREEMENTS 
 
17.60.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for the review and approval of improvement plans, the installation of improvements, agreements and guarantees for their installation, and dedications. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.60.020 - Improvement plans. 
After the approval of a tentative map, the subdivider shall diligently proceed to complete any improvements necessary to fulfill the conditions of approval. Improvement shall be defined as any infrastructure including streets, storm drains, sewers and the like. Before the construction of any improvements, the subdivider shall submit plans to the city as follows: 
A.  Preparation and Content. Improvement plans shall be prepared by a California registered civil engineer. Improvement plan submittals shall include all items in compliance with the city's design standards and construction specifications. 
B.  Submittal of Plans. Improvement plans shall be submitted to the public works director for review and approval. Upon the approval of improvement plans in compliance with subsection C following, the subdivider shall also submit to the public works director a detailed cost estimate of all improvements, based on guidelines provided by the city. 
C.  Review and Approval. Improvement plans shall be reviewed and approved by the public works director, within the time limits provided by Map Act Section 66456.2. 
D.  Effect of Approval. The final approval of improvement plans shall generally be required before approval of a final map. The approval of improvement plans shall not bind the city to accept the improvements nor waive any defects in the improvements as installed. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.60.030 - Installation of improvements. 
Required improvements shall be constructed or otherwise installed: 
A.  After the approval of improvement plans in compliance with Section 17.60.020; and 
B.  Before the approval of a parcel or final map in compliance with sections 17.54.060 (Parcel Map Approval) or 17.54.100 (Final Map Approval), except where improvements are deferred in compliance with Section 17.60.040 (Improvement Agreements and Security). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.60.040 - Improvement agreements and security. 
Any improvement agreement, contract or act required or authorized by the Map Act, for which security is required, shall be secured in one of the manners provided for in Section 66499 et seq. of the Subdivision Map Act. 
A.  Amount of Security. 
1.  The improvement security shall be in the amount of one hundred percent of the total estimated cost of the improvements or of the act to be performed, conditioned upon the faithful performance of the act or agreement and an additional security for the security of laborers and material in an amount not less than fifty percent of the total estimated cost of the improvement or the performance of the required act securing payment to the contractor, subcontractors and the persons furnishing labor and materials or equipment to them for the improvement or the performance of the required act. 
2.  If the improvement security is other than a bond or bonds furnished by duly authorized corporate surety, an additional amount shall be included as determined by the city council as necessary to cover the cost and reasonable expenses and fees, including reasonable attorneys' fees, which may be incurred by the city in successfully enforcing the obligation secured. 
3.  The improvement security shall also secure faithful performance of any changes or alterations in the work to the extent that such changes or alterations do not exceed ten percent of the original estimated cost of the improvement. 
B.  Release of Security. The improvement security required by this section shall be released as follows: 
1.  Security given for faithful performance of any act or agreement shall be released upon the final completion and acceptance of the act or work; provided, however, that the public works director may release a portion of the security in conjunction with the acceptance of the performance of the work as it progresses upon application therefore by the subdivider; provided, however, that no more than ninety percent of the value of the work and/or materials actually furnished and installed may be released until final completion and compliance of the act or work. 
2.  Security securing the payment to the contractor, his or her subcontractors and to persons furnishing labor, materials or equipment may, after passage of the time within which claims of lien are required to be recorded pursuant to Article 3 (commencing with Section 3114) of Chapter 2 of Title 15 of Part 4 of Division 3 of the Civil Code and after acceptance of the work, be reduced to an amount not less than the total claimed by all claimants for whom claims of lien have been recorded and notice thereof given in writing to the council, and if no claims have been recorded, the security may be released in full. 
3.  No security given for the guarantee or warranty of work shall be released until the expiration of the period thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.60.050 - Soils reports. 
A.  A preliminary soils report, prepared by a California-registered civil engineer and based upon adequate test borings, shall be submitted to the public works director for every subdivision. 
B.  A preliminary soils report may be waived by the public works director provided that the public works director finds that due to the knowledge the city has as to the soils qualities of the soils in the subdivision, no preliminary analysis is necessary. 
C.  If the city has knowledge of, or the preliminary soils report indicates, the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils investigation of each lot in the subdivision may be required by the community development director. The soils investigation shall be done by a California-registered civil engineer, who shall recommend the corrective action that is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure proposed to be constructed in the area where such soils problem exists. 
D.  The review authority may approve the subdivision or portion thereof where soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed; and a condition to the issuance of any building permit may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated in the construction of each structure. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.62 - REIMBURSEMENTS FOR CONSTRUCTION 
 
17.62.010 - Findings and purpose. 
The council hereby finds and declares as follows: 
A.  The construction of new streets and water, sewer, and storm drains often benefits other properties. Benefits may occur through the provision of supplemental capacity (oversize lines) or installations across or opposite unserved property that would be required to make such improvements upon development or service connection. 
B.  The state of California, in Government Code Sections 66485 through 66489, requires that the city either pay for or enter into an agreement to reimburse the installing party, including an amount attributable to interest for such installations. To pay the costs as required by the reimbursement agreement, the city may collect funds from the other properties which benefit from such installations. 
C.  The city has adopted a development impact mitigation fee ordinance (Municipal Code Chapter 15.64), which provides for reimbursement and collection of funds from benefitting parcels under only a portion of the circumstances described in subsection A. 
D.  The purpose of Chapter 15.64 is to identify the improvements which are reimbursable under the development impact mitigation fee program and to provide a uniform reimbursement procedure for the cost of improvements which are to be reimbursed from other properties. For purposes of this article, "applicant" means the owner of the property for which the improvements are being installed or are required to be installed per the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 1883, § 2, 9-4-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1883, § 2, adopted September 4, 2013, repealed the former § 17.62.010, and enacted a new § 17.62.010 as set out herein. The former § 17.62.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1869, adopted February 20, 2013.  
17.62.020 - Improvements to be reimbursed. 
A.  The cost of the following improvements shall be reimbursed from the appropriate benefitting parcels. The terms of the reimbursement shall comply with Chapter 15.64. 
1.  Oversize water mains and major crossings required per Chapter 13.08; 
2.  Oversize sewers and storm drains required per Chapter 13.12; 
3.  Excess width street construction and right-of-way required per Chapter 15.44 and 17.50.030; 
B.  The cost of other improvements which benefit other property or would be required of that property upon development shall be reimbursed in compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 1883, § 2, 9-4-2013) 
Editor's note— Ord. No. 1883, § 2, adopted September 4, 2013, repealed the former § 17.62.020, and enacted a new § 17.62.020 as set out herein. The former § 17.62.020 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 1869, adopted February 20, 2013.  
17.62.030 - City eligibility. 
Whenever the city constructs improvements meeting the requirements of this article, the city shall be eligible for reimbursement in a like manner as other applicants. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.62.040 - Application for reimbursement. 
A.  Whenever an applicant constructs improvements eligible for reimbursement under this article, the applicant shall file a request with the public works director. The request shall include: 
1.  A description of the improvements and the additional properties receiving the benefit, including drawings showing the items for reimbursements; 
2.  Engineering calculations and data as described in the city's public improvement design standards; 
3.  An itemized record of cost for the improvements; and 
4.  Application fees as determined by the city's fee resolution. 
B.  All applications for reimbursement shall be filed no later than one year after the acceptance of the improvements by the city. The city will make no effort to delay project approval or otherwise condition payment of reimbursements from other properties benefitting from the improvements prior to completion of a reimbursement agreement. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.62.050 - Reimbursement agreement. 
A.  Within sixty days of receipt of a completed application, the public works director shall prepare a reimbursement agreement containing the following provisions: 
1.  The amount of reimbursable costs shall include construction costs less any applicable credits plus ten percent for administrative and engineering costs. Applicable public works fees shall also be added. Costs of financing, bonds or other applicant costs shall not be included. 
2.  The total reimbursable cost shall be apportioned to the benefiting properties as appropriate. Costs of transitions, utility stubs or other minor work shall not be apportioned to adjacent property. 
3.  The reimbursable amount shall be recalculated annually to include an amount attributable to interest, using the Engineering News Record 20 Cities Construction Cost Index as of the end of the year. The reimbursable amount for subsequent years shall be the prior year reimbursable amount less any reimbursements made during the year, all multiplied by the percentage change in the Index over the year. 
4.  The agreement shall provide that the city will collect the appropriate charge from the properties identified in the agreement and reimburse the applicant or the applicant's heirs, successors or assigns, for a period of fifteen years from the date of the agreement only. Reimbursement agreements to recover funds advanced by city for projects shall expire after fifteen years; reimbursement charges will not be collected after that time. 
5.  Prior to approval of the reimbursement agreement, the council shall conduct a public hearing. The hearing shall be conducted within ninety days of receipt of the completed application. The applicant and property owner of each parcel identified in the reimbursement agreement shall be notified of the hearing by registered mail at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing. 
B.  The reimbursement agreement shall be numbered and filed by the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.62.060 - Collection of reimbursements. 
A.  For any property on which the council has approved a public improvement reimbursement agreement, the appropriate charge shall be collected by the city upon development. Development shall mean any of the following: 
1.  Service connection to the utility covered by the reimbursement agreement; 
2.  Filing of a final map; 
3.  Filing of a parcel map unless the city requirement for installation of public improvements is waived or deferred; or 
4.  Issuance of a building permit. 
B.  In the event the activity described in subsection A only occurs on a portion of the area covered by the reimbursement agreement, the reimbursement charge shall be apportioned by the public works director and the appropriate charge made upon the developing portion. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.62.070 - Payment of reimbursements. 
A.  Upon collection of reimbursement charges, the public works director shall prepare a letter of entitlement stating the amount of the charge collected, reference the agreement number and administrative charge to be retained by the city. The letter shall be forwarded to the finance director for actual reimbursement. 
B.  The administrative fee for collecting the charge and mailing the reimbursement shall be determined by the council. 
C.  The finance director shall mail the reimbursement amount to the last address of the applicant on file with the finance director. 
D.  Any reimbursement amount returned or unclaimed after two years from the date of mailing shall be deposited in the appropriate development impact mitigation fee fund. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.64 - SURVEYS AND MONUMENTS 
 
17.64.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter provides requirements for subdivision survey work and the placement of subdivision monuments. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.64.020 - Survey procedure and practice. 
The procedure and practice of all survey work done on any subdivision, whether for preparation of a final map or parcel map shall conform to the standard practices and principles of land surveying, the California Land Surveyor's Act, and the provisions of this article. All related documents shall be executed by a registered civil engineer licensed to practice land surveying in California, or a California-licensed land surveyor. 
A.  Traverse. The traverse of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision computed from field measurements of the ground must close within a limit of error of one foot to ten thousand feet of perimeter before balancing the survey. 
B.  Field Notes. When required by the public works director, the engineer or surveyor making the survey shall prepare complete field notes, in a form satisfactory to the public works director, showing references, ties, locations, elevations and other necessary data relating to monuments, set in compliance with these regulations, and shall submit the notes to the public works director to be indexed and retained as a part of the permanent public record of his office. 
C.  Geodetic Monuments. Whenever the public works director has established a system of coordinates which is within a reasonable distance of the subdivision boundary, as determined by the public works director, the field survey shall be tied into the city's monument system. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.64.030 - Monuments. 
In surveying a subdivision, the engineer or surveyor shall set sufficient permanent monuments so that any part of the survey may be readily retraced. Survey monuments shall be set by the engineer or surveyor for all new subdivisions requiring a parcel map or final map (Division 16-122, Subdivision Map Approval Requirements), unless waived by the Public Works Director, in compliance with this section. 
A.  Boundary Monuments. 
1.  Boundary monuments shall be set on the exterior boundary of the subdivision at all corners, angle points, beginnings and ends of curves and at intermediate points approximately one thousand feet apart. The locations of inaccessible points may be established by ties and shall be so noted on the final map or parcel map. 
2.  All exterior boundary monuments shall be set prior to recordation of the final map or parcel map or as certified on the final map or parcel map. 
B.  Interior Monuments. Whenever interior monuments are required, the monuments shall be set in compliance with the city of Lodi public works department public improvement design standards, or as otherwise required by the public works director. 
C.  Monument Type and Positioning. All monuments set in the course of the survey shall be as specified by the public works director and shall be set to the depth and in the manner prescribed by the public works director in the public improvement design standards. 
D.  Identification Marks. All monuments shall be permanently and visibly marked or tagged with the registration or license number of the engineer or surveyor who signs the engineer's or surveyor's certificate and under whose supervision the survey is made. 
E.  Replacement of Destroyed Monuments. Any monument which is disturbed or destroyed before acceptance of all improvements by the city shall be replaced by the developer. 
F.  Timing of Monument Installation. The timing of the installation of a monument shall be in compliance with the Map Act (Section 66496). 
G.  Notice of Completion. Within five days after all monuments have been set, the engineer or surveyor shall give written notice to the developer and the public works director that the final monuments have been set. Verification of payment to the engineer or surveyor shall be filed as required by the Map Act (Article 9, Chapter 4). The cost of setting monuments shall be included in the engineer's estimate for improvements in compliance with Section 17.60.040 (Improvements Agreements and Security). 
H.  Inspection and Approval. All monuments shall be subject to the inspection and approval of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.64.040 - Survey information on final or parcel map. 
The following survey information shall be shown on each final map or parcel map for which a field survey was made in compliance with this article: 
A.  Stakes, monuments (together with their precise position and description) or other evidence found on the ground, to determine the boundaries of the subdivision; 
B.  Corners of all adjoining properties identified by lot and block numbers, subdivision names, numbers and pages of record, or by section, township and range, or other proper designation; 
C.  The location and description of any required monuments to be set after recordation of the final map, and the statement that they are "to be set"; 
D.  Bearing and length of each lot line, block line and boundary line and each required bearing and distance; 
E.  Length, radius, and angle of each curve and the bearing of each radial line to each lot corner on each curve; 
F.  The centerlines of any street or alley in or adjoining the subdivision which have been established by the public works director, together with reference to a field book or map showing the centerline and the monuments which determine its position. If determined by ties, that fact shall be so stated; and 
G.  Any other survey data or information as may be required to be shown by the public works director or by the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 6. - DEVELOPMENT CODE ADMINISTRATION  
Chapter 17.66 - ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITY 
 
17.66.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter describes the authority and responsibilities of city staff and official bodies in the administration of this development code, in addition to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.66.020 - Planning agency defined. 
The functions of a Planning Agency shall be performed by the Lodi city council, planning commission, site plan and architectural review committee, community development director, and community development department, in compliance with state law (Government Code Sections 65100, et seq.) 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.66.030 - City council. 
The Lodi city council, in matters related to the city's planning process, shall perform the duties and functions identified in this development code and shall be referred to as the "council." 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.66.040 - Planning commission. 
A.  Establishment. The seven-member Lodi planning commission is established by Section 2.16.010 (Establishment) of this code and shall be referred to in this development code as the "commission." 
B.  Appointment. The members of the commission are appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council in compliance with Section 2.16.020 (Appointment) of the municipal code. 
C.  Rules. The commission shall adopt rules of order and procedure in compliance with Section 2.16.030 (Officers, Rules, Powers and Duties) of the municipal code. 
D.  Terms of Office. The terms of office of the members of the commission shall be for four years from their respective dates of appointment in compliance with Section 2.16.040 (Terms of Office) of the municipal code. 
E.  Authority and Duties. The commission shall have the authority to perform the duties and functions established by Section 2.16.030 (Officers, Rules, Powers and Duties) of the municipal code and shall perform the duties and functions identified in this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.66.050 - Site plan and architectural approval committee (SPARC). 
A.  Establishment. The Lodi Site plan and architectural approval committee is hereby established and shall be referred to in this development code as the "SPARC." 
B.  Appointment. The SPARC members shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the council. 
C.  Membership. The SPARC shall consist of four members, appointed as identified above, and one member appointed by the commission from among its membership. Each shall be appointed to a four-year term. Commission member is vice-chairman on a rotating basis. 
D.  Authority and Duties. The SPARC shall have the authority to assist the commission in reviewing site plans and architectural drawings and shall perform the duties and functions identified in this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.66.060 - Community development director. 
A.  Appointment. The community development director shall be appointed by the city manager and shall be referred to in this development code as the "director." Whenever the term director is used in this development code, it shall be understood to include the phrase "or designee." 
B.  Duties and Authority. The director shall: 
1.  Have the responsibility to perform all of the functions designated by state law (Government Code Section 65103 (Planning Agency Functions)); 
2.  Have the responsibility and authority to take action on applications for all administrative permits and approvals issued by the department; 
3.  Perform other responsibilities assigned by the city manager; and 
4.  Perform the duties and functions identified in this development code, including the initial review of land use applications, in compliance with state law (Government Code Sections 65901 et seq.), Section 17.38.020 (Authority for Land Use and Zoning Decisions), Table 4-1 (Review Authority), the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
C.  Delegation and Supervision. The director may delegate the responsibilities of the director to assigned department staff under the supervision of the director. When the director designates a department staff person, the staff person shall perform the duties assigned by the director in addition to those listed in subsection B above, as appropriate to the personnel title of the designee. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.67 - REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION 
 
17.67.010 - Applicability. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or any entity, when the application of a zoning law or other land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities. This chapter is intended to apply to those persons who are defined as disabled under the acts or to persons who have a physical or mental impairment that limits or substantially limits one or more major life activities. 
A request for reasonable accommodation may include a modification or exception to the rules, standards and practices for the siting, development and use of housing or housing-related facilities that would eliminate regulatory barriers and provide a person with a disability fair access to housing of their choice. Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be made in the manner prescribed by Section 17.67.020 (application requirements). 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.020 - Application requirements. 
A.  Application. In addition to any other information that is required under Title 17 of this code, requests for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the community development department, or in the form of a letter addressed to the director of community development (director), and shall contain the following information: 
1.  The applicant's name, address and telephone number; 
2.  Address of the property for which the request is being made; 
3.  The current actual use of the property; 
4.  The basis for the claim that the individual is considered disabled under the acts; 
5.  The zoning code provision, regulation or policy from which reasonable accommodation is being requested; 
6.  A description of why the reasonable accommodation is necessary to make the specific property accessible to the individual; and 
7.  Such other relevant and permissible information as may be requested by the director of community development or designee. 
B.  Submission of confidential and protected healthcare information. Any confidential or protected healthcare information provided in support of the application shall be submitted separately under seal in an envelope marked, "confidential healthcare information." Such confidential information shall be exempt from public disclosure. 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.30 - Review authority—Director of community development. 
Requests for reasonable accommodation shall be reviewed by the director of community development, or designee. 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.40 - Review procedure—Director of community development review. 
The director of community development, or designee, shall make a written determination within forty-five calendar days of receipt of an application and either grant, grant with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation in accordance with Section 17.67.050 (decision and findings). 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.050 - Decision and findings. 
A.  Decision. The written decision to grant or deny a request for reasonable accommodation will be consistent with the acts and shall be based on consideration of the following factors: 
1.  Whether the housing, which is the subject of the request, will be used by an individual defined as disabled under the acts. 
2.  Whether the request for reasonable accommodation is necessary to make specific housing available to an individual with a disability as defined under the acts. 
3.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city. 
4.  Whether the requested reasonable accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of a city program or law, including but not limited to land use and zoning. 
5.  Potential impact on surrounding uses. 
6.  Physical attributes of the property and structures. 
7.  Alternative reasonable accommodations which may provide an equivalent level of benefit. 
B.  Conditions of Approval. In granting a request for reasonable accommodation, the director may impose any conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection A above. 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.060 - Appeal of decision. 
A.  An appeal of any decision of the director of community development or designee shall be filed in writing with the city manager within ten calendar days after service of notice of the written decision. Service shall be by regular postal service or personal delivery. The applicant shall set forth in the appeal the reason why the decision is not proper. 
B.  The city manager shall direct an appeal to be heard within fifteen business days, or as soon as practical, after a notice of appeal is filed with the city manager as required by this section. 
C.  If no appeal is filed within the time allowed in subsection A above, the decision of the director of community development or designee shall be considered final. 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
17.67.070 - Procedure of appeal to city manager. 
A.  Appeals to the City Manager. 
1.  The appeal of any decision of the community development director or designee under this chapter shall be in writing signed by the appellant, briefly set forth the reasons why such decision is not proper, state an address at which the appellant will receive notices, and filed with the city manager. 
2.  The city manager shall upon receipt of the appeal set the matter for hearing before a hearing officer. The hearing officer shall be an attorney or recognized mediator designated by the city attorney. The hearing shall be scheduled for not more than thirty calendar days after receipt of the appeal unless a longer time is requested or consented to by the appellant. 
3.  The appellant (or a representative) shall have the right to present his or her case in person. 
4.  The hearing officer shall consider the case record as well as any statements offered by interested parties. The hearing will be conducted according to administrative rules relating to evidence and witnesses as set forth in Chapter 1.10 of this code. 
5.  The hearing officer may grant, grant with modifications, or deny the request for reasonable accommodation that is the subject of the appeal. 
B.  Any party dissatisfied with the decision of the hearing officer may file an action under the provisions for administrative mandamus (Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5) as it now exists or may later be amended. 
(Ord. No. 1916, § 1, 11-4-2015)  
Chapter 17.68 - NONCONFORMING USES, STRUCTURES, AND PARCELS 
 
17.68.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes uniform provisions for the regulation of nonconforming uses, structures, and parcels, as these terms are defined in Article 7 (Definitions). 
A.  Within the zoning districts established by this development code, there exist land uses, structures, and parcels that were lawful before the adoption, or amendment of this development code, but which would be prohibited, regulated, or restricted differently under the terms of this development code or future amendments. 
B.  It is the intent of this development code to discourage the long-term continuance of these nonconformities, but to permit them to exist under limited conditions. 
C.  This chapter does not apply to land uses, structures, and parcels that were illegally established, constructed, or divided. These are instead subject to Chapter 17.76 (Enforcement). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.020 - Restrictions on nonconforming uses and structures. 
Nonconformities may be continued subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Nonconforming Uses of Land. A nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use within a structure, may be continued, transferred, or sold, only as follows: 
1.  Prohibited Activities for a Nonconforming Use. Owners or tenants of nonconforming uses shall not: 
a.  Enlarge, expand, extend, or increase the nonconforming use either on the same or adjoining parcel(s), except in compliance with the provisions of this development code; 
b.  Extend the nonconforming use to occupy a greater area of land than that occupied by the use at the time it became nonconforming. A nonconforming use of a portion of the structure which otherwise conforms to the regulations of the subject zoning district shall not be expanded or extended into any other portion of the structure nor changed except to a conforming use; 
c.  Move the nonconforming use, in whole or in part, to any other location on the subject parcel; or 
d.  Retain the benefits under this chapter if the nonconforming use ceases for 180 days or longer, in compliance with subsection 3 (Loss of Nonconforming Use Status), below. 
2.  Replacement of a Nonconforming Use. 
a.  A nonconforming use may be changed to a use of the same or more restrictive classification. 
b.  The replacement use shall serve as the "new bench mark" in terms of establishing the acceptable level of nonconformity. 
c.  Where a nonconforming use is changed to a use of a more restrictive classification, it shall not thereafter be changed to a use of a less restrictive classification. 
d.  An example of a change to a more restrictive classification would be changing from a restaurant with drive-in or drive through service to an auto parts sales store, or from an auto repair and maintenance facility (major) to a business support service facility in compliance with Table 2-6 (Commercial—Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements) in Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards). 
3.  Loss of Nonconforming Use Status. Without any further action by the City, a nonconforming use shall not retain the benefits under this chapter if: 
a.  The nonconforming use of land, or a nonconforming use within a structure, ceases for any reason for one hundred eighty days or more; 
i.  A vacant nonconformity may be occupied by a use for which it was designed if so occupied within a period of one hundred eighty days after the effective date of this development code or after the date when the nonconformity first became vacant. 
ii.  If the use is discontinued for a period of one hundred eighty days or more, the land or structure shall lose its nonconforming status, and shall be altered to conform to the provisions of this development code. The use shall be considered discontinued when any of the following apply: 
(A)  The intent of the owner to discontinue use of the nonconformity is apparent; or 
(B)  Where characteristic furnishings and equipment of the use have been removed and not replaced with equivalent infrastructure during this time. 
b.  The structure in which the nonconforming use is conducted or maintained is moved any distance on the site for any reason, or is removed from the site. 
c.  The one hundred eighty-day period shall begin to run as soon as the department becomes aware of the fact that the nonconforming use has been discontinued, moved, or removed in compliance with subsection a and b, above. 
4.  Additional Uses. Additional uses may be allowed on the site of a nonconforming use only in the case of a multi-tenant structure or site, or where the nonconforming use is first discontinued, and any replacement use complies with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
5.  Replacement Uses. The use of a site after the discontinuance or removal of a nonconforming use shall comply with all applicable requirements of this development code and the applicable zoning district. 
6.  Existing industrial uses and structures within the Mixed Use Corridor, as of March 1, 2013, shall be allowed to expand on property currently owned by the user. 
B.  Nonconforming Structures. 
1.  Normal Maintenance. A nonconforming structure may undergo normal maintenance and repairs including painting, interior and exterior wall surface repair, window and roof repair, and fixture replacement, in compliance with this subsection. 
2.  Nonconforming as to Use. A structure which is nonconforming in terms of use regulations may: 
a.  Not be added to or enlarged unless the structure, including every portion of the structure, is made to conform to all of the applicable provisions of this development code. 
b.  Undergo normal maintenance and repairs (e.g., painting, interior and exterior wall surface repair, window and roof repair, and fixture replacement) provided that no structural alterations shall be made except for those required by law or ordinance. 
3.  Nonconforming as to Area, Height, or Setback Regulations. A structure which is nonconforming in terms of area, height, or setback regulations may undergo additions or alterations, provided that the additions or alterations comply with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
4.  Moving of a Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure shall not be moved in whole or in part to any other location, either on the same parcel or on another parcel, unless every portion of the structure is made to conform to all of the applicable provisions of this development code after being moved. 
5.  Replacement After Destruction. 
a.  Not over Fifty percent. A nonconforming structure that is involuntarily damaged or partially destroyed by fire or any other calamity or act of God may be restored, provided the total cost of restoration shall not exceed an aggregate total of fifty percent of the then assessed value of the structure. 
b.  Over Fifty percent. If the damage or destruction exceeds fifty percent of the then assessed value of the structure, no repairs or reconstruction shall be made unless every portion of the structure is made to conform to all of the applicable provisions of this development code. 
c.  Assessed Value. For the purpose of this subsection, "assessed value" shall mean the then assessed value of the structure as shown on the current county property assessment rolls in effect at the time of the occurrence of the casualty, or on the date of application for the required building permit. 
6.  Replacement of a Residential Structure After Destruction. Any residential structure legally existing as a nonconforming use in any non-residential zoning district may be rebuilt or restored if damaged or destroyed by fire or any other calamity or act of God, provided the rebuilding or restoration is commenced within one hundred eighty days of the damage or destruction and diligently pursued to completion. However, the rebuilt or restored structure shall not exceed the square footage of the original structure and shall otherwise conform to all other applicable regulations for residential structures. (See also Section 17.68.040 (Single- and Multi-Family Dwelling Units Exempt, below.) 
7.  Seismic Retrofitting/Building Code Compliance. Repairs or alterations otherwise required by law shall be allowed in the following circumstances: 
a.  Reconstruction required to reinforce unreinforced masonry structures shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards; and 
b.  Reconstruction required to comply with California Building Code requirements shall be allowed without cost limitations, provided the retrofitting/code compliance is limited exclusively to compliance with earthquake safety standards and/or other applicable building code requirements, including state law (e.g., Title 24, California Code of Regulations, etc.). 
8.  Initiation of Construction. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any structure upon which actual construction was lawfully initiated before the effective date of this development code. For the purposes of this development code, actual construction shall mean the placing of construction materials in a permanent manner, excavation of a basement, or demolition of existing structures preparatory to rebuilding; provided, that in all cases construction work shall be diligently pursued until completion of the subject structure(s). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013; Ord. No. 1893, § 1, 4-2-2014)  
17.68.030 - Nonconforming signs. 
Requirements for nonconforming signs are provided by Section 17.34.100 (Nonconforming Signs). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.040 - Single- and multi-family dwelling units exempt. 
A.  Dwellings. Nonconforming single- and multi-family dwellings located in any zoning district that have been involuntarily damaged or destroyed by a catastrophic event may be reconstructed or replaced with a new structure(s) using the same development standards applied to the damaged or destroyed structure(s) (e.g., setbacks, square footage, building height, and density standards), but only when the reconstructed or replacement structures comply with state law (Government Code Section 65852.25). 
B.  Mobile Homes. A nonconforming mobile home may be replaced with a new or newer and larger mobile home placed in the same location as the former unit, subject to site plan and architectural approval (Section 17.40.020). 
C.  Code Compliance. All new construction shall comply with current building, electrical, plumbing, and fire code requirements. 
D.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval. The director may require site plan and architectural approval (Section 17.40.020) for the replacement of a destroyed dwelling or residential project. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.050 - Public structures and utilities exempt. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to require the discontinuance, removal, or termination, or to prohibit the alteration, expansion, maintenance, modernization, rebuilding, reconstruction, repair, or replacement of a publicly owned structure or utility. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.060 - Nonconforming parcels. 
A.  Determination of Nonconforming Status. A nonconforming parcel of record that does not comply with the access, area, or dimensional requirements of this development code for the zoning district in which it is located, shall be considered to be a legal building site if it meets one of the criteria specified by this section. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to produce sufficient evidence to establish the applicability of one or more of the following: 
1.  Approved Subdivision. The parcel was created through a subdivision approved by the city or the county, before incorporation. 
2.  Individual Parcel Legally Created by Deed. The parcel is under one ownership and of record, and was legally created by a recorded deed before the effective date of the zoning amendment that made the parcel nonconforming. 
3.  Variance or Lot Line Adjustment. The parcel was approved through the variance procedure (Section 17.40.050) or its current configuration resulted from a lot line adjustment. 
4.  Partial Government Acquisition. The parcel was created in conformity with the provisions of this development code, but was made nonconforming when a portion of the parcel was acquired by a governmental entity. 
B.  Limitations on Use of Nonconforming Parcels. Nonconforming parcels shall be developed and used only as follows: 
1.  Site Plan and Architectural Approval Required. The director may require site plan and architectural approval (Section 17.40.020) for development proposed on nonconforming parcels. 
2.  Further Subdivision Prohibited. Where structures have been erected on a nonconforming parcel, the area where the structures are located shall not be later subdivided, nor shall lot lines be altered through lot line adjustment, so as to reduce the building site area and/or frontage below the requirements of the applicable zoning district or other applicable provisions of this development code, or in any way that makes the use of the parcel more nonconforming. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.070 - Conformity of uses requiring use permits. 
A.  Use Allowed with Use Permit Approval. 
1.  Any use of a structure for which a use permit is required, or for which a use permit may be granted, which use is existing at the time of adoption of this development code, in any zoning district in which the use is allowed subject to the granting of a use permit, shall without further city action, be considered a conforming use. 
2.  A land use that was legally established without a use permit, but would be required by current development code provisions to have use permit approval, shall not be altered in any way unless a use permit is first obtained. 
B.  Use No Longer Allowed with Use Permit Approval. A land use that was established with use permit approval, but is not allowed with use permit approval by the current development code may continue only in compliance with the original use permit. If the original use permit specified a termination date, then the use shall terminate in compliance with the use permit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.080 - Unlawful uses and structures. 
A.  Violations. Uses and structures which did not comply with the applicable provisions of this development code or prior planning and zoning regulations when established are violations of this development code and are subject to the provisions of Chapter 17.76 (Enforcement). 
B.  Illegal Uses and Structures Prohibited. This chapter does not grant any right to continue occupancy of property containing an illegal use or structure. 
C.  Permits Required. The illegal use or structure shall not continue unless/until permits and entitlements required by this development code and the municipal code are first obtained. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.68.090 - Nuisance abatement. 
In the event that a nonconforming use or structure is found to constitute a public nuisance, appropriate action shall be taken by the city, in compliance with Chapter 17.76 of this code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.70 - APPEALS 
 
17.70.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes procedures for the following: 
A.  Commission's Review. The commission's review of a decision rendered by the director or SPARC; 
B.  Council's Review. The council's review of a decision rendered by the commission; and 
C.  Eligibility. Other eligible appellants, as identified in Section 17.70.040 (Eligibility), below. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.70.020 - Commission's review. 
A.  Review. The commission may choose to review a decision rendered by the director or SPARC. 
B.  Discussion. 
1.  A member of the commission may request the opportunity to discuss any decision previously rendered. 
2.  A majority vote of the commission is required to initiate an appeal of the decision. 
C.  Appeal. Once the vote to initiate an appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing by the director. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.70.030 - Council's review. 
A.  Review. The council may choose to review a decision rendered the commission. 
B.  Discussion. 
1.  A member of the council may request the opportunity to discuss any decision previously rendered. 
2.  A majority vote of the council is required to initiate an appeal of the decision. 
C.  Appeal. Once the vote to initiate an appeal is passed by a majority, the matter shall be scheduled for hearing by the city clerk. 
D.  Decision Final. The decision of the council on the appeal shall be final and shall become effective upon adoption of the resolution by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.70.040 - Eligibility. 
An appeal may be filed by: 
A.  Administrative Determination. Any person affected by an administrative determination or action by the director. 
B.  Land use Permit or Hearing Decision. In the case of a land use permit or hearing decision, by anyone who, in person or through a representative, presented testimony at a public hearing in connection with the decision being appealed, or who otherwise informed the city in writing of the nature of their concerns before the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.70.050 - Appeal subjects and jurisdiction. 
Determinations and actions that may be appealed, and the authority to act upon an appeal shall be as follows: 
A.  Ordinance Administration and Interpretation. The following determinations and actions of the director or SPARC may be appealed to the commission and then to the council: 
1.  Determinations on the meaning or applicability of the provisions of this development code that are believed to be in error, and cannot be resolved with staff; 
2.  Any determination that a permit application or information submitted with the application is incomplete, in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 65943); and 
3.  Any enforcement action in compliance with Chapter 17.76 (Enforcement). 
B.  Permit/Entitlement and Hearing Decisions. Decisions by the director or SPARC may be appealed to the commission. Decisions by the commission may be appealed to the council. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.70.060 - Appeal filing, processing, review and action. 
A.  Timing and Form of Appeal. 
1.  Appeal applications shall be submitted before 5:00 p.m. on the 10th business day following the date the decision is rendered by the director or SPARC, or the adoption of the resolution by the commission. 
2.  Appeal applications addressed to the commission shall be filed with the department, while appeals addressed to the council shall be filed with the city clerk. 
3.  The appeal application shall: 
a.  Specifically state the pertinent facts of the case and the basis for the appeal; 
b.  Be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for appeal applications; and 
c.  Be accompanied by the filing fee established by the council's fee resolution. 
B.  Delay of Proceedings. Filing of an appeal shall delay all proceedings associated with the matter subject to the appeal (e.g., issuance of a certificates of occupancy, building or grading permit, etc.), pending the city's final action on the appeal. 
C.  Joining an Appeal. 
1.  Only those persons who file an appeal within the specified appeal period shall be considered appellants of the matter under appeal. 
2.  Any person who wishes to join an appeal shall follow the same procedures for an appellant. 
3.  A person(s) shall not be allowed to join an appeal after the end of the specified appeal period. 
D.  Action on Appeals. The appeal body shall conduct a public hearing in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
1.  Scope of Review and Decision. When reviewing an appeal the review authority may: 
a.  Consider any issues associated with the decision being appealed, in addition to the specific grounds for the appeal. The review authority shall also consider any environmental determination applicable to the entitlement or decision being appealed; 
b.  By resolution, uphold, uphold in part, or reverse the action, the determination, or decision that is the subject of the appeal; 
c.  Adopt additional conditions of approval deemed reasonable and necessary; and 
d.  Disapprove the land use permit approved by the previous review authority, even though the appellant only requested a modification or elimination of one or more conditions of approval. 
2.  New Evidence. If new or different evidence is presented during the appeal hearing, the commission or council, may refer the matter back to the director, SPARC, or commission, as applicable, for a report on the new or different evidence before a final decision on the appeal. 
3.  Findings. When reviewing an appeal the review authority shall adopt findings in support of the intended action on the appeal. The nature of the findings shall be in compliance with the findings adopted by the original review authority (e.g., use permits 17.40.040, planned development permits 17.40.060, variances 17.40.050, etc.) 
E.  Mailing of Resolution. The director or city clerk, as applicable to the level of review authority, shall mail a copy of the resolution to the appellant, the applicant (if not the appellant), the commission, and the council within ten days after the date the decision is rendered. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.72 - AMENDMENTS 
 
17.72.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes provisions for the amendment of the general plan, the official zoning map, or this development code whenever required by public necessity and general welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.020 - Applicability. 
A.  General Plan. A general plan amendment may include revisions to text or diagrams. 
B.  Zoning Map. A zoning map amendment has the effect of rezoning property from one zoning district to another. 
C.  Development Code. A development code amendment may modify any standard, requirement, or procedure applicable to land use and/or development within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.030 - Initiation of amendments. 
An amendment to the general plan, the zoning map, or this development code shall be initiated in compliance with this section. 
A.  Who May Initiate an Amendment. An amendment may be initiated by: 
1.  The council; 
2.  The commission; 
3.  The director; or 
4.  The filing of an amendment application with the department by an eligible applicant, except for a development code amendment, which may only be initiated by the council or commission or director. 
B.  Application Filing and Processing. 
1.  An application for an amendment shall be filed and processed in compliance with Chapter 17.38 (Application Filing and Processing). 
2.  The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the department handout for amendment applications. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.040 - Hearings and notice. 
A.  Scheduling of Hearings. Upon receipt of a complete application to amend the general plan, the zoning map, or development code, or upon initiation by the commission or council, and following department review, public hearings shall be scheduled before the commission and council. 
B.  Notice of Hearings. Notice of the hearings shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.74 (Public Hearings). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.050 - Commission's action on amendments. 
A.  Commission's Recommendation. The commission shall make a written recommendation to the council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment, based upon the findings contained in Section 17.72.070 (Findings and Decision), below. 
B.  Recommendation for Disapproval. The decision of the commission, recommending disapproval of the amendment, shall be final unless, within twenty days after the commission's action, the applicant/appellant files a written appeal with the city clerk requesting a hearing before the council. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.060 - Council's action on amendments. 
A.  Approval or Disapproval of Amendment. Upon receipt of the commission's recommendation, the council shall, approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based upon the findings in Section 17.72.070 (Findings and Decision), below. 
B.  Referral to Commission. 
1.  If the council proposes to adopt any substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the commission during its hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the commission for its recommendation, in compliance with state law (Government Code Sections 65356 [General Plan amendments] and 65857 (Zoning Map/Development Code Amendments)). 
2.  Failure of the commission to report back to the council within forty-five days for general plan amendments or forty days for zoning map/development code amendments after the referral, or within a longer time set by the council, shall be deemed a recommendation for approval of the modification. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.070 - Findings and decision. 
A.  Findings for General Plan Amendments. An amendment to the general plan may be approved only if all of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner: 
1.  The proposed amendment is internally consistent with the general plan; 
2.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city; 
3.  The site is physically suitable (including absence of physical constraints, access, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and provision of utilities) for the requested/anticipated land use developments; and 
4.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
B.  Findings for Zoning Map/Development Code Amendments. An amendment to the official zoning map or this development code may be approved only if the review authority first finds all of the following, as applicable to the type of amendment. 
1.  Findings Required for All Zoning Map/Development Code Amendments. 
a.  The proposed amendment is consistent with the general plan; 
b.  The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the city; and 
c.  The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), and the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines. 
2.  Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The site is physically suitable (including absence of physical constraints, access, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and provision of utilities) for the requested zoning designations and anticipated land uses/developments. 
3.  Additional Finding for Development Code Amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.080 - Effective date. 
A zoning map/development code amendment shall become effective on the 31st day following the adoption of an ordinance by the council in compliance with Chapter 17.72 of this development code. A general plan amendment shall become effective upon the adoption of a resolution by the council. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.72.090 - Prezoning. 
A.  Purpose. An unincorporated property within the city's sphere of influence may be prezoned to the zoning district that would apply upon annexation to the city. 
B.  Initiation and Processing. A prezoning shall be initiated, processed, and approved or disapproved in the same manner as provided for other amendments by this chapter. 
C.  Application of Official Zoning Designation. Upon the effective date of annexation, the zoning designation established by prezoning shall become the official zoning for the property and shall be so designated on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.74 - PUBLIC HEARINGS 
 
17.74.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes procedures for public hearings before the director, SPARC, commission, and council. When a public hearing is required by this development code, public notice shall be given and the hearing shall be conducted as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.020 - Notice of hearing. 
When a land use permit, or other matter requires a public hearing, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with state law (Government Code Sections 65090, 65091, 65094, and 66451.3, and Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.), and as required by this chapter. 
A.  Contents of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include: 
1.  Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the hearing body; a brief description of the city's general procedure concerning the conduct of hearings and decisions; and the phone number and street address of the department, where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information; 
2.  Project Information. The name of the applicant; the city's file number assigned to the application; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; a general description, in text and/or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing; and 
3.  Statement on Environmental Document. If a draft negative declaration or environmental impact report has been prepared for the project in compliance with the Lodi Environmental Review Guidelines, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the hearing body will also consider approval of the draft negative declaration or certification of the final environmental impact report. 
B.  Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter for a land use permit, amendment, or appeal shall be given as follows, as required by state law (Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091). 
1.  Publication. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten days before the date of the hearing. 
2.  Mailing. Notice shall be mailed or delivered at least ten days before the date of the hearing to the following: 
a.  Owners of the Project Site. The owners of the property being considered in the application, or the owner's agent, and the applicant; 
b.  Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide schools, utilities, or other essential facilities or services to the project, whose ability to provide the facilities and services may be significantly affected; 
c.  Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the latest county equalized assessment roll, within a radius of three hundred feet from the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other person whose property might, in the judgment of the director, be affected by the proposed project; and 
d.  Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the director and has paid the required fee for the notice. 
3.  Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with subsection (B)(2) above is more than one thousand, the director may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by state law (Government Code Section 65091(a)(3)). 
4.  Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the director may provide any additional notice with content or using a distribution method as the director determines is necessary or desirable. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.030 - Scheduling of hearing. 
After the completion of any environmental documents required by the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the matter shall be scheduled for public hearing on a director, SPARC, commission, or council agenda (as applicable). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.040 - Review authority decision and notice. 
A.  Decision. 
1.  The review authority (director, SPARC, commission, or council, as applicable) may announce and record their decision on the matter being considered at the conclusion of a scheduled hearing, defer action and continue the matter to a later meeting agenda in compliance with Section 17.74.070 (Hearing Procedures), or, in the case of the director, take the matter under advisement. 
2.  The director may instead refer the matter to the commission for determination. A referral will require a new noticed hearing before the commission. 
3.  The decision of the council on any matter shall be final. 
B.  Notice of Decision. The notice of decision shall contain any conditions of approval, and reporting/monitoring requirements deemed necessary to mitigate any impacts and protect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare of the city. 
C.  Mailing of the Notice. 
1.  After the final decision or recommendation is rendered by the review authority, notice of the decision shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
2.  A copy of the notice of decision shall also be sent to the property owner, if different from the applicant and to all other persons who have filed a written request for notice. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.050 - Recommendation by commission. 
A.  Commission's Action. At the conclusion of any public hearing on an amendment (e.g., general plan, zoning map, or development code), a development agreement, or a specific plan the commission shall forward a recommendation, including all required findings, to the council for final action. 
B.  Mailing of Recommendation. Following the hearing, a copy of the commission's recommendation shall be mailed to the applicant at the address shown on the application. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.060 - Effective date of decision. 
A decision of the director, SPARC, or commission (other than a recommendation in compliance with Section 17.74.050) is final and effective after 5:00 p.m. on the 10th business day following the date of decision, unless an appeal is filed in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.74.070 - Hearing procedures. 
A.  Holding of Hearings. Hearings shall be held at the date, time, and place described in the public notice required by this chapter. 
B.  Continuances. If a hearing cannot be completed on the scheduled date, the presiding councilperson or commissioner, before the adjournment or recess of the hearing, may continue the hearing by publicly announcing the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued. 
C.  Additional Notice Not Required. Additional notice for the continued hearing is not required. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
Chapter 17.76 - ENFORCEMENT 
 
17.76.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
This chapter establishes provisions which are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this development code and any conditions of land use permit or subdivision approval, to promote the city's planning efforts, and for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.020 - Permits and licenses. 
All departments, officials, and public employees of the city who are assigned the authority or duty to issue permits or licenses shall comply with the provisions of this development code. 
A.  Permits in Conflict with Development Code. Permits for uses or structures that would be in conflict with the provisions of this development code shall not be issued. 
B.  Permits Deemed Void. Any permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this development code shall be deemed void. 
C.  Actions Deemed Void. Any action taken by an official or public employee of the city in conflict with the provisions of this development code shall be deemed void. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.030 - Official duty to enforce. 
A.  Designated City Officials. The city manager and director may: 
1.  Exercise the authority provided in Section 836.5 of the Penal Code; and 
2.  Issue citations for any violations of this development code pertaining to the use of any land and the addition, alteration, construction, conversion, erection, moving, reconstruction, or use of any structure. 
B.  Other City Officials. All officials of the city charged by the law with the general duty of enforcing city ordinances shall also enforce the provisions of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.040 - Violations. 
Any structure constructed or maintained contrary to the provisions of this development code and any use of land or structure operated or maintained contrary to the provisions of this development code are hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
A.  Public Nuisance. Any structure or use which is altered, constructed, converted, enlarged, erected, established, maintained, moved, or operated, contrary to the provisions of this development code or any applicable condition of approval imposed on a permit, is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and shall be subject to the remedies and penalties identified in this chapter and Chapter 1.08 of the municipal code. 
B.  Infractions. Except where otherwise provided by this development code, it is an infraction for any person to do any act forbidden or fail to perform any act required by this development code. Penalties for infractions shall be in compliance with state law (Government Code Section 36900) and Chapter 1.08 of the municipal code. 
C.  Stop Work Order. 
1.  Any construction in violation of this development code or any conditions imposed on a permit shall be subject to the issuance of a "stop work order." 
2.  Any violation of a stop work order shall constitute an infraction, subject to the penalties described in Chapter 1.08 of the municipal code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.050 - Remedies are cumulative. 
A.  New and Separate Offense. Each day any violation of this development code continues is a new and separate offense. 
B.  Cumulative, Not Exclusive. All remedies contained in this development code for the handling of violations or enforcement of the provisions of this development code shall be cumulative and not exclusive of any other applicable provisions of city, county, state, or federal law. 
C.  Other Remedies. Should a person be found guilty and convicted of an infraction for the violation of any provision of this development code, the conviction shall not prevent the city from pursuing any other available remedy to correct the violations. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.060 - Inspection. 
A.  Preapproval Inspections. Every applicant seeking a permit or any other action in compliance with this development code shall allow the city officials handling the application access to any premises or property which is the subject of the application. 
B.  Post Approval Inspections. If the permit or other action in compliance with this development code is approved, the owner or applicant shall allow appropriate city officials access to the premises in order to determine continued compliance with the approved permit and/or any conditions of approval imposed on the permit. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.070 - Permit revocation or modification. 
A.  Procedures. This section provides procedures for securing punitive revocation or modification of previously approved land use permits or entitlements. 
B.  Revocations. The city's action to revoke an entitlement shall have the effect of terminating the entitlement and denying the privileges granted by the original approval. 
C.  Modifications. 
1.  The city's action to modify rather than revoke an entitlement shall have the effect of changing the operational aspects of the entitlement. 
2.  The changes may include the operational aspects related to buffers, duration of the entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc. 
D.  Hearings and Notice. 
1.  The appropriate review authority shall hold a public hearing to revoke or modify an application, entitlement, or permit granted in compliance with the provisions of [this] development code. 
2.  Ten days before the public hearing, notice shall be delivered in writing to the applicant and/or owner of the property for which the permit was granted. 
3.  Notice shall be deemed delivered two days after being mailed, certified and first class, through the United States Postal Service, postage paid, to the owner as shown on the county's current equalized assessment roll and to the project applicant, if not the owner of the subject property. 
E.  Review Authority Action. 
1.  Permits. A land use entitlement or permit may be revoked or modified by the review authority (e.g., director, SPARC, commission, or council) which originally approved the entitlement or permit, or the equivalent city review authority, for entitlements or permits originally approved under the county's authority, if any one of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner: 
a.  Circumstances under which the entitlement or permit was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner and the public health, safety, and welfare require the revocation; 
b.  The entitlement or permit was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant's testimony presented during the public hearing, for the entitlement or permit; 
c.  One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated; 
d.  The use or structure for which the permit was granted has ceased to exist or has been suspended for at least one hundred eighty days, as defined in Section 17.68.020(A)(3) (Loss of Nonconforming Status); 
e.  The improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute; or 
f.  The improvement/use allowed by the permit has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare, or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a public nuisance. 
2.  Variances. A variance (major or minor) may be revoked or modified by the review authority which originally approved the entitlement, or the equivalent city review authority, for entitlements originally approved under the county's authority, if any one of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner, in addition to those outlined in subsection (B)(1), above: 
a.  Circumstances under which the entitlement or permit was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance; or 
b.  One or more of the conditions of the variance have not been met, or have been violated, and the grantee has not substantially exercised the rights granted by the variance. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.080 - Initial enforcement action. 
This section describes the procedures for initiating enforcement action in cases where the director has determined that real property within the city is being used, maintained, or allowed to exist in violation of the provisions of this development code. It is the objective of these provisions to encourage the voluntary cooperation of responsible parties in the prompt correction of violations, so that the other enforcement measures provided by this chapter may be avoided. 
A.  Notice to Responsible Parties. The director shall provide the record owner of the subject site and any person in possession or control of the site with a written notice of violation, which shall include the following information: 
1.  A description of the violation, and citations of applicable development code provisions being violated; 
2.  A time limit for correcting the violation in compliance with subsection B, below; 
3.  A statement that the city intends to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with the abatement of the violations in compliance with Section 17.76.100 (Recovery of Costs), and/or initiate legal action as described in Section 17.76.090 (Legal Remedies); 
4.  A statement that the property owner may request and be provided a meeting with the director to discuss possible methods and time limits for the correction of the violations. 
B.  Time Limit for Correction. 
1.  The notice of violation shall state that the violations shall be corrected within thirty days from the date of the notice to avoid further enforcement action by the city, unless the responsible party contacts the director within that time to arrange for a longer period for correction. 
2.  The thirty-day time limit may be extended by the director upon determining that the responsible party will likely correct the violations within a reasonable time. 
3.  The director may also require through the notice of violation that the correction occur within less than thirty days if the director determines that the violation constitutes a hazard to public health or safety. 
C.  Use of Other Enforcement Procedures. The enforcement procedures of Section 17.76.090 (Legal Remedies) may be employed by the director after or instead of the provisions of this section where the director determines that this section would be ineffective in securing the correction of the violations within a reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.090 - Legal remedies. 
The city may choose to undertake any, or a combination, of the following legal actions to correct and/or abate any nuisance or violation of this development code. 
A.  Civil Actions. 
1.  Injunction. The city attorney, upon order of the council, may apply to the Superior Court for injunctive relief to terminate a violation of this development code. 
2.  Abatement Proceedings. Where any person fails to abate a violation after being provided a notice of violation in compliance with Section 17.76.080(A) and the opportunity to correct or end the violation, the city attorney, upon order of the council, shall apply to the Superior Court for an order authorizing the city to undertake actions necessary to abate the violation and require the violator to pay for the cost of the actions. 
3.  Nuisance Abatement. The city may pursue nuisance abatement in compliance with the Lodi Municipal Code. 
B.  Civil Remedies and Penalties. 
1.  Civil Penalties. Any person who willfully violates the provisions of this development code or any permit issued in compliance with this development code, shall be liable for a civil penalty in compliance with the council's fee resolution for each day that the violation continues to exist. 
2.  Costs and Damages. Any person violating any provisions of this development code or any permit issued in compliance with this development code, shall be liable to the city for the costs incurred and the damages suffered by the city, its agents, and agencies as a direct result of the violations. 
3.  Procedure. In determining the amount of the civil penalty to impose, the court should consider all relevant circumstances, including the extent of the harm caused by the conduct constituting a violation, the nature and persistence of the conduct, the length of time over which the conduct occurred, the assets, liabilities, and net worth of the defendant, whether corporate or individual, and any corrective action taken by defendant. 
C.  Criminal Actions and Penalties. Any person, whether as agent, principal, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of any of the provisions of this development code shall be guilty of an infraction and shall be subject to the penalties identified in the bail schedule adopted by the San Joaquin County Superior Court. 
D.  No limit on City's Options. The penalties identified in this chapter do not limit the right of the city through its legal representative(s), as authorized by the council upon request of the enforcing officials, to institute any appropriate legal procedure(s) as prescribed by law to abate, correct, enjoin, or restrain any actual or threatened violation of this development code. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.100 - Recovery of costs. 
This section establishes procedures for the recovery of administrative costs, including staff and city attorney time expended on the enforcement of the provisions of this development code in cases where no permit is required in order to correct a violation. The intent of this section is to recover city administrative costs reasonably related to enforcement. 
A.  Record of Costs. 
1.  The department shall maintain records of all administrative costs, incurred by responsible city departments, associated with the processing of violations and enforcement of this development code, and shall recover the costs from the property owner in compliance with this section. 
2.  Staff time shall be calculated at an hourly rate as established and revised from time to time by the council. 
B.  Notice. Upon investigation and a determination that a violation of any of the provisions of this development code is found to exist, the director shall notify the record owner or any person having possession or control of the property by mail, of the existence of the violation, the department's intent to charge the property owner for all administrative costs associated with enforcement, and of the owner's right to a hearing on any objections they may have. The notice shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. 
C.  Summary of Costs and Notice. 
1.  At the conclusion of the case, the director shall send a summary of costs associated with enforcement to the owner and/or person having possession or control of the property by certified and first class mail. 
2.  The summary shall include a notice in a form approved by the city attorney, advising the responsible party of their right to request a hearing on the charges for city cost recovery within ten days of the date of the notice, and that if no request for hearing is filed, the responsible party will be liable for the charges. 
3.  In the event that no request for hearing is timely filed or, after a hearing the director affirms the validity of the costs, the property owner or person in control shall be liable to the city in the amount stated in the summary or any lesser amount as determined by the director. 
4.  The costs shall be recoverable by the city in any of the following manners: 
a.  A civil action in the name of the city, in any court of competent jurisdiction; or 
b.  By tax assessment; or 
c.  By a lien on the subject property. 
D.  Request for Hearing on Costs. Any property owner, or other person having possession and control of the subject property, who receives a summary of costs shall have the right to a hearing before the director on their objections to the proposed costs. 
1.  A request for hearing shall be filed with the department within ten days of the service by mail of the department's summary of costs, on a form provided by the department. 
2.  Within thirty days of the filing of the request, and on ten days written notice, the director shall hold a hearing on the objections, and determine their validity. 
3.  In determining the validity of the costs, the director shall consider whether the total costs are reasonable in the circumstances of the case. Factors to be considered include: whether the present owner created the violation; whether there is a present ability to correct the violation; whether the owner moved promptly to correct the violation; the degree of cooperation provided by the owner; and whether reasonable minds can differ as to whether a violation exists. 
4.  The director's decision shall be appealable directly to the council in compliance with Chapter 17.70 (Appeals). 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.110 - Additional permit processing fees. 
Any person who alters, constructs, converts, enlarges, erects, establishes, maintains, moves, or operates any land use or structure without first obtaining any permit required by this development code, shall pay the additional permit processing fees established by the council's fee resolution for the correction of the violations, before being granted a permit for a use or structure on the site. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.76.120 - Reinspection fees. 
A.  Amount and Applicability of Reinspection Fee. 
1.  A reinspection fee shall be imposed on each person who receives a notice of violation, notice and order, or letter of correction of any provision of this development code, the municipal code, adopted building code, or state law. 
a.  The fee amount shall be established by the council's fee resolution. 
b.  The fee may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection conducted when the particular violation for which an inspection or reinspection is scheduled is not fully abated or corrected as directed by, and within the time and manner specified in, the notice or letter. 
2.  The fee shall not apply to the original inspection to document the violations and shall not apply to the first scheduled compliance inspection made after the issuance of a notice or letter, whether or not the correction has been made. 
B.  Continuation of the Original Case. 
1.  If a notice or letter has been previously issued for the same violation and the property has been in compliance with the provisions of this development code or the municipal code for less than one hundred eighty days, the violation shall be deemed a continuation of the original case, and all inspections or reinspections, including the first inspection for the repeated offense, shall be charged a reinspection fee. 
2.  This fee is intended to compensate for administrative costs for unnecessary city inspections, and is not a penalty for violating this development code or the municipal code. 
3.  Any reinspection fees imposed shall be separate and apart from any fines or penalties imposed for violation of this development code or the municipal code, or costs incurred by the city for the abatement of a public nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
ARTICLE 7. - DEFINITIONS  
Chapter 17.78 - DEFINITIONS 
 
17.78.010 - Purpose of article. 
This article provides definitions of terms and phrases used in this development code that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If any of the definitions in this article conflict with definitions in other provisions of the municipal code, these definitions shall control for the purposes of this development code. If a word is not defined in this article, or in other provisions of the development code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013)  
17.78.020 - Definitions of specialized terms and phrases. 
As used in this development code, the following terms and phrases shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context in which they are used clearly requires otherwise. 
A.  Definitions, "A." 
"ACE" means the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the federal agency responsible for issuing wetlands delineations. 
"Accessory dwelling units" means a second permanent dwelling that is accessory to a primary dwelling on the same site. An accessory dwelling unit provides complete, independent living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, sanitation, and parking. 
"Accessory residential uses and structures" means any use and/or structure that is customarily a part of, and clearly incidental and secondary to, a residence and does not change the character of the residential use. These uses include the following detached accessory structures, and other similar structures normally associated with a residential use of property: 
Garages; 
Gazebos; 
Greenhouses; 
Spas and hot tubs; 
Storage sheds; 
Studios; 
Swimming pools; 
Tennis and other on-site sport courts; 
Workshops. 
Also includes the indoor storage of automobiles (including their incidental restoration and repair), personal recreational vehicles and other personal property, accessory to a residential use. Does not include: accessory dwelling units, which are separately defined, or home satellite dish and other receiving antennas for earth-based TV and radio broadcasts (see "telecommunications facilities"). 
"Accessory retail uses" means the retail sales of various products (including food) and/or the provision of personal services (e.g., hair cutting, etc.) within a health care, hotel, office, or industrial complex for the purpose of serving employees or customers, and is not visible from public streets. These uses include pharmacies, gift shops, and food service establishments within hospitals; convenience stores and food service establishments within hotel, office and industrial complexes. 
"Accessory  structure" means a structure that is physically detached from, secondary and incidental to, and commonly associated with the primary structure. For the purposes of this development code, accessory structures and uses include: detached garages, greenhouses, artist's studios, and workshops; hot tubs, jacuzzis, spas, and swimming pools, together with any enclosures; and any other open air enclosures, including gazebos and detached patio covers. 
"Accessory  use" means a use customarily incidental to, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same parcel, which does not alter the principal use nor serve property other than the parcel where the principal use is located. 
"Adult  entertainment businesses" means any adult bookstore, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, adult motion picture theater, cabaret, sexual encounter center, or any other business or establishment that offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas," but not including those uses or activities, the regulation of which is preempted by state law. Refer to Chapter 5.40 of the Lodi Municipal Code for adult business definitions. 
"Affordable  unit" means an ownership or rental housing unit as required by this section, which is affordable by households with very low or low income. 
"Agent"  means a person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with city employees, committees, commissions, and the council, regarding matters regulated by this development code. 
"Agricultural  processing" means the processing of crops after harvest, to prepare them for on-site marketing or processing and packaging elsewhere. Includes the following: 
Alfalfa cubing; 
Corn shelling; 
Cotton ginning; 
Custom grist mills; 
Custom milling of flour, feed and grain; 
Drying of corn, rice, hay, fruits and vegetables; 
Grain cleaning and custom grinding; 
Hay baling and cubing; 
Pre-cooling and packaging of fresh or farm-dried fruits and vegetables; 
Sorting, grading and packing of fruits and vegetables; 
Tree nut hulling and shelling. 
Any of the above activities performed in the field with mobile equipment not involving permanent structures are included under the definition of "crop production." 
"Alcoholic beverage sales" means the retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premise consumption. 
"Alley" means a public or private roadway, generally not more than thirty feet wide that provides vehicle access to the rear or side of parcels having other public street frontage, that is not intended for general traffic circulation. 
"Allowed use" means a use of land identified by Article 2 (Land Use and Development Standards) as a permitted or conditional use that may be established with land use permit and, where applicable, site plan and site plan and design review and/or building permit approval, subject to compliance with all applicable provisions of this development code. 
"Alteration" means any construction or physical change in the internal arrangement of rooms or the supporting members of a structure, or a change in the external appearance of any structure, not including painting. 
"Amenity" means interior features which are not essential to the health and safety of the resident, but provide visual or aesthetic appeal, or are provided as conveniences rather than as necessities. Interior amenities may include, but are not limited to fireplaces, garbage disposals, dishwashers, cabinet and storage space and bathrooms in excess of one. Amenities shall in no way include items required by city building codes or other ordinances which are necessary to insure the safety of the building and its residents. 
"Antenna" means any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or similar devices used for the transmission and/or reception of electromagnetic radiation waves, including devices with active elements extending in any direction, and directional parasitic arrays with elements attached to a generally horizontal boom which may be mounted on a vertical support structure. Antenna-related definitions include the following: 
1.  Antenna, Amateur Radio. Any antenna used for transmitting and receiving radio signals in conjunction with an amateur ratio station licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC). 
2.  Antenna, Building or Roof Mounted. An antenna mounted on the side or top of a building or another structure (e.g., water tank, billboard, church steeple, freestanding sign, etc.), where the entire weight of the antenna is supported by the building, through the use of an approved framework or other structural system which is attached to one or more structural members of the roof or walls of the building. 
3.  Antenna, Dish. A dish-like antenna used to link communication sites together by wireless transmissions of voice or data. Also called microwave dish antenna. 
4.  Antenna, Ground Mounted. Any freestanding antenna, the entire weight of which is supported by an approved freestanding platform, framework, or other structural system which is attached to the ground by a foundation. 
5.  Antenna, Monopole. A structure composed of a single spire used to support antennas and related equipment. 
6.  Antenna, Panel. An antenna or array of antennas that are flat and rectangular and are designed to concentrate a radio signal in a particular area. Also referred to as a directional antenna. 
7.  Antenna, Satellite. An antenna for the home, business, or institutional reception of television, data, and other telecommunications broadcasts from orbiting satellites. 
8.  Antenna, Whip. An antenna consisting of a single, slender, rod-like element, which is supported only at or near its base. They are typically less than six inches in diameter and measure up to eighteen feet in height. Also called omnidirectional, stick or pipe antennas. 
"Animal raising" means the keeping/raising of farm animals, including cattle, goats, horses, sheep, swine (including pot bellied pigs), fowl, poultry, and other animals determined by the director to not be common household pets. Does not include: birds, cats, dogs, and other household pets or exotic animals, which are separately defined. 
Apartment. See "multi-family dwellings." 
"Applicant" means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or an entity or combination of entities which seeks city permits and approvals. 
"Approval" means includes both approval and approval with conditions. 
Area, Lot. See "lot area." 
"Art, antique, collectible and gift stores" means retail sales uses including antique shops, art galleries, curio, gift, and souvenir shops, and the sales of collectible items including sports cards and comic books. 
"At one location" means all adjacent land owned or controlled by the applicant, the property lines of which are contiguous at any point, or the property lines of which are separated only by a public or private street, road or other public or private right-of-way, or separated only by other land of the applicant. 
"Attic" means the area located between the uppermost plate and the roof or ridge of a structure. 
"Auto parts sales" means stores that sell new automobile parts, tires, and accessories. May also include minor parts installation (see "vehicle services"). Does not include tire recapping establishments, which are found under "vehicle services" or businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, which are included under "recycling—scrap and dismantling yards." 
"Auto repair and maintenance" means the repair, alteration, restoration, towing, painting, cleaning (including self-service and attended car washes), or finishing of automobiles, trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and other vehicles as a primary use, including the incidental wholesale and retail sale of vehicle parts as an accessory use. This use includes the following categories: 
1.  Major Repair/Body Work. Repair facilities dealing with entire vehicles. These establishments provide towing, collision repair, other body work, and painting services; and also include tire recapping establishments. 
2.  Minor Maintenance/Repair. Minor facilities specialize in limited aspects of repair and maintenance (e.g., muffler and radiator shops, quick-lube, etc.). 
Does not include automobile parking (see "parking facilities/vehicle storage"), repair shops that are part of a vehicle dealership on the same site (see "auto sales and rental," and "recreational vehicle sales and rental"), automobile service stations, which are separately defined, or automobile dismantling yards, which are included under "recycling—scrap and dismantling yards." 
"Auto sales and rental" means retail establishments selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans. May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not include: the sale of auto parts/accessories separate from a vehicle dealership (see "auto parts sales"); bicycle and moped sales (see "general retail"); mobile home sales (see "mobile home and RV sales"); tire recapping establishments (see "auto repair and maintenance"); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts, (see "recycling — scrap and dismantling yards"); or "service stations," which are separately defined. 
"Automated teller machines (ATM)" means computerized, self-service machines used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals and fund transfers, without contact with financial institution personnel. The machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations. 
Automobile Dismantling Yard. See "recycling—scrap, and dismantling yards." 
B.  Definitions, "B." 
"Banks and financial services" means financial institutions including: 
Banks and trust companies; 
Credit agencies; 
Holding (but not primarily operating) companies; 
Lending and thrift institutions; 
Other investment companies; 
Securities/commodity contract brokers and dealers; 
Security and commodity exchanges; 
Vehicle finance (equity) leasing agencies. 
See also, "automated teller machine," above. 
Bar. See "night clubs and bars." 
"Basic services" means services provided by a residential care facility for the elderly that may include daily activities (social, recreational and educational); community space; utilities and cleaning; safety and security; twenty-four hour experienced staff; maintenance of residence and grounds; personal care; three daily meals; family support activities; transportation; and medication administration. 
"Bed and breakfast inns (B&Bs)" means residential structures with one family in permanent residence with up to five bedrooms rented for overnight lodging, where meals may be provided subject to applicable health department regulations. A bed and breakfast inn with more than five guest rooms is considered a hotel or motel, and is included under the definition of "hotels and motels." Does not include room rental, which is separately defined (see "rooming and boarding houses). 
"Block" means property abutting on one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting or intercepting streets, or nearest intersecting or intercepting streets and railroad right-of-way or waterway or subdivided acreage 
Building. See "structure." 
"Building material stores" means retail establishments selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display and sales occur indoors. Includes paint, wallpaper, glass, fixtures. Includes all these stores selling to the general public, even if contractor sales account for a major proportion of total sales. Includes incidental retail ready-mix concrete operations, except where excluded by a specific zoning district. Establishments primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating, and air conditioning equipment and supplies are classified in "warehousing, wholesaling and distribution." Hardware stores are listed in the definition of "general retail," even if they sell some building materials. 
"Business support services" means establishments primarily within buildings, providing other businesses with services including maintenance, repair and service, testing, rental, etc., also includes: 
Blueprinting; 
Business equipment repair services (except vehicle repair, see "Vehicle Services"); 
Commercial art and design (production); 
Computer-related services (rental, repair); 
Copying and quick printing services; 
Equipment rental businesses within buildings (rental yards are "outdoor sales yards"); 
Film processing laboratories; 
Heavy equipment repair services where repair occurs on the client site; 
Janitorial services; 
Mail advertising services (reproduction and shipping); 
Outdoor advertising services; 
Photofinishing; 
Protective services (other than office related); 
Soils and materials testing laboratories; 
Window cleaning. 
C.  Definitions, "C." 
"California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)" means state law (California Public Resources Code Sections 19000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, prior to allowing the action to occur. 
"California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC)" means the governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the state. 
"Car washes" means permanent, self-service and/or attended car washing establishments, including fully mechanized facilities. May include detailing services. Temporary car washes are fund-raising activities, typically conducted at a service station or other automotive-related business, where volunteers wash vehicles by hand, and the duration of the event is limited to one day. See Section 17.40.030 (Temporary Use Permits). 
"Care and supervision" means services which if provided require a residential care facility for the elderly to be licensed. These services include assistance as needed with activities of daily living and the assumption of varying degrees of responsibility for the safety and well-being of residents to include: assistance in dressing, grooming, bathing and other personal hygiene; assistance with taking medication; central storing and distribution of medications; assistance with medical and dental care (including transportation); maintenance of house rules; supervision of resident schedules and activities; voluntary maintenance and supervision of resident monies or property; and monitoring food intake or special diets. 
"Caretaker quarters" means a residence that is accessory to a nonresidential primary use of the site, where needed for security, or twenty-four-hour care or supervision. 
"Cell site" means a geographical area with a radius of two to eight miles that contains both transmitting and receiving antennae. 
"Cellular" means an analog or digital wireless communication technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites, each of which contains antennae. 
"Certificate of Public convenience and necessity" means a certificate issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). 
"City" means the city of Lodi referred to in this development code as the "city." 
"City council" means the Lodi city council, referred to in this development code as the "council." 
"City resident" means any person who has lived within the city limits of the city of Lodi continually for one year immediately prior to the date of application for an affordable unit. 
"Clubs, lodges, and membership meeting halls" means permanent, headquarters-type and meeting facilities for organizations operating on a membership basis for the promotion of the interests of the members, including facilities for: 
Business associations; 
Civic, social and fraternal organizations; 
Labor unions and similar organizations; 
Political organizations; 
Professional membership organizations; 
Other membership organizations. 
"Co-location" means the locating of wireless communications equipment from more than one provider on a single ground-mounted, roof-mounted, or structure-mounted facility. 
Commission. See "planning commission." 
"Common interest development" means any residential condominium, community apartment house, or stock cooperative. 
"Community care facility" means any place or building which is maintained and operated to provide twenty-four-hour non-medical residential care, or day care services for children, adults, or both limited to the following: 
1.  Residential Care Facility. A home, group care facility, residential care facility for the elderly, foster home, alcohol and/or drug recovery facility, intermediate care facility or similar facility, for twenty-four-hour non-medical care of persons in need of personal services, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual. 
2.  Family Day Care. Regularly provided care, protection and supervision of children, in the care giver's own home, for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day, while the parents or authorized representatives are away. 
a.  Small Family Day Care Home. A home that provides family child care for up to six children, or for up to eight children, including children under age ten who live in the licensee's home, if all of the following conditions are met: 
i.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age. 
ii.  No more than two infants are cared for during any time when more than six children are being cared for. 
iii.  The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two additional school age children and that there may be up to seven or eight children in the home at one time. 
iv.  The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
b.  Large Family Day Care Home. A home that provides family child care for up to twelve children, or for up to fourteen children, including children under age ten who live in the licensee's home and the assistant provider's children under age ten, if all of the following criteria are met: 
i.  At least two of the children are at least six years of age. 
ii.  No more than three infants are cared for during any time when more than twelve children are being cared for. 
iii.  The licensee notifies each parent that the facility is caring for two additional school age children and that there may be up to thirteen or fourteen children in the home at one time. 
iv.  The licensee obtains the written consent of the property owner when the family day care home is operated on property that is leased or rented. 
3.  Day Care Center. Commercial or non-profit child or adult day care facilities designed and approved to accommodate fifteen or more. Includes infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and facilities for adults who require supervision and care because of advanced age, mental or physical deterioration, dementia, Alzheimer's disease, or similar disabling condition. These may be operated as part of a business, school, or religious facility, or as an independent land use. 
"Community centers" means multi-purpose meeting and recreational facilities typically consisting of one or more meeting or multi-purpose rooms, kitchen and/or outdoor barbecue facilities, that are available for use by various groups for activities including meetings, parties, receptions, dances, etc. 
"Community garden" means a site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, flowers, which is shared and maintained by nearby residents. 
"Community space" means space within a residential care facility for the elderly that may include dining facilities such as a cafe or snack bar; beauty or barber shops; retail shops that sell food items, non-prescription drugs, small household items and gifts; pharmacies; libraries; game rooms; meeting rooms; music/craft rooms; community laundry rooms; community kitchens; and other similar facilities for residents and guests. 
"Condominium" means, as defined by Civil Code Section 1315, a development where undivided interest in common in a portion of real property is coupled with a separate interest in space called a unit, the boundaries of which are described on a recorded final map or parcel map. The area within the boundaries may be filled with air, earth, or water, or any combination thereof, and need not be physically attached to any land except by easements for access and, if necessary, support. 
Congregate Living Health Facility. See "medical services—extended care". 
"Construction/heavy equipment sales and rental" means retail establishments selling or renting heavy construction equipment, including cranes, earth moving equipment, heavy trucks, etc. 
"Contractor storage yards" means storage yards operated by, or on behalf of a contractor for storage of large equipment, vehicles, or other materials commonly used in the individual contractor's type of business; storage of scrap materials used for repair and maintenance of contractor's own equipment; and buildings or structures for uses such as offices and repair facilities. 
Convalescent Hospital. See "medical services—extended care". 
"Convenience stores" means retail stores of generally three thousand five hundred square feet or less in gross floor area, which carry a range of merchandise oriented to convenience and travelers' shopping needs. 
"County" means the county of San Joaquin, state of California. 
"Crop production" means commercial agricultural field and orchard uses including production of: 
Field crops; 
Flowers and seeds; 
Fruits; 
Grains; 
Grapes; 
Melons; 
Ornamental crops; 
Tree nuts; 
Trees and sod; 
Vegetables; 
Also includes associated crop preparation services and harvesting activities, such as mechanical soil preparation, irrigation system construction, spraying, crop processing and retail sales in the field, including sales sheds. 
D.  Definitions, "D." 
"Density" means the number of housing units per net acre, unless otherwise stated, for residential uses. 
"Department" means the Lodi community development department, referred to in this development code as "department." 
"Detached" means any structure that does not have a wall or roof in common with another structure. 
"Developer" means any person, firm, partnership, association, joint venture, corporation, or an entity or combination of entities that seeks city permits and approvals for development. 
"Development" means any construction activity or alteration of the landscape, its terrain contour or vegetation, including the erection or alteration of structures, and/or the establishment of a new land use. New development is any construction, or alteration of an existing structure or land use, after the effective date of this development code. 
"Development agreement" means a contract between the city and an applicant for a development project, in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Development Agreements) of this development code and Government Code Sections 65864 et seq. A development agreement is intended to provide assurance to the applicant that an approved project may proceed subject to the policies, rules, regulations, and conditions of approval applicable to the project at the time of approval, regardless of any changes to city policies, rules, and regulations after project approval. In return, the city may be assured that the applicant will provide infrastructure and/or pay fees required by a new project. 
"Development code" means the Lodi Development Code, Title 17 of the Lodi Municipal Code, referred to herein as "this development code." 
"Development standards" means the provisions of Lodi Development Code. 
"Director" means the city of Lodi community development director, or designee of the director. 
District. See "zoning district." 
"Drive-in and drive-thru sales" means facilities where food or other products may be purchased by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include fast-food restaurants, drive-through coffee, dairy product, photo stores, etc. 
"Drive-in and drive-thru services" means facilities where services may be obtained by motorists without leaving their vehicles. These facilities include drive-up bank teller windows, dry cleaners, etc. Does not include: automatic teller machines (ATMs) or automobile service stations, or car washes, which are separately defined. 
"Driveway" means a vehicle accessway extending from road or street to a building or structure, vehicle parking or delivery area, or pedestrian drop-off point, or between such areas on a site. 
"Duplex" means a residential structure under single ownership containing two dwellings. 
"Dwelling, dwelling unit, or housing unit" means a room or group of internally connected rooms that have sleeping, cooking, eating, and sanitation facilities, but not more than one kitchen, which constitute an independent housekeeping unit, occupied by or intended for one household on a long-term basis. 
"Dwelling group" means two or more detached dwelling units located on a single parcel of land in one ownership and having any yard, access driveway or court in common. 
E.  Definitions, "E." 
"Easement" means a grant of one or more of the property rights by the property owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another person or entity. 
"Electromagnetic field" means the local electric and magnetic fields caused by voltage and the flow of electricity that envelop the space surrounding an electrical conductor. 
"Electronics, equipment, and appliance manufacturing" means establishments engaged in manufacturing machinery, apparatus, and supplies for the generation, storage, transmission, transformation and use of electrical energy, including: 
Appliances such as stoves/ovens, refrigerators, freezers, laundry equipment, fans, vacuum cleaners, sewing machines; 
Aviation instruments; 
Computers, computer components, and peripherals; 
Electrical transmission and distribution equipment; 
Electronic components and accessories, semiconductors, integrated circuits, and related devices; 
Electronic instruments, components and equipment such as calculators and computers; 
Electrical welding apparatus; 
Lighting and wiring equipment such as lamps and fixtures, wiring devices, vehicle lighting; 
Industrial apparatus; 
Industrial controls; 
Instruments for measurement, testing, analysis and control, associated sensors and accessories; 
Miscellaneous electrical machinery, equipment and supplies such as batteries, X-ray apparatus and tubes, electromedical and electrotherapeutic apparatus, electrical equipment for internal combustion engines; 
Motors and generators; 
Optical instruments and lenses; 
Photographic equipment and supplies; 
Pre-recorded magnetic tape; 
Radio and television receiving equipment such as television and radio sets, phonograph records and surgical, medical and dental instruments, equipment, and supplies; 
Surveying and drafting instruments; 
Telephone and telegraph apparatus; 
Transformers, switch gear and switchboards; 
Watches and clocks; 
Does not include testing laboratories (soils, materials testing, etc.) (see "business support services"), or research and development facilities separate from manufacturing (see "research and development"). 
"Enhanced specialized mobile radio" means a digital wireless communication technology that specializes in providing dispatching services. 
"Enlargement of use" means the expansion of a land use activity on a site or within a structure so that the use/activity occupies more floor or site area. 
"Environmental impact report (EIR)" means an informational document used to assess the physical characteristics of an area and to determine what effects will result if the area is altered by a proposed action, prepared in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
Equipment Rental, Indoor. "Indoor equipment rental means service establishments which may offer a wide variety of materials and equipment for rental. Construction equipment rental is separately defined. 
F.  Definitions, "F." 
"Family" means one or more persons occupying a premises and living as a single housekeeping unit, as distinguished from a group occupying a lodging house or hotel. A family includes the necessary servants. 
"Farmworker housing" means a housing accommodation developed for and/or provided to a minimum of five farmworkers, and shall consist of any living quarters, dwelling, boarding house, tent, barracks, bunkhouse, mobile home, recreational vehicle, travel trailer, or other housing accommodation maintained in one or more buildings and on one or more sites. Permanent housing for farmworkers who live in Lodi year-round is treated the same as other permanent housing (i.e., single family or multi-family). Seasonal or migrant farmworker housing is treated the same as group residential. 
"Feasible" means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social and technological factors. 
Floor Area, Gross. "Gross floor area" means the area in square feet of all floors within a building, measured from the outside surfaces of the exterior walls. 
Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The floor area ratio (FAR) is the ratio of floor area to total lot area. FAR restrictions are used to limit the maximum floor area allowed on a site (including all structures on the site). The maximum floor area of all structures (measured from exterior wall to exterior wall) permitted on a site (including carports) shall be determined by multiplying the floor area ratio (FAR) by the total net area of the site (FAR x net site area = maximum allowable floor area). 
"Flower tower" means a structure that integrates a monopole into a light pole or other utility pole. 
"Food and beverage manufacturing" means manufacturing establishments producing or processing foods and beverages for human consumption, and certain related products. Includes: 
Bakeries; 
Bottling plants; 
Breweries; 
Candy, sugar and confectionery products manufacturing; 
Catering services separate from stores or restaurants; 
Coffee roasting; 
Dairy products manufacturing; 
Fats and oil product manufacturing; 
Fruit and vegetable canning, preserving, related processing; 
Grain mill products and by-products; 
Meat, poultry, and seafood canning, curing, by product processing; 
Soft drink production; 
Miscellaneous food item preparation from raw products. 
May include tasting and accessory retail sales of beverages produced on site. A tasting facility separate from the manufacturing facility is included under the definition of "night clubs and bars" if alcoholic beverages are tasted, and under "restaurant" if beverages are non-alcoholic. 
Does not include: Bakeries which sell all products on-site, which are included in the definition of "general retail;" or beer brewing as part of a brew pub, bar or restaurant (see "night clubs and bars"). 
"Furniture, furnishings and appliance stores" means stores engaged primarily in selling the following products and related services, including incidental repair services: 
Computers and computer equipment; 
Draperies; 
Floor coverings; 
Furniture; 
Glass and chinaware; 
Home appliances; 
Home furnishings; 
Home sound systems; 
Interior decorating materials and services; 
Large musical instruments; 
Lawn furniture; 
Movable spas and hot tubs; 
Office furniture; 
Other household electrical and gas appliances; 
Outdoor furniture; 
Refrigerators; 
Stoves; 
Televisions. 
"Furniture/fixtures manufacturing, cabinet shops" means manufacturers producing: wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bedsprings and mattresses; all types of office furniture and public building furniture and partitions, shelving, lockers and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery hardware, window blinds and shades. Includes wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or planing mills. 
G.  Definitions, "G." 
"Garage, or carport" means parking space and shelter for automobiles or other vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading). 
1.  A garage is an attached or detached accessory structure with a door, enclosed on at least three sides. 
2.  A carport is an attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides. 
"Garage sale" means any sale held for the purpose of selling, trading or otherwise disposing of household furnishings, personal goods or other tangible properties of a resident of the premises on which the sale is conducted in a residential zone. 
"Gas station" means a retail business selling gasoline or other motor vehicle fuels, which may also provide services which are incidental to fuel services. These secondary services may include vehicle engine maintenance and repair, towing and trailer rental services. Does not include the storage or repair of wrecked or abandoned vehicles, vehicle painting, body or fender work, or the rental of vehicle storage or parking spaces. 
"General plan" means the city of Lodi general plan, including all its elements and all amendments to the general plan, as adopted by the city council under the provisions of Government Code Sections 65300 et seq., and referred to in this development code as the "general plan." 
"General retail" means stores and shops selling many lines of merchandise. These stores and lines of merchandise include but may not be limited to: 
Art galleries; 
Artists' supplies; 
Bakeries (all production in support of on-site sales); 
Bicycles; 
Books; 
Cameras and photographic supplies; 
Clothing and accessories; 
Collectibles (cards, coins, comics, stamps, etc.); 
Department stores; 
Drug and discount stores; 
Dry goods; 
Electronics/TV; 
Fabrics and sewing supplies; 
Florists and houseplant stores (indoor sales only, outdoor sales are "plant nurseries"); 
Furniture, home furnishings and equipment; 
Gift and souvenir shops; 
General stores; 
Hardware—no outside storage; 
Hobby materials; 
Jewelry; 
Luggage and leather goods; 
Musical instruments, parts and accessories; 
Newsstands; 
Orthopedic supplies; 
Pet supplies sales with no animals but fish; 
Religious goods; 
Small wares; 
Specialty shops; 
Sporting goods and equipment; 
Stationery; 
Toys and games; 
Variety stores; 
"Golf courses and country clubs" means golf courses, and accessory facilities and uses including: Clubhouses with bar and restaurant, locker and shower facilities; driving ranges; "pro shops" for on-site sales of golfing equipment; and golf cart storage and sales facilities. 
"Grade" means the ground surface immediately adjacent to the exterior base of a structure, typically used as the basis for measurement of the height of the structure. 
"Grand opening" means an advertising event which has as its purpose, the promotion of a newly opened use, a change in the orientation of a use or reopening of a use following a remodeling or major renovation. 
"Grocery store" means a retail business where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store. 
"Group residential" means all living situations with shared living quarters without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit, including boarding houses, dormitories, and SRO facilities 
"Guest house" means a detached structure accessory to a single-family dwelling, accommodating living/sleeping quarters, but without kitchen or cooking facilities. 
H.  Definitions, "H." 
"Handcraft industries, small-scale manufacturing" means establishments manufacturing and/or assembling small products primarily by hand, including jewelry, pottery and other ceramics, as well as small glass and metal art and craft products. 
"Health/fitness facilities" means fitness centers, gymnasiums, health and athletic clubs including any of the following: indoor sauna, spa or hot tub facilities; indoor tennis, handball, racquetball, archery and shooting ranges and other indoor sports activities. 
"Hedge" means shrubs and/or trees planted and maintained at a spacing interval which creates a physical and/or visual barrier. 
"Heliport" means a designated, marked area on the ground or the top of a structure where helicopters may land at any time. 
"Home occupations" means the conduct of a business within a dwelling unit or residential site, employing occupants of the dwelling, with the business activity being subordinate to the residential use of the property. 
"Hotel or motel" means facilities with guest rooms or suites, provided with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for transient lodging (less than thirty days). Hotels provide access to most guest rooms from an interior walkway, and typically include a variety of services in addition to lodging; for example, restaurants, meeting facilities, personal services, etc. Motels provide access to most guest rooms from an exterior walkway. Also includes accessory guest facilities such as swimming pools, tennis courts, indoor athletic facilities, accessory retail uses, etc. 
"Household pets" means the keeping/raising of birds, cats, dogs, or other common household pets, as determined by the director, accessory to a residential use. 
"Housing costs" means the monthly mortgage principal and interest, property taxes, homeowners insurance, and condominium fees, where applicable, for ownership units; and the monthly rent for rental units. 
"HUD" means the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development or its successor. 
I.  Definitions, "I." 
"Illegal building or use" means a building or use that does not conform to one or more of the provisions of this development code, and did not lawfully exist on the effective date of applicable provisions of this development code. 
"Income eligibility" means the gross annual household income considering household size and number of dependents, income of all wage earners, elderly or disabled household members and all other sources of household income. 
"Independent living" means housing that is intended for elderly persons who may require some assistance but are generally able to live and function independently. These facilities are usually apartment style housing with a studio, one-bedroom or larger units, one or more bathrooms and either a kitchenette or full kitchen. Meals, housekeeping and laundry services are provided for residents. Social activities and other non-medical services, such as transportation, are sometimes offered. 
"Indoor amusement/entertainment facilities" means establishments providing indoor amusement and entertainment services for a fee or admission charge, including: 
Bowling alleys; 
Coin-operated amusement arcades; 
Dance halls, clubs and ballrooms; 
Electronic game arcades; 
Ice skating and roller skating; 
Pool and billiard rooms as primary uses. 
Five or more electronic games or coin-operated amusements in any establishment, or a premises where fifty percent or more of the floor area is occupied by amusement devices, are considered an electronic game arcade as described above, three or less machines are not considered a land use separate from the primary use of the site. 
"Intensification of use" means a change in the use of a structure or site, where the new use is required by Chapter 17.32 (Parking and Loading) to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation), which generate more activity on the site. 
J.  Definitions, "J." 
"Junkyard" means automobile wrecking yards, any area where junk vehicles are stored, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal or other scrap materials, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. 
K.  Definitions, "K." 
"Kitchen" means a room or space within a building intended to be used for the cooking or preparation of food. 
L.  Definitions, "L." 
"Land use permit" means authority granted by the city to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including use permits, temporary use permits, planned development permits, variances, zoning clearances, as established by Article 4 (Land Use and Development Permit Procedures) of this development code. 
"Landscaping" means the planting and maintaining of an area with predominantly native or exotic plant materials including lawn, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials; and also including accessory decorative outdoor landscape elements (for example, pools, fountains, paved or decorated surfaces, but excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas). 
Large Family Day Care Home. See "community care facility". 
"Lattice tower" means a structure with three or four steel support legs that supports a variety of antennae. These towers generally range in height from sixty to two hundred feet and are constructed in areas where increased height is needed, microwave antennas are required, or where the weather demands a more structurally-sound design. 
"Laundries and dry cleaning plants" means service establishments engaged primarily in high volume laundry and garment services, including: power laundries (family and commercial); garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include coin-operated laundries or dry cleaning pick-up stores without dry cleaning equipment; see "personal services." 
"Libraries and museums" means public or quasi-public facilities including aquariums, arboretums, art galleries and exhibitions, botanical gardens, historic sites and exhibits, libraries, museums, and planetariums, which are typically non-commercial, other than an accessory gift/book shop. 
"License" means a basic permit issued by a licensing agency to operate a community care facility. 
Licensing agency" means a state, county or other public agency authorized by the State Department of Social Services to assume specified licensing, approval or consultation responsibilities in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 1569.13. 
"Life Care/Continuing Care Retirement Communities. See "medical services—extended care." 
"Live/work facilities" means an integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-family or multi-family, that has been designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes: 
1.  Complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the California Building Code; and 
2.  Working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more occupants of the unit. 
"Lot, or parcel" means a recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances, including this development code. Types of lots include the following: 
1.  Corner Lot. A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets, where they intersect at an interior angle of not more than one hundred thirty-five degrees. If the intersection angle is more than one hundred thirty-five degrees, the lot is considered an interior lot. 
2.  Flag Lot. A lot having access from the building site to a public street by means of private right-of-way strip that is owned in fee. 
3.  Interior Lot. A lot abutting only one street. 
4.  Key Lot. An interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot. 
5.  Reverse Corner Lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts a key lot. 
6.  Through Lot. A lot with frontage on two generally parallel streets. 
"Lot area" means gross lot area is the total area included within the lot lines of a lot, exclusive of adjacent dedicated street rights of way. Net lot area is exclusive of easements, including those for utilities or flood control channels, which limit the use of the lot. 
Lot Area, Net. "Net lot area" means the portion of a parcel that is: 
1.  Not subject to any easement or included as a proposed public or private facility, such as an alley, highway, street, or other necessary public site within a proposed development project; or 
2.  Subject to an easement where the owner of the underlying fee has the right to use the entire surface except the portion where the owner of the easement may place utility poles or minor utility structures. 
Except as provided above, portions of a parcel to a highway easement or any other private or public easement shall not be counted as part of the net area. 
Lot Coverage. See "site coverage." 
"Lot depth" means the average linear distance between the front and the rear lot lines or the intersection of the two side lot lines if there is no rear line. See Figure 7-1 (Lot Features). The director shall determine lot depth for parcels of irregular configuration. 
"Lot frontage" means the boundary of a lot adjacent to a public street right-of-way. 
"Lot line or property line" means any recorded boundary of a lot. Types of lot lines are as follows (see Figure 7-1 (Lot Features)): 
1.  Front Lot Line. On an interior lot, the property line separating the parcel from the street. The front lot line on a corner lot is the line with the shortest frontage. (If the lot lines of a corner lot are equal in length, the front lot line shall be determined by the director.) On a through lot, both lot lines are front lot lines and the lot is considered to have no rear lot line. 
2.  Interior Lot Line. Any lot line not abutting a street. 
3.  Rear Lot Line. A property line that does not intersect the front lot line, which is most distant from and most closely parallel to the front lot line. 
4.  Side Lot Line. Any lot line that is not a front or rear lot line. 
  
Figure 7-1 - Lot Features 
"Lot of record" means a parcel of land held in separate ownership as shown on the county assessors records at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this title. 
"Lot width" means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at right angles to the lot depth at a point midway between the front and rear lot lines. See Figure 7-1 (Lot Features). The director shall determine lot width for parcels of irregular shape. 
M.  Definitions, "M." 
Map Act. See "Subdivision Map Act." 
"Medical services—clinics, offices, and laboratories" means facilities primarily engaged in furnishing outpatient medical, mental health, surgical and other personal health services, but which are separate from hospitals, including: 
Health management organizations (HMOs); 
Medical and dental laboratories; 
Medical, dental and psychiatric offices; 
Out-patient care facilities; 
Other allied health services. 
Counseling services by other than medical doctors or psychiatrists are included under "offices." 
"Medical services—extended care" means residential facilities providing nursing and health-related care as a primary use with in-patient beds, such as: board and care homes; convalescent and rest homes; extended care facilities; skilled nursing facilities. Long-term personal care facilities that do not emphasize medical treatment are included under "community care facility". 
"Medical services—hospitals" means hospitals and similar facilities engaged primarily in providing diagnostic services, and extensive medical treatment, including surgical and other hospital services. These establishments have an organized medical staff, inpatient beds, and equipment and facilities to provide complete health care. May include on-site accessory clinics and laboratories, accessory retail uses and emergency heliports (see the separate definition of "accessory retail uses"). 
"Metal Products fabrication, machine and welding shops" means establishments engaged primarily in the assembly of metal parts, including the following uses that produce metal duct work, tanks, towers, cabinets and enclosures, metal doors and gates, and similar products: 
Blacksmith and welding shops; 
Sheet metal shops; 
Machine shops and boiler shops. 
"Microbrewery" means a facility where beer brewed on the premises is sold for on-site consumption. 
"Microcell" means a wireless communication facility that: 
1.  Contains a maximum of four whip or panel antennae. Each whip antenna does not exceed four inches in diameter and four feet in length. Each panel antenna does not exceed two square feet in surface area; 
2.  Contains a maximum of one microwave antenna no larger than ten square feet in surface area; 
3.  Has an array of antennae less than ten feet in height; 
4.  Is roof or structure-mounted or, if within the public right-of-way, is located on top of a light pole or telephone pole or a metal or precast concrete monopole (similar in design to a street light pole or street tree); and 
5.  Has a total height, if roof or structure-mounted, that does not exceed the maximum height allowed in the zoning district in which the facility is located. 
"Mixed-use project" means a project which combines both commercial and residential uses, where the residential component is typically located above the commercial. 
"Mobile home" means a trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and forty feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of "single-family dwellings." 
"Mobile home park" means any site that is planned and improved to accommodate two or more mobile homes used for residential purposes, or on which two or more mobile home lots are rented, leased, or held out for rent or lease, or were formerly held out for rent or lease and later converted to a subdivision, cooperative, condominium, or other form of resident ownership, to accommodate mobile homes used for residential purposes. 
"Monopole" means a single, ground-mounted, self-supporting pole-type structure, tapering from base to top and supporting a fixture designed to hold one or more antennas. For the purpose of this title, any tree pole, flagpole, bell tower, clock tower, windmill or other similar ground-mounted, self-supporting structure that is designed to disguise antennas and their support structures shall also be deemed to be a monopole, however a monopole shall not be deemed to be a transmission tower. 
"Mortuaries and funeral homes" means funeral homes and parlors, where deceased are prepared for burial or cremation, and funeral services may be conducted. 
"Mounted" means attached or supported. 
"Multi-Family dwellings" means a building or a portion of a building used and/or designed as residences for three or more families living independently of each other. Includes: triplexes, fourplexes (buildings under one ownership with three or four dwelling units, respectively, in the same structure) and apartments (five or more units under one ownership in a single building); townhouse development (three or more attached single-family dwellings where no unit is located over another unit); and senior citizen multi-family housing; see also "common interest developments." 
N.  Definitions, "N." 
"Negative declaration" means a statement describing the reasoning that a proposed action will not have a significant adverse effect on the environment, in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). 
"Night clubs and bars" means businesses where alcoholic beverages are sold for on-site consumption, which are not part of a larger restaurant. Includes bars, taverns, pubs, and similar establishments where any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. May include entertainment (e.g., live music and/or dancing, comedy, etc.). May also include beer brewing as part of a microbrewery, and other beverage tasting facilities. 
"Nonconforming parcel" means a parcel that was legally created prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., access, area or width requirements, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the parcel is located. 
"Nonconforming sign" means a sign which lawfully existed prior to the effective date of this development code, or any amendment thereto, but which fails by reason of such adoption or amendment to conform to all of the standards and regulations of the adopted or amended provision. 
"Nonconforming structure" means a structure that was legally constructed prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions/standards (e.g., open space, distance between structures, etc.) prescribed for the zoning district in which the structure is located. 
"Nonconforming use" means a use of a structure (either conforming or nonconforming) or land that was legally established and maintained prior to the adoption of this development code and which does not conform to current code provisions governing allowable land uses for the zoning district in which the use is located. 
Nursing Home. See "medical services—extended care." 
O.  Definitions, "O." 
"Occupancy" means all or a portion of a structure occupied by one tenant. 
Offices. This development code distinguishes between the following types of office facilities. These do not include: medical offices (see "medical services—clinics offices, and laboratories"); or offices that are incidental and accessory to another business or sales activity that is the primary use. Incidental offices that are customarily accessory to another use are allowed as part of an approved primary use. 
1.  Administrative/Business. Establishments providing direct services to consumers, such as insurance agencies, real estate offices, utility company offices, etc. 
2.  Government. City, and other local, state, and federal government agency or service facilities. Includes post offices, but not bulk mailing distribution centers, which are under "truck and freight terminals." 
3.  Production. Office-type facilities occupied by businesses engaged in the production of intellectual property. These uses include: 
Advertising agencies; 
Architectural, engineering, planning and surveying services; 
Computer software production and programming services; 
Educational, scientific and research organizations; 
Media postproduction services; 
Photography and commercial art studios; 
Writers and artists offices. 
4.  Professional. Professional offices including: 
Accounting, auditing and bookkeeping services; 
Attorneys; 
Counseling services; 
Court reporting services; 
Data processing services; 
Detective agencies and similar services; 
Employment, stenographic, secretarial and word processing services; 
Literary and talent agencies; 
Management and public relations services. 
5.  Temporary. A mobile home, recreational vehicle or modular unit used as a temporary office facility. Temporary offices may include: construction supervision offices on a construction site or off-site construction yard; a temporary on-site real estate office for a development project; or a temporary business office in advance of permanent facility construction. 
6.  Temporary Real Estate. The temporary use of a dwelling unit within a residential development project as a sales office for the units on the same site, which is converted to residential use at the conclusion of its office use. 
"Off-site" means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, but is not located on the same site as the primary use. 
"On-site" means an activity or accessory use that is related to a specific primary use, which is located on the same site as the primary use. 
"Open fencing" means a barrier constructed of material which is transparent, such as glass, plastic panels or wrought iron, used in conjunction with recreation and seating areas. 
"Outdoor recreation facilities" means facilities for various outdoor participant sports and types of recreation, including: 
Amphitheaters; 
Amusement and theme parks; 
Health and athletic club outdoor facilities; 
Miniature golf courses; 
Skateboard parks; 
Stadiums and coliseums; 
Swim and tennis clubs; 
Tennis courts; 
Water slides; 
Zoos. 
May also include commercial facilities customarily associated with the above outdoor commercial recreational uses, including bars and restaurants, video game arcades, etc. Does not include parks and playgrounds, which are separately defined. 
"Outdoor retail sales and activities" means permanent outdoor sales and rental establishments including auto dealers, lumber and other material sales yards, newsstands, outdoor facilities for the sale or rental of other vehicles/equipment, and other uses where the business is not conducted entirely within a structure. 
Outdoor Retail Sales, Temporary. "Temporary outdoor retail sales" means temporary outdoor retail operations including: 
Christmas trees, pumpkins or the sale of other seasonal items; 
Farmers' markets; 
Food vendors; 
Semi-annual sales of art/handcrafted items in conjunction with community festivals or art shows; 
Sidewalk or parking lot sales longer than one weekend; 
Retail sales from individual vehicles in temporary locations outside the public right-of-way. 
P.  Definitions, "P." 
Parcel. See "Lot, or Parcel." 
"Parking facilities/vehicle storage" means service establishments in the business of storing operative cars, trucks, buses, recreational vehicles, and other motor vehicles for clients. Includes both day use and long-term public and commercial garages, parking lots and structures, except when accessory to a primary use. (All primary uses are considered to include any customer or public use off-street parking required by the development code.) Includes sites where vehicles are stored for rental or leasing. Does not include dismantling yards. 
"Parks and playgrounds" means public parks, play lots, playgrounds, and athletic fields for non-commercial neighborhood or community use, including tennis courts. See also "outdoor recreation facilities." 
"Pawn shops" means indoor retail establishments that accept personal property as collateral for loans, and offer the property for sale to the public. 
"Pedestrian orientation" means any physical structure or place with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant place for pedestrians including but not limited to: 
1.  Street furniture; 
2.  Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, paseos, arcades; 
3.  Visibility into buildings at the street level; 
4.  Highly articulated facades at the street level with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing; 
5.  Continuity of the sidewalk with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way; 
6.  Continuity of building facades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of buildings and stores; 
7.  Signage oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist; and 
8.  Landscaping. 
"Pedestrian-oriented use" means a use which is intended to encourage walk-in customers and which generally does not limit the number of customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general public. A pedestrian-oriented use provides spontaneous draw from sidewalk and street due to intense and surprising visual interest, high customer turnover and intense social interaction. 
"Permitted use" means any use allowed in a zoning district and subject to the restrictions applicable to that zoning district. 
"Person" means any individual, firm, co-partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock association; city, county, state, or district; and includes any trustee, receiver, assignee, or other similar representative thereof. 
"Personal communication services" means a digital wireless communications technology with the capacity for multiple communication services, and which provides a system for the routing of calls to individuals rather than places, regardless of location. 
"Personal services" means establishments providing non-medical services as a primary use, including, but not limited to: 
Barber and beauty shops; 
Clothing rental; 
Dry cleaning pick-up stores with limited equipment; 
Home electronics and small appliance repair; 
Laundromats (self-service laundries); 
Massage (licensed, therapeutic, non-sexual); 
Psychic readers; 
Shoe repair shops; 
Spas and hot tubs; 
Tailors; 
Tanning salons; 
Tattoo parlors. 
These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. 
"Planning commission" means the city of Lodi planning commission, appointed by the Lodi city council in compliance with Government Code Section 65101, referred to throughout this development code as the "commission." 
"Plant nurseries and garden supply stores" means commercial agricultural establishments engaged in the production of ornamental plants and other nursery products, grown under cover or outdoors. Includes stores selling these products, nursery stock, lawn and garden supplies, and commercial scale greenhouses. The sale of house plants or other nursery products entirely within a building is also included under "general retail stores." Home greenhouses are included under "accessory residential uses and structures." 
"Primary structure" means a structure that accommodates the primary use of the site. 
"Primary use" means the main purpose for which a site is developed and occupied, including the activities that are conducted on the site during most of the hours when activities occur. 
"Primary zoning district" means the zoning district applied to a site by the zoning map, to which an overlay zoning district may also be applied. 
"Printing and publishing" means establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade such as bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. "Quick printing" services are included in the definition of "business support services." 
"Private wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that has not been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). 
"Project" means proposed development or a new land use. 
"Property line" means the recorded boundary of a parcel of land. 
"Proposed project" means a proposed new structure, new addition to an existing structure, or area of other new site development; these do not include the alteration of any portion of an existing structure other than an addition. 
"Public safety facilities" means facilities operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities. 
"Public utility facilities" means fixed-base structures and facilities serving as junction points for transferring utility services from one transmission voltage to another or to local distribution and service voltages. These uses include any of the following facilities that are not exempted from land use permit requirements by Government Code Section 53091: 
Corporation and maintenance yards; 
Electrical substations and switching stations; 
Natural gas regulating and distribution facilities; 
Public water system wells, treatment plants and storage; 
Telephone switching facilities; 
Wastewater treatment plants, settling ponds and disposal fields. 
These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in "offices"), or equipment and material storage yards. 
"Public wireless communication facility" means a wireless communication facility that has been granted a certificate of public convenience and necessity by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). 
Q.  Definitions, "Q." 
"Quarry materials storage and processing" means manufacturing facilities for the sorting, grading, and storage of aggregates as construction materials; includes concrete batch plants. A retail ready-mix concrete operation as an incidental use in conjunction with a building materials outlet is defined under "building material stores." 
R.  Definitions, "R." 
"Radiofrequency radiation" means electromagnetic radiation in the portion of the spectrum from three kilohertz to three hundred gigahertz. 
"Recreational vehicle (RV)" means a motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria: 
1.  Contains less than three hundred twenty square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms; 
2.  Contains four hundred square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections; 
3.  Is built on a single chassis; and 
4.  Is either self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit. 
"Recreational vehicle park" means a site where one or more lots are used, or are intended to be used, by campers with recreational vehicles or tents. Recreational vehicle parks may include public restrooms, water, sewer, and electric hookups to each lot and are intended as a higher density, more intensively developed use than campgrounds. May include accessory retail uses where they are clearly incidental and intended to serve RV park patrons only. 
"Recyclable material" means reusable domestic containers and other materials which can be reconstituted, re-manufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials (see "recycling facilities" below). 
"Recycling facilities" means this land use type includes a variety of facilities involved with the collection, sorting and processing of recyclable materials. 
1.  Small Collection Facility. A facility occupying an area of five hundred square feet or less where the public may donate, redeem or sell recyclable materials, which may include the following, where allowed by the applicable zoning district: 
a.  Reverse Vending Machine(s). An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value not less than the container's redemption value, as determined by State law. These vending machines may accept aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and other containers. 
b.  Mobile Recycling Unit. An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers. 
c.  Bulk reverse vending machine is a reverse vending machine that is larger than fifty square feet, is designed to accept more than one container at a time, and issues a cash refund based on total weight instead of by container. 
d.  Kiosk-type units which may include permanent structures. 
2.  Large Collection Facility. A facility which occupies an area of more than five hundred square feet and/or include permanent structures which may include the following: 
a.  Processing Facility. A structure or enclosed space used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an end-user's specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, re-manufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of "recycling-scrap and dismantling yards," below: 
i.  Light processing facility occupies an area of under forty-five thousand square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers; and 
ii.  A heavy processing facility is any processing facility other than a light processing facility. 
3.  Scrap and Dismantling Yards. Outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling (see the definitions above). Does not include: places where these activities are conducted entirely within buildings; pawn shops, and other secondhand stores; the sale of operative used cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites. 
"Religious facilities" means facilities operated by religious organizations for worship, or the promotion of religious activities, including churches, mosques, synagogues, temples, etc.; and accessory uses on the same site, including living quarters for ministers and staff, child day care facilities and religious schools where authorized by the same type of land use permit required for the religious facility itself. May also include fund-raising sales, bazaars, dinners, parties, or other outdoor events on the same site. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, including as full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other potentially-related operations (for example, a recreational camp) are classified according to their respective activities. 
"Resale controls" means legal provisions by which the sale of affordable units will be controlled to insure that the unit is affordable by very low or low income households over time. 
"Research and development (R&D)" means indoor facilities for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and mechanical components in advance of product manufacturing, that are not associated with a manufacturing facility on the same site. Includes pharmaceutical, chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include computer software companies (see "offices—production"), soils and other materials testing laboratories (see "business support services"), or medical laboratories (see "medical services—clinics, offices, and laboratories"). 
Residential Care Home. See "community care facility". 
"Residential district or zone" means any of the residential zoning districts established by Section 17.10.020 (Zoning Districts Established). 
"Residential project" means a housing development at one location including all units for which permits have been applied for or approved within a twelve-month period, intended and designed for permanent occupancy, including but not limited to single-family dwellings, duplexes, triplexes, fourplexes, apartments, multiple-dwelling structures, or group of dwellings, condominium development, townhouse development, cooperative, or land division. 
"Residential shelters" means facilities for the temporary shelter and feeding of indigents or disaster victims, operated by a public or non-profit agency. 
"Restaurant" means a retail business selling ready-to-eat food for on- or off-premise consumption. These include eating establishments where customers are served from a walk-up ordering counter for either on- or off-premise consumption, and establishments where most customers are served food at tables for on-premise consumption, but may include providing food for take-out. Also includes coffee houses. 
"Review authority" means the individual or official city body (the community development director, planning commission, or city council) identified by this development code as having the responsibility and authority to review, and approve or disapprove the permit applications described in Article 6 (Development Code Administration). 
"Roadside stands" means open structures for the retail sale of agricultural products, located on the site or in the area of the property where the products being sold were grown. Does not include field sales or agricultural products, which is included under "production of crops." 
"Rooming and boarding houses" means the renting of individual bedrooms within a dwelling to two or more unrelated people, whether or not meals are provided. 
S.  Definitions, "S." 
"Schools" public and private educational institutions, including: 
Boarding schools; 
Business, secretarial, and vocational schools; 
Community colleges, colleges and universities; 
Elementary, middle, and junior high schools; 
Establishments providing courses by mail; 
High schools; 
Military academies; 
Professional schools (law, medicine, etc.); 
Seminaries/religious ministry training facilities. 
Also includes specialized schools offering instruction in the following: 
Art; 
Ballet and other dance; 
Computers and electronics; 
Drama; 
Driver education; 
Language; 
Music. 
Also includes facilities, institutions and conference centers that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development, such as fitness, environmental awareness, arts, communications, and manage-ment. Does not include pre-schools and child day care facilities (see "community care facility"). See also the definition of "studios—art, dance, music, photography, etc." for smaller-scale facilities offering specialized instruction. 
"Secondary dwelling unit" an additional living unit on a lot within a single-family zone. A second unit is a self-contained unit with separate kitchen, living and sleeping facilities. A second unit can be created by (a) altering a single family dwelling to establish a separate unit or (b) adding a separate unit onto an existing dwelling. 
"Section 404 or Section 10 Permit" the permits issued by U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) establishing wetlands delineations and conditions governing activities therein. 
"Senior apartments" multifamily residential projects where occupancy is limited to people of fifty-five years of age or older. 
Senior Continuum of Care Complex. See "community care facility" and "medical services—extended care." 
"Senior citizen" means an adult fifty-five years or older. 
"Setback" means the distance by which the wall of a structure, parking area or other development feature must be separated from a lot line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement to the wall of the structure. See also "yard." Figure 7-2 (Setbacks) shows the location of front, side, street side and rear setbacks. Figure 7-3 (Flag Lot Setbacks) below, shows the location of front yard setbacks for flag lots. 
  
Figure 7-2 - Location and Measurement of Setbacks 
  
Figure 7-3 - Flag Lot Setbacks 
"Sign" means a structure, device, figure, display, message placard, or other contrivance, or any part thereof, situated outdoors or indoors, which is designed, constructed, intended, or used to advertise, or to provide information in the nature of advertising, to direct or attract attention to an object, person, institution, business, product, service, event, or location by any means, including words, letters, figures, designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination, or projected images. Does not include murals, paintings and other works of art that are not intended to advertise or identify any business or product. Types of signs include the following: 
1.  Abandoned Sign. A sign advertising a use, occupancy, or product which no longer exists, in the event of billboards, or which no longer exists on the site where the sign is located, in the case of on-site signs, for a period of ninety days. 
2.  Animated or Moving Sign. A sign which uses movement, lighting, or special materials to depict action or create a special effect to imitate movement. 
3.  Awning Sign. A sign copy or logo attached to or painted on an awning. 
4.  Banner, Flag, or Pennant. Cloth, bunting, plastic, paper, or similar non-rigid material used for advertising purposes attached to a structure, staff, pole, line, framing, or vehicle, not including official flags of the United States, the state of California, and other states of the nation, counties, municipalities, official flags of foreign nations and nationally or internationally recognized organizations. 
5.  Bench Sign. Copy painted on a portion of a bench. 
6.  Business Identification Sign. A sign which serves to identify only the name, address, and lawful use of the premises upon which it is located and provides no other advertisements or product identification. 
7.  Cabinet Sign (Can Sign). A sign which contains all the text and/or logo symbols within a single enclosed cabinet and may or may not be internally illuminated. 
8.  Changeable Copy Sign. A sign designed to allow the changing of copy through manual, mechanical, or electrical means including time and temperature. 
9.  Civic Event Sign. A temporary sign, posted to advertise a civic event sponsored by a public agency, school, church, civic-fraternal organization, or similar noncommercial organization. 
10.  Contractor or Construction Sign. A sign which states the name of the developer and contractor(s) working on the site and related engineering, architectural or financial firms involved with the project. 
11.  Directional Sign. An on-site sign which is designed and erected solely for the purposes of directing vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic within a project. 
12.  Directory Sign. A sign for listing the tenants and their suite numbers of a multiple tenant structure or center. 
13.  Double-Faced Sign. A sign constructed to display its message on the outer surfaces of two identical and/or opposite parallel planes. 
14.  Flashing Sign. A sign that contains an intermittent or sequential flashing light source. 
15.  Future Tenant Identification Sign. A temporary sign that identifies the names of future businesses that will occupy a site or structure. 
16.  Garage Sale Sign. A sign with a message advertising the resale of personal property that has been used by the resident. 
17.  Grand Opening. A promotional activity not exceeding thirty calendar days used by newly established businesses, within two months after initial occupancy, to inform the public of their location and services available to the community. "Grand Opening" does not mean an annual or occasional promotion of retail sales by a business. 
18.  Ground Mounted Sign. A sign fixed in an upright position on the ground not attached to a structure other than a framework, pole or device, erected primarily to support the sign. Includes monument signs and pole signs. 
19.  Holiday Decoration Sign. Temporary seasonal signs, in the nature of decorations, clearly incidental to and customarily associated with nationally recognized holidays and which contain no advertising message. 
20.  Illegal Sign. A sign which includes any of the following: 
a.  A sign erected without first complying with all regulations in effect at the time of its construction or use; 
b.  A sign that was legally erected, but whose use has ceased, the structure upon which the display is placed has been abandoned by its owner, or the sign is not being used to identify or advertise an ongoing business for a period of not less than ninety days; 
c.  A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming as a result of the adoption of an ordinance, the amortization period for the display provided by the ordinance rending the display conforming has expired, and conformance has not been accomplished; 
d.  A sign that was legally erected which later became nonconforming and then was damaged to the extent of fifty percent or more of its current replacement value; 
e.  A sign which is a danger to the public or is unsafe; 
f.  A sign which is a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the town; or 
g.  A sign that pertains to a specific event, and five days have elapsed since the occurrence of the event. 
21.  Indirectly Illuminated Sign. A sign whose light source is external to the sign and which casts its light onto the sign from some distance. 
22.  Internally Illuminated Sign. A sign whose light source is located in the interior of the sign so that the rays go through the face of the sign, or light source which is attached to the face of the sign and is perceived as a design element of the sign. 
23.  Marquee (Canopy) Sign. A sign which is attached to or otherwise made a part of a permanent roof-like structure which projects beyond the building wall in the form of a large canopy to provide protection from the weather. 
24.  Monument Sign. An independent, freestanding structure supported on the ground having a solid base as opposed to being supported by poles or open braces. 
25.  Multi-Tenant Sign. An identification sign for a commercial site with multiple tenants, displaying the names of more than one tenant on the site. 
26.  Nonconforming Sign. An advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained prior to the adoption of this development code, but does not now completely comply with current regulations. 
27.  Off-Site Directional Sign. A sign identifying a publicly owned facility, emergency facility, or a temporary subdivision sign, but excluding real estate signs. 
28.  Off-Site Sign. A sign identifying a use, facility, service, or product which is not located, sold, or manufactured on the same premise as the sign or which identifies a use, service, or product by a brand name which, although sold or manufactured on the premise, does not constitute the principal item for sale or manufactured on the premise. Also known as a billboard sign. 
29.  Permanent Sign. A sign constructed of durable materials and intended to exist for the duration of time that the use or occupant is located on the premises. 
30.  Political Sign. A sign designed for the purpose of advertising support of or opposition to a candidate or proposition for a public election. 
31.  Pole/Pylon Sign. An elevated freestanding sign, typically supported by one or two poles or columns. 
32.  Portable Sign. A sign that is not permanently affixed to a structure or the ground. 
33.  Programmable Electronic Sign. A changeable and illuminated sign made up of a field of individual electronic elements or mechanical grids that, when programmed and activated, create still or moving images, words, or numbers. 
34.  Projecting Sign. A sign other than a wall sign suspending from, or supported by, a structure and projecting outward. 
35.  Promotional Sign. A sign erected on a temporary basis to promote the sale of new products, new management, new hours of operation, a new service, or to promote a special sale. 
36.  Real Estate Sign. A sign indicating that a property or any portion thereof is available for inspection, sale, lease, rent, or directing people to a property, but not including temporary subdivision signs. 
37.  Roof Sign. A sign constructed upon or over a roof, or placed so as to extend above the edge of the roof. 
38.  Special Event Sign/Banner. A temporary sign or banner that is intended to inform the public of a unique happening, action, purpose, or occasion (i.e., grand opening or community event). 
39.  Temporary Sign. A sign intended to be displayed for a limited period of time and capable of being viewed from a public right-of-way, parking area or neighboring property. 
40.  Under Marquee Sign. A sign suspended from a marquee or canopy. 
41.  Vehicle Sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on a vehicle which is parked on or adjacent to any property, the principal purpose of which is to attract attention to a product sold or business located on the property. 
42.  Wall Sign. A sign which is attached to or painted on the exterior wall of a structure with the display surface of the sign approximately parallel to the building wall. 
43.  Window Sign. A sign posted, painted, placed, or affixed in or on a window exposed to public view. An interior sign which faces a window exposed to public view and is located within three feet of the window. 
"Sign area" means the entire area within a perimeter defined by a continuous line composed of right angles using no more than four lines which enclose the extreme limits of lettering, logo, trademark, or other graphic representation. 
"Sign height" means the vertical distance from the uppermost point used in measuring the area of a sign to the average grade immediately below the sign, including its base or the top of the nearest curb of the street on which the sign fronts, whichever measurement is the greatest. 
"Single-family dwelling" means a building designed for and/or occupied exclusively by one family. Also includes factory-built, modular housing units, constructed in compliance with the California Building Code, and mobile homes/manufactured housing on permanent foundations. May include the rental of rooms within a dwelling also occupied by the property owner or a primary tenant. 
"Site" means parcel or adjoining parcels under single ownership or single control, considered a unit for the purposes of development or other use. 
"Site coverage" means the percentage of total site area occupied by structures, and paving for vehicle use. Structure/building coverage includes the primary structure, all accessory structures (e.g., carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, trash dumpster enclosures, etc.) and architectural features (e.g., chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, stairs, etc.). Structure/building coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall. Pavement coverage includes areas necessary for the ingress, egress, outdoor parking, and circulation of motor vehicles. See Figure 7-4 (Site Coverage). 
  
Figure 7-4 - Site Coverage 
Skilled Nursing Facility. See "medical services—extended care." 
"Stealth facility" means a communications facility which is designed to blend into the surrounding environment, typically one that is architecturally integrated into a structure. Also referred to as concealed antenna. 
Storage, Indoor. "Indoor storage" means the storage of various materials entirely within a structure, as the primary use of the structure. Includes personal storage facilities (mini-storage), which are structures containing generally small, individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers rented as individual storage spaces and characterized by low parking demand. The storage of materials accessory and incidental to a primary use is not considered a land use separate from the primary use. 
Storage, Outdoor. "Outdoor storage" means the storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use. 
"Street" means a public thoroughfare accepted by the city, which affords principal means of access to abutting property, including avenue, place, way, drive, lane, boulevard, highway, road, and any other thoroughfare except an alley as defined in this subsection. 
"Street line" means the boundary between a street right-of-way and property. 
"Structure" means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires attachment to the ground or attachment to something located on the ground. For the purposes of this development code, the term "structure" includes "buildings." 
"Structural alteration" means any change tending to prolong the life of the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams, or girders. 
"Studios for art, dance, music, photography, etc." means small scale facilities, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Larger facilities are included under the definition of "schools—specialized education and training." These include facilities for: individual and group instruction and training in the arts; production rehearsal; photography, and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities; martial arts training studios; gymnastics instruction, and aerobics and gymnastics studios with no other fitness facilities or equipment. 
"Subdivision" means the division, by any subdivider, of any unit or portion of land shown on the latest equalized San Joaquin County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units, for the purpose of sale, lease or financing, whether immediate or future. Property shall be considered as contiguous units, even if it is separated by roads, streets, utility easement or railroad rights-of-way. Subdivision includes the following, as defined in Civil Code Section 1315: a condominium project; a community apartment project; or the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative. 
"Subdivision Map Act, or Map Act" means Division 2, Title 7 of the California Government Code, commencing with Section 66410 as presently constituted, and any amendments to those provisions. 
"Supportive housing" means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to onsite or offsite services that assist the supporting housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. Supportive housing is treated the same as a residential use in a residential zone. 
T.  Definitions, "T." 
"Telecommunications facilities" means public, commercial and private electromagnetic and photoelectrical transmission, broadcast, repeater and receiving stations for radio, television, telegraph, telephone, data network, and wireless communications, including commercial earth stations for satellite-based communications. Includes antennas, commercial satellite dish antennas, and equipment buildings. Does not include telephone, telegraph and cable television transmission facilities utilizing hard-wired or direct cable connections (see "utility infrastructure"). 
"Temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings, and which is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
"Temporary use" means a use of land that is designed, operated and occupies a site for a limited period of time, typically less than twelve months. 
"Theaters and auditoriums" means indoor facilities for public assembly and group entertainment, other than sporting events, including: 
Civic theaters, and facilities for "live" theater and concerts; 
Exhibition and convention halls; 
Motion picture theaters; 
Public and semi-public auditoriums; 
Similar public assembly uses. 
Does not include outdoor theaters, concert and similar entertainment facilities, and indoor and outdoor facilities for sporting events. 
"Transitional housing" means building configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that call for the termination of assistance and recirculation of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at some predetermined future point in time, which shall be no less than six months. Transitional housing is treated the same as a residential use in a residential zone. 
"Truck and freight terminals" means this land use consists of transportation establishments furnishing services incidental to air, motor freight, and rail transportation including: 
Freight forwarding services; 
Freight terminal facilities; 
Joint terminal and service facilities; 
Packing, crating, inspection and weighing services; 
Postal service bulk mailing distribution centers; 
Transportation arrangement services; 
Trucking facilities, including transfer and storage. 
These uses do not include office or customer service centers (classified in "offices"), or equipment and material storage yards. 
"Utility infrastructure" means pipelines for water, natural gas, and sewage collection and disposal; and facilities for the transmission of electrical energy for sale, including transmission lines for a public utility company. Also includes telephone, telegraph, cable television and other communications transmission facilities utilizing direct physical conduits. Does not include offices or service centers (see "offices"), or distribution substations (see "utility facilities"). 
V.  Definitions, "V." 
"Variance" means a discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of this development code, in compliance with Section 17.40.050 (Variances). 
"Vehicle service" means establishments primarily engaged in the maintenance, service, diagnosis, repair, or painting of automobiles, motorcycles, scooters, mopeds, light trucks, vans, trailers, and recreational vehicles subject to the registration with the California Bureau of Automotive Repair. 
"Veterinary clinics, animal hospitals, kennels" means office and indoor medical treatment facilities used by veterinarians, including large and small animal veterinary clinics, and animal hospitals. Kennels and boarding operations are commercial facilities for the keeping, boarding or maintaining of four or more dogs four months of age or older, or four or more cats, except for dogs or cats in pet shops. 
"Voluntary" means resulting from free will. 
W.  Definitions, "W." 
"Warehouse retail" means retail stores that emphasize the packaging and sale of products in large quantities or volumes, some at discounted prices, where products are typically displayed in their original shipping containers. Sites and buildings are usually large and industrial in character. Patrons may be required to pay membership fees. 
Warehouses, Wholesaling and Distribution. These facilities include: 
1.  Warehouses. Facilities for the storage of furniture, household goods, or other commercial goods of any nature. Includes cold storage. Does not include: warehouse, storage or mini-storage facilities offered for rent or lease to the general public (see "storage—indoor"); warehouse facilities in which the primary purpose of storage is for wholesaling and distribution (see "wholesaling and distribution"); or terminal facilities for handling freight (see "vehicle and freight terminals"). 
2.  Wholesaling and Distribution. Establishments engaged in selling merchandise to retailers; to industrial, commercial, institutional, farm, or professional business users; or to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers in buying merchandise for or selling merchandise to such persons or companies. Includes such establishments as: 
Agents, merchandise or commodity brokers, and commission merchants; 
Assemblers, buyers and associations engaged in the cooperative marketing of farm products; 
Merchant wholesalers; 
Stores primarily selling electrical, plumbing, heating and air conditioning supplies and equipment. 
"Wireless communication facility" means any public or private structure that supports antennae, microwave dishes, and other related equipment that sends and/or receives radio frequency signals. 
X.  Definitions, "X." No specialized terms beginning with the letter "X" are used at this time. 
Y.  Definitions, "Y." 
"Yard" means an area between a lot line and a setback, unobstructed and unoccupied from the ground upward, except for projections permitted by this development code. See Section 17.14.060 (Setback Measurement and Exceptions) and Figure 7-2 (Setbacks). 
1.  Front Yard. An area extending across the full width of the lot between the front lot line and the required setback. 
2.  Rear Yard. An area extending the full width of the lot between a rear lot line and the required setback. 
3.  Side Yard. An area extending from the front yard to the rear yard between the nearest side lot line and the required setback. 
Z.  Definitions, "Z." 
"Zero lot line" means the location of a building on a lot in a manner that one or more building edges rest directly on a lot line. 
"Zoning clearance" means a ministerial issued by the department prior to issuance of any building permit to ensure that the proposed use and/or construction complies with all of the provisions of this development code. 
"Zoning district" means any of the residential, commercial, industrial, special purpose, or overlay districts established by Article 2 of this development code (Land Use Development Standards), within which certain land uses are allowed or prohibited, and certain site planning and development standards are established (e.g., setbacks, height limits, site coverage requirements, etc.). 
"Zoning ordinance" means the Lodi Development Code, Title 17 of the Lodi Municipal Code, referred to herein as "this development code." 
(Ord. No. 1869, § 2, 2-20-2013) 
