Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 PUBLIC WELFARE
Title 5 PUBLIC PEACE
Title 6 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 7 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 8 STREETS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 9 SANITATION AND HEALTH
Title 10 PUBLIC UTILITIES
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Title 11 ZONING

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.07 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
Chapter 1.10 ENFORCEMENT OF THE CODE
Chapter 1.16 CHALLENGES TO CITY ACTIONS

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted the “La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 307 § 1, 2000)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the “La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “LCFMC” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this code as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.” References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code” and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 307 § 2, 2000)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
     Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 307 § 3, 2000)

 

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. (Ord. 307 § 4, 2000)

 

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 307 § 5, 2000)

 

1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
     The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 303, passed April 17, 2000. The following ordinance, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 303, but prior to adoption of this code, is adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance No. 304. (Ord. 307 § 6, 2000)

 

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 307 § 7, 2000)

 

1.01.080 References to prior code.
     References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 307 § 8, 2000)

 

1.01.090 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 307 § 9, 2000)

Chapter 1.04 PENALTY PROVISIONS
1.04.010 Violation—Penalties—Declaration of nuisance.
     A.    No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this code or of any statute or ordinance which is adopted by reference by any provision of this code. Any person who violates any such provision or fails to comply with any such requirement, unless otherwise provided, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), or by imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Every violation determined to be an infraction is punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) consecutive months; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same ordinance within twelve (12) consecutive months.

     C.     In addition to the penalties set forth in subsections A and B of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any statute or ordinance adopted by reference to this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in any manner authorized by law.

     D.    Each separate day, or any portion thereof, during which any violation of the municipal code occurs or continues constitutes a separate offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in this section. (Ord. 254 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 1.07 ADMINISTRATIVE CITATIONS
1.07.005 Purpose.
     The city council finds that there is a need for an alternative method of enforcement for various violations of the municipal code and zoning ordinance. The city council also finds that an appropriate method for enforcement of various violations is an administrative citation program that will reduce the burden on the judicial system while providing full due process for those cited. The procedures established in this chapter are in addition to criminal, civil or other legal remedies that may be available to the city to enforce violations of the municipal code, zoning ordinance or applicable state codes. The city council finds and determines that enforcement of the provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code, zoning ordinance and conditions on entitlements or permits are municipal affairs as well as matters of purely local concern to the citizens of La Cañada Flintridge.

     The city council finds that the adoption and implementation of this administrative citation program is within the power and authority of the city of La Cañada Flintridge as a general law city and will achieve the following goals:

     1.     To promote and protect the public health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city of La Cañada Flintridge;

     2.     To help ensure compliance with the municipal code, zoning ordinance and state codes, ordinances and regulations in a timely and efficient manner;

     3.     To provide for an administrative process to appeal the imposition of administrative citations and fines that will fully comport with due process and provide those cited with the right to a fair hearing;

     4.     To provide a method to hold parties responsible when they fail or refuse to comply with the provisions of the municipal code, zoning ordinance, ordinances, agreements or terms and conditions on entitlements in the city of La Cañada Flintridge; and

 

     5.     To reduce the burden on the judicial system and minimize the time and expense of defending the citation on the part of the person cited. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.010 Application of chapter.
     A.    This chapter makes any violation of the provisions of the municipal code or zoning ordinance subject to civil fines as herein set forth.

     B.     This chapter establishes the administrative procedure for the imposition, enforcement, collection, and administrative review of civil fines pursuant to Government Code Section 53069.4 and the city’s general police power as a general law city.

     C.     The purpose of issuing civil citations pursuant to this chapter is to encourage voluntary and complete compliance with the provisions of the municipal code or zoning ordinance without the imposition of criminal penalties.

     D.    The issuance of a civil citation under this chapter is solely at the city’s discretion and is only one option the city has to address violations of the municipal code or zoning ordinance. By adopting this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its discretion, or the discretion of its officers and employees, to use any other remedy, civil or criminal, which may be available in a particular case. The procedure set forth in this chapter may be used as an alternative to, or in conjunction with, any other available civil and/or criminal remedies. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.020 Definitions.
     The following words and terms as used in this chapter shall have the meanings hereinafter respectively set forth:

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     “City clerk” means the city clerk of the city La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Code” means the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code, including the zoning code.

     “Code enforcement officer” means the city manager and/or designee(s) with the authority to enforce the Code as provided in Chapters 1.10 and 2.04 of the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code.

     “Correction period” means the period of time allowed to correct a violation shown on a notice of violation.

     “Department” means the community development department of the city.

     “Director” means the community development director.

     “Hearing officer” means a person designated by the city council to conduct the administrative hearing.

     “Issued” means the date a citation or notice of violation is delivered to a responsible person, and shall be deemed either: (1) the date when the citation or notice is personally served upon the responsible person, (2) the date it is deposited in the United States mail for delivery to the responsible person, or (3) the date it is posted on the real property where a property-related violation exists. In the event the citation or notice is served or delivered by more than one of the above specified methods, such date shall be deemed the earliest of such dates.

     “Notice of decision” means a form prepared by the authorized representative of the city and used to inform responsible person of any decision made pursuant to any provision of this chapter.

     “Person” means a natural person, partnership, corporation, joint venture or any other legal entity, regardless of form, and the owners, corporate officers, trustees, and general partners of a legal entity.

     “Responsible person” or ”person responsible” means any of the following:

     1.     A person who causes any violation of this code to occur;

     2.     A person who maintains or allows any violation of this code to continue, over which such person has control by his or her action or failure to act;

     3.     A person whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes any violation of this code, by its action or failure to act;

     4.     A person who is the owner, or lessee or sub-lessee with a current right of possession of real property upon which a property-related violation of this code occurs or exists;

     5.     A person who is the on-site director of a business who normally works at the site when the business is open and who is responsible for the activities at such premises;

     6.     A person who is the beneficiary under a deed of trust for the property upon which a property-related violation exists, and who has not corrected the violation within thirty (30) days after being notified by a code enforcement officer in writing that: (a) such violation exists, (b) the trustee under the deed of trust is no longer living on the property, and (c) such trustee’s whereabouts are unknown to the city;

     7.     A minor who personally commits any violation of this code and, jointly and severally, any parent or guardian of any such minor.

     There shall be a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as indicated by the County of Los Angeles’ latest equalized property tax assessment rolls, and any lessee or sub-lessee of a parcel, has notice of any code violation existing on the property. For purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.030 Notices of violation.
     A.    Violations. When a code enforcement officer determines that a violation of the code exists that can be corrected and which such code enforcement officer is authorized to enforce, and the responsible person has not been issued a notice of violation or citation for the same violation within the past twelve (12) months, the officer may issue a notice of violation, allowing a period for the correction of the violation. If so issued, the person receiving such notice shall correct the violation within such period, or within any extension thereof, as approved pursuant to subsection B of this section. The notice of violation shall set forth the violation, the provisions of the law violated, the acts required to correct, and the rights for administrative review of the notice.

     B.     The recipient of a notice of violation may request an extension of any correction period, provided such request is filed with the code enforcement officer before the specified correction period expires. The code enforcement officer shall grant a reasonable extension of the period of time to correct the violation, if the recipient thereof has supplied substantial evidence showing that the correction cannot reasonably be made within the correction period specified in the notice, or that mitigating or extenuating circumstances exist which reasonably require extension of the correction period. The filing of a request for such an extension does not, unless and until granted, extend the correction period or any other time periods set forth in this chapter.

     C.     The responsible shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine(s) described in the citation, which fine(s) shall be due on the date the citation is issued. Additional civil citations may be issued and fines imposed for every day the violation continues uncorrected after the date the first citation is issued, provided that no additional civil citations shall be issued and additional civil fines shall not be imposed during any period a prior civil citation for the same violation is under administrative or judicial review pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of any other civil or criminal remedies for continuing or subsequent violations during the period a civil citation is under administrative or judicial review, as herein provided. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.035 Preliminary review.
     A.    A responsible person issued a notice of violation pursuant to this chapter may request a preliminary review, if the request is received by the city within ten days of the date the notice is issued.

     B.     To obtain a preliminary review, the responsible person or his or her representative shall contact the city and bring a copy of the notice of violation and file a signed written request, stating the reasons why and any evidence showing no violation occurred or exists, or why he or she is not a person responsible for the violation. All filed requests shall be date stamped upon receipt by the department.

     C.     The preliminary review shall be conducted by the city manager or designee. The reviewer shall not be the code enforcement officer who issued the notice. The purpose of the review is to uncover and cancel any mistakenly issued notices due to errors that are readily verifiable.

     D.    The preliminary review shall be decided within three business days thereafter, and shall consist of a review of the notice of violation and the written statement and any other evidence submitted at the time of the request by the responsible person.

     E.     The recipient shall be notified of the results of the review by being given a written notice of decision. The notice may be given by mail, facsimile transmission, or in person. The city shall keep a record of all preliminary review requests, decisions, and notices for a minimum period of two years.

     F.     A request for preliminary review does not extend any time periods for compliance, the time any correction period ends, or the time within which to request an administrative review.

     G.    If, following a preliminary review, the reviewer determines that no code violation occurred or that the recipient was not a person responsible for the violation, the notice of violation shall be canceled. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.040 Civil citations.
     A.    A code enforcement officer, upon determining that a provision of this code which he or she is authorized and charged to enforce has been violated, may issue a civil citation to any person(s) responsible therefor if: (1) the violation cannot be corrected, a notice of violation cannot be been served, and time has past without correction of the violation; or (2) the same violation has been committed by the same responsible person within the past twelve (12) months and a notice of violation or civil citation has been served within the same twelve (12) month period. A code enforcement officer may issue a citation for a violation not committed in the officer’s presence if the officer has determined through investigation that the responsible person cited, in fact, committed the violation. A responsible person to whom a citation is issued shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine(s) described in the citation when due pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     The responsible person shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine(s) described in the citation, which fine(s) shall be due on the date the citation is issued. Additional civil citations may be issued and fines imposed for every day the violation continues uncorrected after the date the first citation is issued, provided that no additional civil citations shall be issued and additional civil fines shall not be imposed during any period in which a prior civil citation for the same violation is under administrative or judicial review pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. Nothing contained in this section shall prevent the use of any other civil or criminal remedies for continuing or subsequent violations during the period a civil citation is under administrative or judicial review, as herein provided. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.050 Citation contents.
     Each citation issued pursuant to this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:

     A.    Name of the person responsible for the violation of any provision of this code.

     B.     Date on which the code violation occurred or, in the case of a continuing violation, the date the code violation was first known or observed to have occurred by the code enforcement officer issuing the citation.

     C.     The code section(s) violated.

     D.    Address of the property where the code violation occurred. in the event the property does not have a legal address, or such address is unknown to the code enforcement officer, a description of the property reasonably sufficient to identify the site of the violation shall be sufficient.

     E.     Descriptions of the violation(s).

     F.     Total amount due on the fine for each violation, and procedure to pay the fine(s) and avoid a late payment penalty, and/or any interest charges.

     G.    Description of the procedure for requesting a waiver of fine deposit and/or an administrative review to contest the citation.

     H.    Signature of the code enforcement officer issuing the citation.

     I.      Date the citation is issued.

     J.      A self-addressed envelope in which the responsible party can mail or deliver to the city the fine, or request a waiver of fine deposit or request an administrative hearing.

     K.    Any other information deemed necessary or appropriate by the code enforcement officer, city manager or designee. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.060 Service of citations and notices.
     Any citation or notice of violation issued or given pursuant to any provision of this chapter may be served, and shall be deemed received on the date when served, in any of the following manners:

     A.    A code enforcement officer may personally serve the notice or citation on the responsible person. When personally served, the responsible person shall be requested to sign a copy of the notice or citation showing his or her receipt thereof. If the responsible person refuses or otherwise fails to sign the notice or citation, the code enforcement officer shall so indicate on the officer’s copy of the notice or citation. The refusal or failure of the responsible person to sign the notice or citation shall not affect the validity of the notice or citation or the validity of its service.

     B.     A code enforcement officer may mail the notice or citation by first class mail, if the responsible person is not present for personal service when the officer issues the notice or citation. When served by mail, the notice or citation shall be mailed to the responsible person’s address shown on the county’s current equalized property tax assessment rolls for a property-related violation, or to any address known for the responsible person for all other violations.

     C.     A code enforcement officer may post a copy of the notice or citation in a conspicuous place upon the property of which any property-related code violation(s) exists or existed. When served by posting, a copy of the notice or citation shall also be mailed by first class mail to the responsible person at the address of the property where the violation exists or existed. Failure of the responsible person to receive the posted or mailed copy of the notice or citation, or both, shall not affect the validity of the notice or citation or the validity of its service.

     D.    Any notice or order required or authorized to be given by the city manager or the hearing officer, or their designees, pursuant to any provision of this chapter shall be given in the manner provided in this section. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

 

1.07.070 Civil fines.
     A.    The amount of the fines for violating particular provisions of this code shall be as set forth in a schedule of fines adopted by resolution of the city council of the city. The schedule may include escalating fine amounts for repeat violations occurring within specified periods of time.

     B.     The schedule of fines may also specify the amount of interest and/or late payment penalty, if any, owed for any fine not paid when due. Any interest and/or late payment penalty shall be imposed for fines not paid within ten calendar days of their due date, or such other time as specified in the resolution adopting and specifying the interest and/or penalties.

     C.     Fines are due and payable upon the date the citation is issued, except, when a fine deposit has been waived pursuant to Section 1.07.090 of this chapter and the hearing officer thereafter upholds the citation and the amount of the fine, in whole or part, the fine amount shall be due on the date notice of the decision is given to the responsible person by the hearing officer, as provided in this chapter.

     D.    Any civil fine(s), penalties and interest due pursuant to this chapter shall be paid to the city’s finance department or such location or address as designated by the city manager or designee.

     E.     Payment of a civil fine shall not excuse the responsible person from correcting the code violation for which the citation was issued. The issuance of a citation and/or payment of a fine does not bar the city from taking further enforcement action regarding a code violation that is not corrected, including issuing additional civil citations, nor bar any other civil or criminal enforcement action(s) as may be authorized by law for any uncorrected or subsequent violation of the same or any other code provision.

     F.     Any civil fine imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be separate and apart from any reinspection fee(s) due pursuant to Section 1.10.030 or any other applicable provision of this code. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.075 Civil penalties.
     A.    A late payment penalty shall be imposed for civil fines and/or inspection fees (L.C.F.M.C. Section 1.10.030) not paid within thirty (30) calendar days of their due date. The amount of the late payment penalty shall be fifty (50) percent of the total amount of the civil fine owed.

     B.     An additional fifty (50) percent penalty shall be imposed for civil fines and/or inspection fees (L.C.F.M.C. Section 1.10.030) not paid within sixty (60) calendar days of their due date for cumulative total of one hundred (100) percent penalty of the original fine amount.

     C.     Unless otherwise prohibited by law or regulation, all civil fines, inspection fees (L.C.F.M.C. Section 1.10.030) and administrative costs imposed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall accrue interest at the rate of eight percent until the civil fine, inspection fees or administrative costs, including interest thereon, is paid in full. Interest shall begin to accrue sixty (60) calendar days after the due date for the civil fine, inspection fees or administrative costs and continue until the civil fine, inspection fees or administrative costs, including interest thereon, is paid in full. (Ord. 367 § 1, 2007)

 

1.07.080 Request for administrative hearing.
     A.    Any person receiving a civil citation may contest it by filing a request for an administrative review within the time provided herein. To obtain an administrative review, the responsible person shall file a signed written application in the form prescribed by the city, specifying the grounds for contesting the citation and fine. The responsible person may only contest the citation on one or more of the following grounds: (1) by challenging that a violation occurred; (2) by challenging that a violation was not corrected within any applicable correction period; (3) by challenging that the person is the responsible person for the violation; or (4) by challenging that the circumstances do not warrant imposition of the fine(s) prescribed.

     B.     Any application request for administrative review must be received by the city clerk within ten calendar days of the date the citation was issued, and be accompanied by a fine deposit of the full amount of the fine or an application for waiver of the fine deposit pursuant to Section 1.07.090 of this chapter. The request for administrative review shall not be accepted for filing, if not received timely and accompanied by either a deposit of the full amount of the fine or an application for waiver of the fine deposit which conforms to the provisions of Section 1.07.090. When an application for administrative review and fine deposit and/or an application for waiver of fine deposit are mailed, the application(s) and fine shall be deemed filed on the date received by the city. All applications shall be date stamped on the date received by the city. The city clerk shall deny any application which is not timely received by the city. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.090 Waiver of fine deposit.
     A.    A person filing an application for administrative review may also request at the same time, a waiver of the fine deposit on the grounds of financial hardship. To request such a waiver, the person shall file with the city clerk a signed written application in the form prescribed by the city, specifying the reasons the person is unable to make the fine deposit. Such application shall be made at the time of and shall accompany the request for administrative review made pursuant to Section 1.07.080 of this chapter.

     B.     Within ten days following the receipt of a timely application for waiver of the fine deposit, the city clerk shall provide notice of the time, date and place of a hearing upon such application for waiver of the fine deposit, which hearing date shall be not sooner than ten days nor later than thirty (30) days following the date notice of such hearing is given.

     C.     The responsible person bears the burden of establishing that he or she does not have the financial ability to make the fine deposit.

     D.    The request shall be decided by the city manager or designee prior to the administrative review contesting the citation. Within ten days following the conclusion of the hearing on the waiver request, the city manager or designee shall issue a written decision that the fine deposit is or is not waived, and specifying the reasons therefor. The city manager or designee shall include with the notice of the waiver decision notice of the hearing date set for the administrative review.

     E.     If the waiver is denied, the city manager or designee shall give the responsible person a self-addressed envelope to use in making the fine deposit. The person shall mail or deliver the deposit in the envelope provided so that it is postmarked or personally delivered at least three business days before the date designated for the administrative review hearing. The city manager or designee is authorized to determine the address to which the deposit is to be mailed or delivered. Failure to make the deposit by the time required shall be deemed an abandonment of the contest.

     F.     The filing of an application for waiver of the fine deposit does not extend the time within which to request an administrative review or any other time set forth in this chapter, except as provided in subsection E of this section. The decision of the city manager or designee on the waiver of the fine deposit is final and not subject to judicial review pursuant to Section 1.07.120. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.100 Administrative review.
     A.    Hearings shall be conducted by the hearing officer at a time, date and location set by the hearing officer, which date shall be at least ten days but not more than thirty (30) days after the date upon which the responsible person requests an administrative review, accompanied by the fine deposit, unless otherwise agreed to by the responsible person and the hearing officer. The responsible person shall be given at least ten days advance notice of such hearing date.

     B.     The city manager or designee shall ensure that the pertinent citation records for a citation set for hearing are delivered to the hearing officer. Before the hearing, the city manager or designee shall also make available to the responsible person a copy of any additional reports concerning the citation that are provided to the hearing officer.

     C.     The responsible person shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present witnesses and evidence relevant to the challenges made to the issued citation. A parent, guardian or legal representative must accompany any responsible person who is under eighteen (18) years of age at the time of the hearing, or any request or contest shall be deemed abandoned.

     D.    The citation and any other reports prepared by the code enforcement officer, or prepared at his or her request, concerning the code violation shall be accepted by the hearing officer as prima facie evidence of the code violation and the facts stated in such documents.

     E.     Neither the code enforcement officer nor any other representative of the city shall be required to attend the hearing, nor shall the hearing officer require that there be submitted any evidence of the violation, other than the citation, that may exist among the public records of the city. However, any such appearance and/or submission may be made at the discretion of the code enforcement officer or any city employee or agent.

     F.     The hearing officer may continue a hearing if a request is made by the responsible person, or representative, or the representative of the city, upon a showing of good cause. All continuance requests shall either: (1) be made in person at the hearing; or (2) be made by a written request received by the hearing officer at least three days notice before the scheduled time of the hearing. If the continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set for a date not later than fifteen (15) days after the previously scheduled hearing date, unless otherwise mutually agreed by the responsible person and the director. If the continuance is denied, the hearing shall proceed as scheduled and, if the responsible person is not present, the request shall be deemed abandoned in accordance with subsection H of this section. The decision on the continuance request is final, and the notice shall either be delivered personally to the responsible person or the representative if present, or be mailed by the department. If the request for continuance is not made in person, the person is responsible for determining whether the request is denied and the hearing is to proceed as scheduled.

     G.    The hearing shall be conducted informally and the legal rules of evidence need not be followed. Each party shall have opportunity present evidence and witnesses in support of his or her case. The city bears the burden of proof to establish a violation of the code. The citation is prima facie evidence of the violation, and the code enforcement officer who issued the citation is not required to participate in the hearing. The hearing officer controls the hearing and may limit or control the examination of witnesses and the submission of evidence. The hearing officer shall not have the authority to issue subpoenas.

     H.    The failure of the responsible person to appear at the hearing, unless the hearing was continued to another date pursuant to subsection F of this section, shall constitute an abandonment of the request for administrative review and a failure to exhaust administrative remedies concerning the violation as set forth in the citation. The fine deposit shall be credited by the city to the fine due for the violation. The responsible person’s failure to appear shall be noted on the notice of decision by the hearing officer, and it shall be mailed to the responsible persons.

     I.      In the event that the designated hearing officer also serves as an employee of the city, the hearing officer’s continued employment, performance evaluation, compensation, and benefits shall not be linked, directly or indirectly, to the number of citations upheld or canceled by such hearing officer. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.110 Decision and administrative order.
     A.    Following the conclusion of the administrative review hearing, the hearing officer shall render a decision as follows:

     1.     Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued occurred, and uphold the fine in the amount set forth in the fine schedule adopted by the city council, and if the violation has not been corrected as of the date of the hearing, order correction of the violation; or

     2.     Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued occurred, but that the responsible person, or his or her representative, has introduced credible and substantial evidence of mitigating circumstances warranting imposition of a lesser fine than that prescribed in the fine schedule adopted by the city council, or no fine at all, and imposing such lesser fine, if any, and if the violation has not been corrected as of the date of the hearing, order correction of the violation; or

     3.     Determine that the violation for which the citation was issued did not occur, or that the condition did not constitute a violation of the code, or that the person is not a responsible person for such violation, and order that the citation shall be canceled.

     B.     The hearing officer shall issue a written decision entitled “Notice of Decision and Administrative Order” (hereinafter the “Administrative Order”) no later than fifteen (15) calendar days after the date on which the administrative review hearing is concluded. The administrative order shall be served by first class mail or by any other method set forth in Section 1.07.060 of this chapter. The administrative order shall become final on the date of mailing or other service, and shall notify the responsible person of his or her right to judicial review as provided in Section 1.07.120 of this chapter. The administrative order shall also either: (1) set a deadline for compliance with its terms, in the absence of a timely filed appeal for judicial review as provided in Section 1.07.120, or following a denial of such appeal, which deadline shall be not less than twenty (20) days from either the date of mailing or other service of the administrative order or the date of denial of any appeal for judicial, whichever date is later; or (2) if the hearing officer determines, as described in subsection (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, and the responsible person has made the fine deposit; order a partial or full refund of the deposit.

     C.     In the event the responsible person fails to comply with any final administrative order directing abatement of a continuing violation of the code, the city may exercise any civil or criminal remedy available under the code, or otherwise provided by law, to gain compliance with the administrative order. For purposes of this subsection, the term ”continuing violation” shall mean a single, ongoing condition or activity in violation of the code. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.120 Judicial review.
     A.    The responsible person may seek judicial review of the administrative review decision, by filing an appeal with the superior court within twenty (20) calendar days after the responsible person served with a copy of the notice of decision following the conclusion of the hearing, in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4. The appeal filed with the court shall also contain a proof of service, showing a copy of the appeal was served upon the city. If the responsible person fails to file a timely notice of appeal for judicial review, the administrative order shall be deemed final.

     B.     No appeal is permitted from a decision regarding:

     1.     A request for preliminary review;

     2.     An extension of the correction period for any violation;

     3.     A request for waiver of the fine deposit;

     4.     A decision that the responsible person is deemed to have abandoned the contest due to his or her failure to appear at the hearing or failure to make the fine deposit.

     C.     The city shall forward to the superior court, within fifteen (15) days of its request, the pertinent citation documents for any case appealed to that court. If the superior court cancels any citation, the city will refund any fine deposit made. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.130 Collection of unpaid fines.
     A.    The city, at its discretion, may pursue any and all legal and equitable remedies for the collection of unpaid fines, interest and penalties, including the recordation of a lien pursuant to Section 1.07.140 of this chapter. Pursuit of one remedy does not preclude the pursuit of any other remedies until the total fines, interest and penalties owed by a person under this chapter have been collected.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, the city may refuse to issue, extend, or renew any discretionary city permit or entitlement, or other discretionary city approval, to any person, who has unpaid delinquent fines, interest, penalties, liens or assessments due under this chapter, related to the permit, entitlement or approval. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

 

1.07.140 Lien procedure.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any administrative fine imposed pursuant to this chapter in connection with real property has not been satisfied in full, including any applicable interest and penalties, and/or has not been successfully challenged by a judicial review pursuant to Section 1.07.120 of this chapter, such obligation shall constitute and may be declared a lien against the real property on which the violation occurred.

     B.     The lien, as provided herein, shall have no force and effect until recorded with the county recorder. Once recorded, the administrative order shall have the force and effect and priority of a judgment lien governed by the provisions of Section 697.340 of the Code of Civil Procedure, and may be extended as provided in Sections 683.110 to 683.220, inclusive, of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     C.     Interest shall accrue on the amount of the lien remaining unsatisfied pursuant to law.

     D.    Prior to recording any such lien, the city manager or designee shall prepare and file with the city clerk a report stating the amounts due and owing.

     E.     The city clerk shall fix a time, date, and place for hearing such report and any protests or objections thereto by the city council of the city.

     F.     The city manager or designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the property owner not less than ten days prior to the time set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served as provided in Section 1.07.060 of this chapter.

     G.    Public Hearing and Protests.

     1.     Any person whose real property is subject to a lien pursuant to subsection A of this section may file a written protest with the city clerk, and/or may protest orally at the public hearing held by the city council.

     2.     Each written protest must contain a description of the property in which the protesting party has interest and the grounds of such protest.

     3.     The city council shall conduct the public hearing and, following the conclusion thereof, shall adopt a resolution confirming, discharging or modifying the amount of the lien.

     H.    Following the adoption of a resolution by the city council imposing a lien pursuant to this section, the city clerk shall file the same as a judgment lien in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County, California. The lien may carry such additional penalties and interest as set forth by resolution of the city council.

     I.      Once payment in full is received by the city for all outstanding amounts due pursuant to said lien, including all accumulated penalties and interest, the director shall either record a notice of satisfaction or provide the property owner or any interested financial institution with a notice of satisfaction, in a form which may be recorded with the office of the county recorder. such notice of satisfaction shall cancel the city’s lien. (Ord. 359 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 1.10 ENFORCEMENT OF THE CODE
1.10.010 Enforcement authority.
     The city manager and/or designated representative(s) shall have the duty and authority to enforce the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code and zoning ordinance; and are further authorized and directed, pursuant to Section 836.5 of the California Penal Code and Section 1.04.010 of the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code, to investigate violations, to arrest persons, to prepare, issue and deliver to any such arrested person written notice to appear in court, and to release such person from custody, upon receiving his or her written promise to appear in court for any violation or violations of these provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code, zoning ordinance and of state law. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2006)

 

1.10.020 No change in employment status.
     Nothing in this chapter is intended to, or shall operate to change, or shall have the effect of changing, the status of the city manager, community development director, code enforcement officers, or other designated employees from public or miscellaneous employees of the city of La Cañada Flintridge to an individual peace officer or safety member for purposes of retirement, workers’ compensation or similar injury or death benefits, or any other employee benefits to which the officer or employee would not have been entitled to as a public employee prior to adoption of this chapter. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2006)

 

1.10.030 Inspection fee.
     There is imposed, upon each person who receives a notice of violation of any of the above-referenced provisions of the municipal code, zoning ordinance or state law, an inspection fee, in such amounts as set from time to time by resolution of the city council, which may be assessed for each inspection or reinspection conducted pursuant to this chapter. Any such initial inspection fee and first reinspection fee shall be waived and shall not be imposed, when the particular violation for which an initial inspection and first reinspection is conducted is fully abated and corrected within the time and manner specified in the notice of violation. This fee is intended to provide full cost recovery for administrative and operational costs, based on actual time expended for unnecessary inspections, and not for enforcement of the law. Any fees imposed shall be separate and apart from any fines or penalties imposed for violation of the law. The amount of any fee imposed shall be deemed a civil debt due and owing to the city of La Cañada Flintridge. For purposes of this subsection, the term “initial inspection” shall mean any inspection of the premises which results in the issuance of a notice of violation of any of the above-referenced provisions of the municipal code, zoning ordinance or state law. (Ord. 360 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 1.16 CHALLENGES TO CITY ACTIONS
1.16.010 Code of Civil Procedures Section 1094.6 applicable.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure shall apply to any decision of the city, or of any commission, board, officer or agent of the city, which is subject to review pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 (Ord. 207 § 1, 1992)

 

1.16.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of Section 1.16.010 of this code, “decision” shall be defined as set forth in subsection (e) of Section 1094.6 of the California Code of Civil Procedure or any successor thereto. (Ord. 207 § 1, 1992)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.01 COUNCIL
Chapter 2.02 ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 2.04 MANAGER
Chapter 2.08 DEPARTMENTS AND BOARDS
Chapter 2.12 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.16 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
Chapter 2.20 PERSONNEL SYSTEM

Chapter 2.01 COUNCIL
2.01.010 Regular meetings.
     Regular meetings of the city council shall be held at City Hall, Council Chambers, One Civic Center Drive, La Cañada Flintridge, California 91011. The day and time of regular meetings shall be established by resolution of the city council. From time to time, meetings of the city council may be held at Lanterman Auditorium, 4491 Cornishon Avenue, La Cañada Flintridge, CA 91011, or such other place as the city council may designate. (Ord. 480 § 1, 2019; Ord. 434 § 1, 2015; Ord. 319 § 1, 2001; Ord. 242 § 1, 1995; Ord. 226 § 1, 1994; Ord. 137 § 1, 1986; Ord. 65 § 1, 1980; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.01.020 Compensation.
     City councilmembers shall be paid a salary in an amount not to exceed three hundred dollars ($300.00) per month, and shall, in addition, receive the same benefits as are made available to the city employees and paid for by the city. (Ord. 249 § 1, 1996; Ord. 209 § 1, 1992; Ord. 149 § 1, 1987; Ord. 114 § 1, 1985; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.01.040 General municipal elections.
     General municipal elections of the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in March of even-numbered years effective with the next regularly scheduled general municipal election following adoption of this section. (Ord. 465 § 1, 2017)

 

2.01.050 Filling vacancies on the city council—Term.
     Upon determination by the city council that a vacancy has occurred in the office of the city council, the city council shall within thirty (30) days take one of the following actions:

     A.    Call a special election to fill a vacancy. The date of the special election shall be determined as provided by Section 36512 of the Government Code. A person elected to fill a vacancy holds office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent; or

     B.     Appoint a person to fill a vacancy on the city council. A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the unexpired term of the former incumbent. (Ord. 116 § 1, 1985; Ord. 70 § 2, 1981; Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 2.02 ADMINISTRATION
2.02.010 Places for posting public notices.
     The following public places in the city are designated as the locations where ordinances, resolutions and notices of the city shall be posted when required by the laws of the city or state:

     A.    La Cañada Flintridge City Hall

             1327 Foothill Boulevard

             La Cañada Flintridge, California

     B.     La Cañada Flintridge Public Library

             4545 Oakwood Avenue

             La Cañada Flintridge, California

     C.     Roger Barkley Community Center of La Cañada Flintridge

             4469 Chevy Chase Drive

             La Cañada Flintridge, California. (Ord. 321 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 2.04 MANAGER
2.04.010 Office created.
     The office of the city manager of the city of La Cañada Flintridge is created and established. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.011 Qualifications.
     The city manager shall be appointed by the council on the basis of his or her executive and administrative qualifications and such other qualifications as may be established by the city council. The city manager shall hold office for an indefinite term at the pleasure of the council.

     No council member shall be eligible for appointment as city manager until one year has elapsed after such council member has ceased to be a member of the council. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.012 Chief executive.
     The city manager shall be the chief executive of the city government under the direction and control of the council, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The city manager shall have authority over all other officers and employees of the city except the city treasurer and city attorney. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.020 Council-manager relations.
     A.    The council and its members shall deal with the administrative services of the city through the city manager, except for the purpose of inquiry. Should any council member make an inquiry, it shall be for the purpose of compiling facts and data. The city manager shall take instructions and direction from the council and no individual council member shall give instructions or directions to the city manager or other city employee.

     B.     The city manager shall attend all meetings of the city council unless excused therefrom by the mayor or the council.

     C.     The city manager may take part in council discussions but may not vote. The city manager shall have the authority to appear and address the council or any of its commissions at any meeting.

     D.    The city manager shall recommend to the council for adoption such measures and ordinances as that official deems necessary or desirable. The city manager shall keep the council fully informed at all times as to the financial condition and needs of the city and shall make such reports as may be desirable or as requested by the council. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.030 City manager duties.
     The city manager shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under that official’s control. In addition to the city manager’s general authority as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereof, it shall be the city manager’s duty and that official shall have the authority to:

     A.    Enforcement of Laws. See that the laws of the state of California pertaining to the city and all laws and ordinances of the city are duly enforced, and that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city are faithfully observed;

     B.     Appoint, Dismiss, Supervise, etc. Appoint and promote, discipline, suspend, demote, or dismiss, employees of the city except the city attorney and city treasurer;

     C.     Administrative Reorganization of Offices. Conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, functions, positions or units under the city manager’s direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business;

     D.    Appoint to Acting Capacity. Designate him or herself or some other officer or employee to perform the duties of any office or position in the municipal service under the city manager’s control which is vacant or which lacks administration due to the absence or disability of the incumbent;

     E.     Purchases. Purchase or cause to be purchased by some officer designated by the city manager all services, supplies, and equipment for all of the departments of the city. All purchases and expenditures for purchases shall be made in accordance with procedures established by ordinance or resolution;

     F.     Public Property. Exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, streets and other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the council;

     G.    Annual Report. The annual report shall be submitted in February of each year, or at such other time as the council may determine;

     H.    Annual Budget and Capital Program. They shall be presented to the council at or before the second council meeting in May of each year, or at such other time as the council may determine;

     I.      Miscellaneous Duties. Serve in any appointed office within the city government for which he or she may be qualified when appointed thereto by the council, and to hold and perform duties thereof at the pleasure of the council;

     J.      Investigate all complaints related to matters concerning the administration of the city government and services to its citizens;

     K.    Perform such other duties and exercise such other authorities as may be delegated to him or her from time to time by action of the council. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.040 City manager authorities.
     The city manager shall have the authority to properly perform any duty assigned to that office by the city council or by other process of law. In general, the city manager’s authority shall include:

     A.    Prescribe Rules. Have the authority to prescribe such rules and regulations as he or she shall deem necessary for the conduct of administrative agencies subject to the city manager’s authority, and he or she shall have the authority to revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation of the administrative service by whomever prescribed.

     B.     Investigate. Have the authority, either personally or by any person designated by the city manager, to investigate and examine or inquire into the affairs or operations of any function and any contract, or the proper performance of any obligations of or to the city; and when so authorized by the council, the city manager shall have the authority to employ consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations, examinations or inquiries.

     C.     Overrule Officials. Have the authority to set aside any action taken by another employee and to supersede any such employee in the functions of that employee’s office.

     D.    Delegate Duties. Have the authority to direct any department to perform the work for any other department. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.050 Miscellaneous provisions.
     A.    Acting City Manager. The assistant city manager shall serve as acting city manager during any temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event of the absence or disability of the assistant city manager, the city manager, by filing a written notice with the mayor, shall designate a qualified city employee or officer to exercise the authority and perform the duties of the city manager during a temporary absence or disability of the city manager. In the event of failure to make such designation, the city council may appoint an acting city manager.

     B.     Bond. The city manager and assistant city manager shall be bonded to assure the faithful performance of the duties imposed on them as herein prescribed. Such bond may be part of a blanket surety bond and the premium for same shall be a proper charge against the city.

     C.     Compensation—Expenses. The city manager shall receive such compensation and benefits as the city council shall from time to time determine.

     The city manager shall be reimbursed for all sums necessarily incurred by that official in the performance of his or her duties or incurred while traveling on business pertaining to the city. Reimbursement shall only be made, however, when an itemized claim, setting forth the sums expended and for which reimbursement is requested, has been submitted and approved by the council.

     D.    Agreements on Employment. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as a limitation on the authority of the council to enter into any supplemental agreement with the city manager delineating additional terms and conditions of employment not inconsistent with any provisions of this chapter.

     E.     Assistance From Others. It shall be the duty of all subordinate officers, officials under contract with the city, city commissions, city treasurer and city attorney to assist the city manager in administering the affairs of the city efficiently, economically and harmoniously. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

 

2.04.060 Removal of city manager.
     The removal of the city manager shall be only upon a three member vote of the whole council in the city in regular council meeting, subject, however, to the provisions of the next succeeding subsections. In case of his or her intended removal by the council, the city manager shall be furnished with written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him or her at least thirty (30) days before the effective date of such anticipated removal, which shall be shown upon the written notice.

     A.    Hearing. Within seven days after the delivery to the city manager of such notice, that official may, by written notification to the council, request a hearing before the council. Thereafter, the council shall fix a time for the hearing which shall be held at its usual meeting place, at which the city manager may appear and be heard.

     B.     Discretion of Council. In removing the city manager, the council shall use its uncontrolled discretion and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city manager to present grounds of opposition to his or her removal.

     C.     Limitations. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter hereinbefore enumerated, a four-fifths vote of the city council shall be required to remove the city manager from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any general municipal election held in the city at which election a member of the council is elected; the purpose of this provision is to allow any newly elected member of the city council or a reorganized council to observe the actions and ability of the city manager in the performance of the duties of his or her office. After the expiration of said ninety (90) days aforementioned, the provisions of the preceding paragraphs of this section as to the removal of said city manager shall apply, except that if the city manager has committed acts of moral turpitude of a violation of any law which would bring disrepute upon his or her office, or where he or she has committed any acts of dishonesty, the council may forthwith discharge the city manager upon a vote of three members of the council.

 

     D.    Severance Pay. On termination of employment of the city manager by reason of involuntary removal from service, other than for willful misconduct in office, the city manager shall receive cash severance pay in a lump sum equal to one month’s pay or prorated portion thereof for each year or fraction thereof of continuous service as city manager, up to a total of three month’s pay, to be computed at the highest salary received during his or her service with the city.

     Any reduction in pay for the city manager shall be deemed to be “involuntary removal from service” unless such reduction is part of a comparable reduction in pay for all employees as an economy measure. (Ord. 45 § 1, 1978)

Chapter 2.08 DEPARTMENTS AND BOARDS
2.08.010 Establishment.
     The city council may establish by resolution or ordinance such boards, and/or commissions as it deems necessary or convenient to aid in the administration of the affairs of the city. Board members and commissioners shall be paid such compensation as the city council may provide by resolution. (Ord. 114 § 2, 1985; Ord. 27, 1997)

 

2.08.020 Appeal to city council.
     Except as specifically provided for in the city’s municipal code or zoning code, any determination by a board or commission that is final may be appealed by any interested party to the city council within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of decision. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk together with any required fees and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason to appeal.

     The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing, giving notice to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. Following such hearing the city council shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse, or modify the determination of the board or commission. The determination of the city council shall be final and effective immediately. (Ord. 317 § 1, 2001)

 

2.08.030 Appeal stays effective date.
     When an appeal is properly filed, the determination appealed from is stayed. Any action taken pursuant to such determination prior to the expiration of the appeal period is at the risk of party taking such action. (Ord. 317 § 1, 2001)

 

2.08.040 Failure to act.
     In the event that an appeal is filed and not acted upon within forty (40) calendar days after the hearing is closed, then in that event, the previous decision shall be deemed affirmed. (Ord. 317 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 2.12 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.12.010 Created.
     A planning commission for the city of La Cañada Flintridge is established with membership, powers and duties as provided herein and by the statutes of the state of California. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.020 Appointment and term.
     The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be appointed in the manner hereinafter provided:

     A.    The term of office of the members shall be established by resolution of the city council.

     B.     All appointments shall be for a term of four years, or until their successors are appointed, unless terminated earlier as provided in this chapter.

     C.     Where vacancies on the planning commission arise, each member of the city council shall be entitled to designate the person(s) whom he or she wishes to appoint for each vacancy on the planning commission (e.g., if three planning commissioners are to be appointed, then each city councilman may nominate three persons. After each councilman has declared his or her nominees, the persons receiving the three highest number of votes shall be appointed members of the planning commission).

     D.    No person shall be appointed for more than two consecutive terms of office. (Ord. 139 § 1, 1986; Ord. 64 § 1, 1980; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.030 Statement of qualifications.
     Persons wishing to be considered for appointment to the La Cañada Flintridge planning commission shall complete and submit a statement of qualifications together with such other information as the city council may request. Copies of these materials shall be made available to members of the city council at least one week prior to the time that an appointment is to be made to the planning commission. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.040 Removal.
     Any member of the planning commission may be removed at any time, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the entire city council. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.050 Residency.
     Any member of the planning commission shall automatically be deemed to have resigned from the planning commission and his or her office vacated, if he or she ceases to be a resident of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.060 Duties and powers.
     The planning commission shall have and exercise each and all of the powers, duties, rights, privileges and authorities for the city planning commission as set forth or provided for in any ordinance of this city or under the provisions of the planning and zoning law of the state of California, as the same now exists or as it may be hereinafter amended, and shall perform the duties, acts and functions of the city planning commission set forth and referred to in and as contemplated by the planning and zoning law of the state of California and ordinances of this city in the manner therein set forth, except where otherwise provided by ordinance of this city. The planning commission shall recommend to the city council the approval, conditional approval or disapproval of tentative maps of proposed subdivisions of land, and the city council does hereby designate the planning commission as its advisory agency with respect to the design and improvement of proposed subdivisions. Every map or plat shall, prior to its final approval or disapproval by the city council, be submitted to the planning commission for action thereon. The planning commission shall advise the city council on such other matters as the city council may from time to time refer to the planning commission for report and recommendation. Whenever reference is made in any ordinance of this city, or the laws of this state to the planning advisory committee, the planning advisory agency or words of similar impact, they shall mean the La Cañada Flintridge planning commission. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.070 Rules and proceedings.
     A.    Except as otherwise provided herein, the planning commission shall have power to and shall provide for its own organization; shall adopt rules and regulations for the transaction of business before it; shall designate the time and place for the regular monthly meeting or meetings of the planning commission; and to take such other action as is required.

     B.     The planning commission shall cause proper records to be kept of all of its official acts and proceedings and shall make reports to the city council, all as contemplated in and provided for in the laws of the state and this code. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

2.12.080 Compensation.
     Members of the planning commission shall be paid such compensations the city council may provide by resolution. (Ord. 114 § 3, 1985; Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 2.16 EMERGENCY ORGANIZATION AND FUNCTIONS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 27.

 

2.16.010 Purposes.
     The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.020 Definition.
     “Emergency” means the actual threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within the city caused by such conditions including, but not limited to, fire, brush fire, earthquake, flood, windstorm, rain storm, tornado, hurricane, riot, terrorist attack, drought, energy shortage, hazardous materials release, air pollution, epidemic, or other conditions posing a wide-scale threat to persons or property including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment, and/or facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.030 Disaster council membership.
     The La Cañada Flintridge disaster council is hereby created and shall consist of the following:

     A.    The mayor, who shall be the chair;

     B.     The director of emergency services, who shall be the vice chair, designated to be the duty of the city manager;

     C.     The assistant director of emergency services, designated to be the duty of the assistant city manager;

     D.    The emergency operations center coordinator, designated to be the duty of the emergency services coordinator;

     E.     Such representatives of the city’s public safety commission, civic, business, labor, veterans, professional, or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.040 Disaster council powers and duties.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the La Cañada Flintridge disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements.

     B.     The La Cañada Flintridge disaster council shall also be responsible for the review of the city of La Cañada Flintridge emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.050 Disaster council meetings.
     The La Cañada Flintridge disaster council shall meet upon call of the chair or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chair. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.060 Powers and duties of the director of emergency services.
     The director is empowered to:

     A.    Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a “local emergency” if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session;

     B.     Request the governor of the state of California to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     C.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     D.    Direct cooperation between, and coordination of, services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

     E.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

     F.     In the event of the proclamation of a “local emergency,” as herein provided, or upon the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the governor or the director of the state office of emergency services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is hereby empowered:

     1.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

     2.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment, and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

     3.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county of Los Angeles, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he or she deems necessary in the execution of his or her duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits, and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster services workers,

     4.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

     5.     To execute all of his or her ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him or her by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all pow-

ers conferred upon him or her by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority,

     6.     To establish and cause the implementation of temporary parking restrictions on one or both sides of certain streets as necessary to provide emergency access, facilitate an evacuation and/or ensure public safety. The temporary parking restrictions shall become effective when signs or markings giving notice of the effective dates and times of such prohibition or restriction are placed on the curb, street or other appropriate location in accordance with the California Vehicle Code;

     G.    To designate the order of succession to the directorship, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable or otherwise unable to perform his or her duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 391 § 1, 2010; Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.070 Powers and duties of the assistant director.
     The assistant director shall, under the supervision of the director and with the assistance of specially appointed representatives, develop the emergency plan. The plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency, or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption by resolution of the city council. The assistant director shall manage the emergency programs of this city; and shall have such other powers and duties as may be assigned by the director. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.080 Emergency organization.
     A.    All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations, and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.16.060(F)(3) herein, be charged with the duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     B.     All members of the emergency organization of the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall utilize the Standardized Emergency Management System (SEMS), as defined by Government Code Section 8607(a), for managing responses to multi-agency and multi-jurisdiction emergencies within this city. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.085 Expenditures.
     Any expenditure made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be conclusively deemed for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

 

2.16.090 Penalty for obstruction.
     It shall be a misdemeanor, for any person, during an emergency, to:

     A.    Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization, in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him or her by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give, or be likely to give assistance to, the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense of protection thereof;

     C.     Wear, carry, or display, any mark, badge, symbol, insignia or other means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state or by the emergency organization of this city, for the purpose of gaining or securing, without authority, access, privileges, enumeration and/or other benefit controlled or regulated by the director of the emergency organization of this city or city recognized emergency response agency or state sworn peace officer. (Ord. 337 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 2.20 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
2.20.010 Adoption of personnel system.
     In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to ensure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the following personnel system is adopted. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms shall be used as indicated:

     “Administrative staff” means the organizational title held by the incumbent in each of the following classifications: assistant city manager, city planner.

     “Class” means all positions sufficiently similar in duties, authority and responsibility, to permit grouping under a common title in the application with equity of common standards of selection, transfer, promotion, demotion and salary.

     “Days” means calendar days, unless otherwise stated.

     “Demotion” means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a lower maximum rate of pay, or the reduction in pay of any employee for disciplinary reasons or in the event his or her service in a class is deemed by the city manager to be unsatisfactory.

     “Layoff” means the separation of employees from the active work force due to lack of work or funds, or to the abolition of positions by the city council for the above reasons or due to organizational changes.

     “Municipal service” means all positions of employment in the service of the city except those specifically excluded by Section 2.20.050 of this chapter.

     “Position” means a group of duties and responsibilities in the municipal service requiring the full time or part time employment of one person.

     “Probationary period” means a working test period during which an employee is required to demonstrate his or her fitness for the position to which he or she is appointed by actual performance of the duties of the position.

 

 

     “Promotion” means the movement of an employee from one class to another class having a higher maximum rate of pay.

     “Reinstatement” means the re-employment of a former regular employee or probationary employee.

     “Suspension” means the temporary separation from the service of an employee without pay, for disciplinary purposes.

     “Temporary appointment” means an appointment of a person who preferably possesses the desirable qualifications established for a particular class and who has been appointed to a position in that class in the absence of the availability of a regular employee.

     “Transfer” means a change of an employee from one position to another position in the same class or in a comparable class. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.030 Personnel officer.
     The city manager shall be the personnel officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as personnel officer under this chapter to any other employee of the city or may recommend that such powers and duties be performed under contract as provided in Section 2.20.040. The personnel officer shall:

     A.    Administer all the provisions of this chapter and of the personnel rules not specifically reserved to the city council;

     B.     Prepare and recommend to the city council personnel rules and revisions and amendments to such rules;

     C.     Prepare or cause to be prepared a position classification plan, including class specifications, and revisions of the plan. The plan, and any revisions thereof, shall become effective upon approval by the council;

     D.    Provide for the publishing or posting of notices of positions in the competitive service; the receiving of applications therefor; the conducting of interviews, tests and the appointment of applicants to positions. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.040 Right to contract for special services.
     The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city shall contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or public or private agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter:

     A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     B.     The preparation of a position classification plan, and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     C.     The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

     D.    The conduct of employee training programs;

     E.     The conduct of salary surveys;

     F.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.050 Municipal service.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all offices, positions and employees in the service of the city, except:

     A.    City manager;

     B.     City attorney;

     C.     City treasurer;

     D.    Elective officers;

     E.     Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

     F.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional, technical and any other services;

     G.    Emergency employees who are hired to meet the immediate requirements of an emergency condition, such as extraordinary fire, flood or earthquake, which threatens life or property;

     H.    Volunteers who provide clerical, maintenance or other services to the city without compensation;

     I.      Employees, other than those listed elsewhere in this section, who are not regularly employed in permanent positions. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.060 Appointments.
     Appointments to vacant positions in the municipal service shall be made in accordance with the personnel rules. Appointments and promotions shall be based on merit and fitness to be ascertained so far as practicable by a competitive process. Examinations may be used and conducted to aid in the selection of qualified employees and shall consist of selection techniques which will test fairly the qualifications of candidates, such as achievement and aptitude tests, written tests, personal interviews, performance tests, physical agility tests, evaluations of daily work performance, work samples, or any combination of these or other tests. The probationary period shall be considered an extension of the examination process. Physical and medical tests may be given as part of any examination.

     For any appointment, the city manager may include, in addition to competitive tests, a qualifying test or tests, and set minimum standards therefor.

     All appointments shall be made by the city manager. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.070 Probationary period.
     All regular appointments, including promotional appointments, shall be for a probationary period of not less than one year for administrative employees, and six months for other employees. During the probationary period, the employee may be rejected at any time without the right of appeal or hearing.

     An employee rejected during the probationary period from a position to which he or she has been promoted shall be reinstated to a position in the class from which he or she was promoted, unless he or she is discharged from the municipal service provided in this chapter and the rules. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.080 Layoff.
     Whenever, in the judgment of the city council, it becomes necessary in the interest of economy, or because the necessity for a position no longer exists, the city council may abolish any position in the municipal service, and the employee holding such position may be laid off without the right of appeal. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.090 Demotion, dismissal, suspension.
     The city manager shall have the right, for due cause, to demote, reduce the salary of, dismiss or suspend without pay for thirty (30) calendar days, any regular employee. Notice of such action shall be served within ten working days in advance of the action taken. Such notice shall specify the penalty and contain a statement of the reason or reasons therefor.

     The provisions of this section shall not apply to reductions in pay which are a part of a general plan to reduce salaries and wages or to eliminate positions. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.100 Status of present employees.
     Any person holding a position included in the municipal service who, on the effective date of this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the municipal service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for their class, shall assume regular status in the municipal service in the position held on such effective date without a qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules.

     Any other persons holding positions in the municipal service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary periods as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.110 Applicability of rules to certain exempt positions.
     The provisions of the personnel rules relating to attendance and leaves shall apply to the incumbents of full-time exempt positions as defined herein, unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.120 Equal employment opportunity.
     It is the policy of the city of La Cañada Flintridge to provide equal employment opportunity to all applicants and employees in every phase of personnel administration. Discrimination on the basis of race, creed, ancestry, national origin, color, religious or political beliefs and affiliations, gender, age, physical handicap, marital status, other nonmerit factors, or because of the exercise of rights under Section 3502 of the California Government Code, shall be prohibited. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.130 Improper political activity.
     The political activities of city employees shall conform to pertinent provisions of state and federal law. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

 

2.20.140 Adoption and amendment of rules.
     Personnel rules may be adopted by resolution of the city council. The rules may establish procedures governing the personnel system including:

     A.    Preparation, installation, revision and maintenance of a position, classification plan covering all positions in the municipal service, including employment standards and qualifications for each class;

     B.     Public announcement for all open positions and acceptance dates of applications for employment;

     C.     Preparation and conduct of tests;

     D.    Appointment of persons to regular status and the making of provisional appointments;

     E.     Establishment of probationary periods;

     F.     Evaluation of employees throughout their municipal service;

     G.    Transfer, promotion, demotion, reinstatement, disciplinary action and layoff of employees in the municipal service;

     H.    Separation of employees from the municipal service;

     I.      The establishment of adequate personnel records;

     J.      The establishment of appeal procedures concerning the interpretation or application of this chapter and any rules adopted hereunder;

     K.    The establishment of an employee training program;

     L.     The establishment of procedures governing employee leaves, holidays and the compensation plan. (Ord. 46 § 1, 1978)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 495. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 3.01 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.03 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 3.04 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX (REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX)
Chapter 3.07 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.12 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
Chapter 3.16 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 3.20 MILLS ACT

Chapter 3.01 SALES AND USE TAX
3.01.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “uniform local sales and use tax ordinance.” (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.020 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.030 Operative date.
     This chapter shall be operative on December 20, 1976. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.040 Purpose.
     The city council declares that the ordinance codified herein is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California state sales and use taxes;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and use taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.050 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of the sales and use tax ordinance codified herein; provided, that if this city has not contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.060 Sales tax.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.01.020 of this code of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.070 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his or her agent to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.080 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.04.020 of this code of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.090 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.100 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     In adopting the provisions of Part I of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “State” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be otherwise exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to the tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitutions shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.110 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.120 Exclusions and exemptions.
     A.    The amount subject to tax shall not include any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or customer.

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city, city and county, or county in this state shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter.

     C.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of the sales tax the gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government.

     D.    In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government is exempted from the use tax. (Ord. 99 § 1, 1983; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.130 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city, or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.01.150 Penalties.
     Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 3.03 PURCHASING SYSTEM
3.03.010 Definitions.
     “Public works project” means all projects as defined within Public Contract Code Section 20161 as the same may be, from time to time, amended.

     “Responsible bidder” means consideration for the vendor’s reputation, relevant experience, resources, facilities, efficiency and customer service institutional knowledge; the quality, availability and adaptability of the supplies or contractual services to a particular use and/or conformity to the products in use by the city; the character, integrity, reputation, judgment, experience, efficiency, financial resources, and financial responsibility of the bidder. The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance and service for the use of the subject of the contract; The nature and extent of the vendor’s compliance with the city’s expressed bid specifications; The number, scope and completeness of the conditions attached to the bid. Additional consideration for local competitive vendors. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.020 Adoption—Purposes.
     In order to maintain an efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, to secure for the city supplies, services and equipment at the lowest possible costs commensurate with quality needed, to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted in accordance with Section 54202 of the California Government Code. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.030 Purchases by purchasing agent pursuant to contract.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply in respect to the purchase of supplies, services and equipment where the city council, by contract or resolution or both, transfers the authority to make the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, whether blanket authority or single purchases, to another governmental agency or officer thereof, pursuant to lawful authority and where such other governmental agency or officer, in the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, follows to the satisfaction of the purchasing officer policies and procedures in compliance with the provisions of Sections 54201 to 54202 of the Government Code of the state of California. In the event of the transfer of blanket authority in respect to such purchase of supplies, services and equipment pursuant to this section, the purchasing officer shall remain the purchasing officer of the city and the other office or agency performing the services shall be designated the “purchasing agent.” In such an event, the purchasing officer may authorize purchases through the purchasing agent in accordance with the authority vested in him or her by the city council. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.040 Purchasing officer—Authority—Procedures.
     The authority for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment is vested in a purchasing officer and the procedures and policies contained in this chapter, as well as in supplemental rules and resolutions, shall be followed in respect to the purchase of supplies, services and equipment, unless the provisions of Section 3.03.030 are applicable. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.050 Purchasing officer—Designated—Powers and duties.
     The city manager, or designee, shall serve as the “purchasing officer.” He or she shall have the following powers and duties:

     A.    To purchase or contract for supplies, services and equipment required by any using agency in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council;

     B.     To negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies, services and equipment;

     C.     To act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies, services and equipment at least expense to the city;

     D.    To discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases;

     E.     To promulgate rules governing the purchasing of supplies, services and equipment for the city, consistent with this chapter, state and federal laws;

     F.     To prepare and recommend to the city council, revisions and amendments to this chapter;

     G.    To keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

     H.    To prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and other rules and regulations;

     I.      To supervise the inspection of all supplies, services and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

     J.      To recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use; and

     K.    To maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.060 Authorization to execute documents.
     All documents may be executed by the purchasing officer whenever such authorization is granted in a resolution, motion, or minute order adopted by the city council. All contracts under fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) may be approved and executed by the purchasing officer and attested by the city clerk and do not require council approval. Contracts equal to or over fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016)

 

3.03.070 Estimates of requirements.
     All using agencies shall file detailed estimates of their requirements in supplies, services and equipment in such manner, at such time, and for such future periods as the purchasing officer shall prescribe. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.080 Use of requisitions.
     Using agencies shall submit requests for supplies, services and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.090 Purchase orders.
     Purchase of supplies, services and equipment at or over three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) shall be made by purchase orders and/or contracts. Procurement of professional services shall be in an amount as promulgated by the purchasing officer and enumerated in the purchasing policies and procedures manual. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.100 Purchases—Open market.
     Purchases of supplies, services, equipment, except professional services, and the sale of surplus or unused supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed by Section 3.03.100 herein, pursuant to the following procedure:

     A.    Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchases shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids and shall be awarded to the lowest responsible bidder. The purchasing officer may promulgate rules setting forth minimum purchase amounts where three bids shall be required.

     B.     Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors by telephone, by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in the City Hall and/or on the city’s website. The purchasing officer may promulgate additional rules setting forth the procedure for notice inviting bids.

     C.     Written Bids. Bids shall be submitted to the city clerk who shall keep a record of all open market orders and bids for a period of one year after the submission of bids or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. The purchasing officer may promulgate additional rules setting forth the retention of bids consistent with this provision. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.110 Purchases—Pursuant to formal contract.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, public works projects estimated to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), purchases and contracts for supplies, services and equipment in an amount estimated to exceed fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), and the sale of surplus or unused supplies and equipment of an estimated value greater than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), shall be by written contract with the lowest or highest responsible bidder, as the case may be, pursuant to the following prescribed procedure:

     A.    Notice Inviting Bids. Notices inviting bids shall include a general description of the items or articles to be purchased or sold, shall state where bid blanks and specifications may be secured and the time and place for opening bids. The purchasing officer may promulgate additional rules and regulations on notices inviting bids.

     1.     Published Notice. Notice inviting bids shall be given at least ten days before the date of the opening of the bids. Notice shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation, printed and if there is none, published on the city’s website. The purchasing officer may promulgate rules setting forth additional notification requirement.

     2.     Bidders’ List. The purchasing officer shall also solicit sealed bids from all responsible prospective suppliers whose names are on the bidders’ list or who have requested their names to be added thereto.

     B.     Bidders Security. When deemed necessary by the purchasing officer, a bidders’ security bond may be prescribed in the public notices inviting bids. Bidders shall be entitled to return of bid security provided that a successful bidder shall forfeit his or her bid security upon refusal or failure to execute the contract within ten days after the notice of award of contract has been mailed, unless the city is responsible for the delay. The city council may, on refusal or failure of the successful bidder to execute the contract, award it to the next lowest responsible bidder. If the city council awards the contract to the next lowest bidder, the amount of the lowest bidder’s security shall be applied by the city to the difference between the low bid and the second lowest bid, and the surplus, if any, shall be returned to the lowest bidder.

     C.     Bid Opening Procedure. Sealed bids shall be submitted to the city clerk and shall be identified as bids on the envelope. Bids shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the public notices. A tabulation of all bids received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the bid opening.

     D.    Rejection of Bids. In its discretion, the city council may reject any bids presented and re-advertise for bids.

     E.     Award of Contracts. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, and except for contracts which must be awarded by the city council because of provisions of state law, all other contracts may be awarded by the purchasing officer provided that the budget adopted by the city council for the current fiscal year authorizes said purchase, or provides discretion to the city manager, to make such purchase.

     F.     Tie Bids. If two or more bids received are for the same total amount of unit price, quality and service being equal, and if the public interest will not permit the delay of re-advertising for bids, the city council may accept the one it chooses or accept the lowest bid made by negotiation with the tie bidders at the time of the bid opening.

     G.    Performance Bonds. The city council shall have authority to require a performance bond, before entering a contract, in such amount as it shall find reasonably necessary to protect the best interests of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond, the form and amount of the bond shall be described in the notice inviting bids.

     H.    La Cañada Flintridge Vendors. Whenever appropriate, the purchasing officer shall seek to include La Cañada Flintridge vendors in the bid process. In tabulation of all bids, a one percent consideration shall be given to bids received from La Cañada Flintridge vendors.

     I.      Recycled Materials. Whenever appropriate, the purchasing officer shall encourage the bidding and purchase of supplies and equipment made from recycled materials. In tabulation of all bids, a five percent consideration shall be given to bids received for supplies and equipment that are made from at least fifty (50) percent recycled materials and can be verified as such. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.120 Bidding requirements—Exceptions.
     A.    Informal Purchases. Any contract for a purchase of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) shall be let in accordance with the procedures established in this section. Contract requirements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute separate purchases under this section.

     1.     Purchases of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) to Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000.00). So far as practical, for any purchase costing of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) or more and less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00), at least three vendors shall be solicited to submit price quotations by use of sealed bidding methods, electronic facsimile, or electronic mail. Award shall be made to the responsive and responsible vendor who offers the lowest acceptable quotation that best meets the needs of the city. The names of vendors submitting quotations, their respective local addresses and principal places of business, and the date and amount of each quotation shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

     2.     Purchases under Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). The purchasing officer shall adopt operational procedures for making small purchases of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The operational procedures shall require the preparation and maintenance of written records adequate to document the procurement, properly account for the funds expended, and facilitate an audit of the small purchase made.

     B.     Sole Source Procurement.

     1.     Sole Source Purchases of Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00) and More. A contract for a purchase may be awarded without competition when the purchasing officer determines in writing, after conducting a good faith review of available sources, that there is only one source for the required materials, supplies, equipment, or services. The purchasing officer shall conduct appropriate negotiations as to price, delivery, and other terms. A record of sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each vendor’s name, local address and principal place of business, the amount and type of each contract, the item(s) procured under each contract, and the identification number of the procurement, if any. Contracts for purchases let pursuant to this subsection shall be awarded and executed in accordance with Section 3.03.060 of this chapter.

     2.     Sole Source Purchases Under Five Thousand Dollars ($5,000.00). Purchases under five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) shall be made in accordance with subsection (A)(2) of this section and do not require justification for sole source procurement.

     3.     Public Works Sole Source Purchases. All public works purchases required to conform to the requirements of Public Contract Code Section 3400 et seq., pertaining to sole source procurement on public works projects, shall conform to said statutory requirements instead of to the requirements of subsection (B)(1) or (B)(2). In addition, a record of such sole source procurements shall be maintained as a public record and shall list each vendor’s name, local address and principal place of business, the amount and type of each contract, the item(s) procured under each contract, and the identification number of the procurement, if any.

     C.     Emergency Purchases. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the purchasing officer may make or authorize others to make emergency purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, or services when there exists a sudden, unexpected occurrence that poses a clear and imminent danger, requiring immediate action to prevent or mitigate the loss or impairment of life, health, property, or essential public services. Emergency purchases shall be made with such competition as is practicable under the circumstances. A written determination of the basis for the emergency and the selection of the particular contractor shall be included in the contract file. Expenditures made during a locally declared emergency or in an emergency situation must be reported to the city council at the next regular city council meeting if approval for such expenditures would otherwise have been subject to the approval of the city council.

     D.    Cooperative Purchasing. The purchasing officer may arrange for the city to enter an agreement involving the purchase of materials, supplies, equipment, vehicles, apparatus, or services in cooperation with another local, county, state, federal, or other public entity, school district, or the League of California Cities, provided that:

     1.     The agreement is the result of competitive bidding or negotiation and is made in compliance with the competitive bid or proposal requirements of any participating entity or organization; and

     2.     The purchase conforms to the city’s specifications for the item; and

     3.     The price established by the prior bid or negotiation is not more than six months old; and

     4.     The estimated price of the purchase is lower than that estimated for the purchase if made directly by the city pursuant to this chapter.

     Such cooperative purchasing may include, but is not limited to, joint or multi-party contracts between public agencies and public agency contracts negotiated to be available to other public agencies.

     E.     Standardization. When supplies, materials, equipment, or services have been uniformly adopted or otherwise standardized, or when an item is designated to match others in use by the city, the purchase is not subject to this chapter. Justifications for standardization shall be recorded and maintained as a public record.

     F.     Professional and Personal Services Procurement. The procurement of the professional services of any architect, landscape architect, engineer, artist, environmental consultant, land surveyor, construction project manager, accountant, appraiser, financial advisor, attorney, or other provider of professional services involving a high degree of technical or individual skill shall be based on demonstrated competence, the professional qualifications necessary for satisfactory performance of the required services, and a fair and reasonable price, after notice to a number of potential offerors adequate to permit reasonable competition consistent with the nature and requirements of the procurement. Offerors shall provide evidence that the person or firm carrying out contract responsibilities possesses the expertise and experience to perform the requisite professional services. The contract file shall contain a written summary of the basis on which notice to potential offerors was given and on which the award was made. Professional services contracts, except as authorized below, shall be awarded in accordance with Section 3.03.110 of this chapter. Professional service contracts of less than fifteen thousand dollars ($15,000.00) may be awarded in accordance with subsection A of this section by purchase order, and without competition, on the written recommendation of the department or division head. Professional services contracts for the preparation of environmental reports or special studies regarding private projects, when the project applicant has deposited the full amount of the contract, must be awarded by city council.

     G.    Other Purchases. The provisions of this chapter do not apply to purchases of the following items, so long as funds have been properly appropriated therefor:

     1.     Materials, supplies, equipment or services from public or private nonprofit California corporations operating workshops serving the handicapped;

     2.     Books, periodicals, records, tapes, and similar materials used at the public library;

     3.     Software and other intellectual property with a unique or special purpose, as documented in writing by the purchasing officer;

     4.     Items and services acquired with federal or state loan or grant funds when the terms and conditions of the loan or grant conflict with this code;

     5.     Insurance, insurance adjusting, legal, and related services. If a new appropriation therefor is required or an existing appropriation is insufficient, the chief administrative officer or finance director is authorized to bind coverage or otherwise provide for such services until the required appropriation has been approved; and

 

     6.     Vendor servicing agreements where the equipment has been purchased competitively. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 278 § 1, 1997; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.130 Purchases—Contracts for public works projects.
     Contracts for public works projects, as defined in Public Contract Code Sections 1101 and 20161, shall be let in compliance with the California Public Contract Code, including, without limitation, Public Contract Code Section 20160 et seq.

     A.    Change Orders.

     1.     Any alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from an awarded contract as to scope, cost, time for completion, material, or equipment furnished as a part of the contract, or any alteration to, amendment of, or deviation from the nature of work to be performed, shall require the completion and issuance of a change order or execution of a contract amendment. Additions to work cannot be combined with deletions to work to avoid the change order requirement.

     2.     Change orders shall be approved by the designated authority within their original approving authority or that contained within the contract itself, such that the original contract and change order do not exceed the officer’s aggregate purchasing authority, or authority under the contract. Change orders in excess of the designated officer’s authority shall be approved by the city council. No change order shall be binding on the city until approved as provided in this code.

     3.     Change orders shall not be issued unless:

     a.     The change order arises in good faith out of an unknown condition or unforeseen circumstance differing materially from the conditions of the contract; or the change order arises due to an error, as determined by the city, in the city’s specifications that accompanied the bid solicitation; or the city desires to make a material substitution or addition to the project based on new information obtained during the construction phase of the project; and

     b.     The change order does not change the purpose of the contract and is reasonably related to the scope of work authorized under the original contract; and

     c.     The change order is in writing; and

     d.     The change order is signed by the contractor and all the designated representatives of city (contract officer, project manager, architect (if any), or other representatives). (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016)

 

3.03.140 Purchases—Against unencumbered funds—Exception.
     Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies, services and equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund against which such purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.150 Formal contract procurement protest procedures.
     Procurements through formal contracts for public works projects, materials, supplies, goods and services shall be protested in accordance with this section. Protests not complying with the provisions of this section shall not be reviewed.

     A.    Definitions. For the purposes of this section:

     1.     “Bid” includes “offer” and “proposal” in the context of formal, informal, or negotiated procurements.

     2.     “Days” mean business days unless otherwise indicated.

     3.     “Filing date” or “submission date” means the final date for receipt by the city clerk or the purchasing officer.

 

     4.     “Interested party” means an actual bidder or offeror.

     5.     “Procurement staff” means the finance director, designated purchasing officer, city engineer, community development director or other department director initiating the procurement being requested, or the designees of any of these persons.

     6.     “Reviewing officer” means the chief administrative officer or designee.

     7.     “Mail” means any delivery service such as U.S. mail, UPS or FEDEX.

     B.     Grounds for Protest. Any interested party may file a written protest on any of the following grounds:

     1.     The existence of a substantial defect, error or omission in the solicitation documents issued by the city;

     2.     Failure of the city to follow the procedures of this chapter;

     3.     Failure of the city to apply correctly the standards of review, evaluation, or scoring of a bid or proposal as specified in the solicitation documents therefor;

     4.     Award of the contract by the city to a bidder other than on the basis stated in the solicitation documents; or

     5.     Such other grounds as would state a cause of action at law or in equity.

     C.     Disallowed Protest Grounds. Protests based on the following grounds shall not be considered:

     1.     An evaluator’s professional judgment on the quality of a response; or

     2.     The proposer’s assessment of the agency’s needs or requirements; or

     3.     Any grounds other than those listed in subsection B.

     D.    Protest Filing and Delivery. Protests made in accordance with said section shall be processed in accordance herewith. Protestors shall bear all costs of the protest other than salary and personnel costs of city employees. Protests shall be in writing and hand delivered or sent by certified U.S. mail, return receipt requested:

     1.     To the purchasing officer (for protests of purchases of materials, supplies, equipment, and services); or

     2.     To the city clerk (for protests related to public works projects).

     E.     Protest/Appeal Contents. Protest documents shall:

     1.     Include the name, address, business telephone, email, and fax number of the protestor;

     2.     Identify the procurement or project under protest by name, solicitation number, and submission date;

     3.     Contain a concise statement of the grounds for protest and the facts supporting such grounds, including all supporting documentation (documentation submitted after filing will not be reviewed); and

     4.     State the form of relief requested.

     F.     Pre-Opening Protest Period—Solicitation Documents. Interested parties wishing to protest city solicitation documents must do so within two business days prior to the final date to accept bids, not counting the bid acceptance date or protest submission date as one of the two business days.

     G.    Post-Opening Protest Period. In cases of protests involving aspects of city procurement, other than solicitation documents, interested parties shall make such protest prior to award of contract. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016)

 

3.03.160 Purchases—Inspection—Testing.
     The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order of contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

 

3.03.170 Disposal of surplus supplies and equipment.
     Department directors should advise city manager in writing of any equipment or supplies not needed or no longer useful. Such notice must include a description of the item, the present location of the item, and an estimated market value of the item. Before surplusing, city staff shall first determine whether such items may be put to practical use in another department. The city manager shall be authorized to declare any item or equipment “surplus property” and shall prepare such item for sale to the general public or, alternatively, for distribution to the local school district or a nonprofit, nonsectarian charitable organization. City website and/or online surplus vendors may be used to advertise and sell surplus property.

     Any items not sold through the surplus property sale process following thirty (30) day advertising period may either be donated to a nonprofit or educational institution or may be disposed of by any means deemed appropriate by the city manager. Any receiving organization must supply to the city a letter of acceptance for the goods/items received as a condition of their acceptance. (Ord. 449 § 1, 2016; Ord. 263 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 3.04 DOCUMENTARY STAMP TAX (REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX)
3.04.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “real property transfer tax ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.” It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.04.020 Imposition.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or vested in, the purchaser or purchasers, or any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.04.030 Payment.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.04.010 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.04.040 Exemptions.
     The tax imposed pursuant to the ordinance codified herein shall not apply to:

     A.    Instruments given to secure a debt (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11921);

     B.     Instruments of the United States or agencies or instrumentalities thereof (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11922);

     C.     Conveyances under reorganization or adjustment plans (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11923);

     D.    Conveyances under order of Securities and Exchange Commission (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11924);

     E.     Transfers of certain partnership property (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11925);

     F.     Instruments taken in lieu of foreclosure (Revenue and Taxation Code Section 11926). (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.04.050 Administration.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division

2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.04.060 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 3.07 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION REDUCTION
3.07.010 Mobile source air pollution reduction ordinance.
     A.    Findings. The city of La Cañada Flintridge finds and declares that:

     1.     Whereas, the city is committed to improving the public health, safety and welfare including air quality;

     2.     Whereas, mobile sources are a major contributor to air pollution in the South Coast Air Basin;

     3.     Whereas, air quality goals for the region established by state law cannot be met without reducing air pollution from mobile sources;

     4.     Whereas, the South Coast Air Quality Management Plan (AQMP) calls upon cities and counties to reduce emissions from motor vehicles consistent with the requirements of the California Clean Air Act of 1988 by developing and implementing mobile source air pollution reduction programs;

     5.     Whereas, such programs place demands upon the city’s funds, those programs should be financed by shifting the responsibility for financing from the general fund to the motor vehicles creating the demand, to the greatest extent possible;

     6.     Whereas, Section 44223, added to the Health and Safety Code by action of the California Legislature on September 30, 1990 (Chapter 90-1705), authorizes the South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) to impost an additional motor vehicle registration fee of two dollars ($2.00) commencing on April 1, 1992 to finance the implementation of transportation measures embodied in the AQMP and provisions of the California Clean Air Act;

     7.     Whereas, forty cents ($0.40) of every dollar collected under Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed to cities and counties located in the South Coast Air Quality Management District that comply with Section 44243 of the Code, based in the jurisdictions’ prorated share of population as defined by the State Department of Finance;

     8.     Whereas, the city is located within the South Coast Air Quality Management District and is eligible to receive a portion of the revenues from the additional motor vehicle registration fees contingent upon adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter;

     9.     Whereas, the prorated share of the fee revenues from cities that fail to adopt an ordinance pursuant to Section 44243(b)(3) of the Health and Safety Code shall be distributed instead to the jurisdictions within the district that have adopted an ordinance;

     10.   Now, therefor, be it resolved that, the city, after careful consideration, hereby finds and declares that the imposition of the additional motor vehicle registration fee by the SCAQMD to finance mobile source air pollution reduction programs is in the best interest of the city and promotes the general welfare of its residents.

     B.     Intent. This chapter is intended to support the SCAQMD’s imposition of the vehicle registration fee and to bring the city into compliance with the requirements set forth in Section 44243 of the Health and Safety Code in order to receive fee revenues for the purpose of implementing programs to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles.

     C.     Definitions. As applied in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as follows:

     1.     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     2.     “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     3.     “Fee administrator” means the finance director of the city or designee.

     D.    Administration of Vehicle Registration Fee.

     1.     Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator.

     2.     Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.

     3.     Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection (D)(2) of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.

     4.     Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in subsection (C)(2) of this section. Such revenues and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs.

     5.     Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided in Sections 44244 and 44244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 195 § 1, 1991)

 

3.07.020 Legal construction.
     The provisions of this chapter shall be construed as necessary to effectively carry out its purposes, which are found and declared to be in furtherance of the public health, safety, welfare and convenience. (Ord. 195 § 1, 1991)

 

3.07.030 Severability.
     Should any sentence, section, clause, part or provisions of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any part thereof, other than the part declared to be invalid. (Ord. 195 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 3.08 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.08.010 Created.
     To comply with the provisions of Section 2113 of the Streets and Highways Code and to avail itself of its benefits of Sections 2106 and 2107 thereof, there is created in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the “special gas tax street improvement fund.” (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.08.020 Depositions.
     All moneys received by the city from the state of California under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code for the acquisition of real property or interests therein or for engineering or for the construction, maintenance or improvement of streets or highways by the city shall be paid into said fund. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.08.030 Expenditures.
     All moneys in said fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by and subject to the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 3.12 TRANSFER OF TAX FUNCTIONS
3.12.010 Assessor and tax collector.
     Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 51501 of the Government Code of the state of California, the assessment and tax collection duties performed by the city assessor and tax collector are transferred to the assessor and tax collector of the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 3.16 PAYMENT OF CLAIMS AND DEMANDS
3.16.010 Person to present claim.
     No city officer shall, except for his or her own service, present any claim, account or demand for allowance against the city, or in any way except in the discharge of his or her official duty advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other person. Any person may appear before the city council and oppose the allowance of any claim or demand made against the city. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.020 Itemization.
     The city council shall not hear or consider or allow or approve any claim, bill or demand against the city unless the same be itemized giving names, dates and particular services rendered, character of work done, and number of days engaged, materials and supplies furnished, when, to whom, and in what quantity furnished, the price therefor, and other pertinent details as the case may be. Claims and demands for salaries and wages of officers and employees of the city may, but need not be, presented to the city in accordance with the provisions of this code. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.030 Presenting and filing.
     All claims against the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 900 through 935.6 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.040 Suit.
     Any action brought against the city of La Cañada Flintridge upon any claim or demand shall conform to the requirements of Sections 945 through 949 of the Government Code of the state of California and any action brought against any employees shall comply with the requirements of Sections 950 through 951 of the Government Code of the state of California. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.050 Disposition of claim.
     If the city council finds that any claim or demand is not a proper charge against the city, it shall be rejected by resolution or minute action, and the fact of rejection shall be plainly endorsed upon the claim by the city clerk or authorized representative. If any claim or demand is determined to be a proper charge against the city, the same shall be allowed only by resolution setting forth as to each claim the name of the claimant, a brief statement of the claim, and the amount allowed. Any claim may be allowed in part and rejected in part by the city council. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.060 Method of approval.
     Each claim or demand shall be presented by the city clerk to the department head, if any, who authorized the same, for his or her written approval thereof, and each claim or demand thereafter shall be presented to the city manager for his or her written approval thereof. The city manager shall inform the city council in writing of any claims or demands presented against the city which shall fail to obtain the approval of the proper department head or which shall fail to obtain approval of the city manager. All such claims and demands, whether approved as aforesaid or not, shall be forwarded by the city manager to the city council for audit. The city council shall audit said claims and demands as required by law. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.070 Approved and allowed.
     If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the city council, the city clerk shall endorse upon each of the duplicate copies thereof the words “allowed by the city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge,” together with the resolution number allowing the same and for what amount and from what fund and the city clerk shall attest the same with his or her signature. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.080 Warrant.
     If any claim or demand be approved and allowed by the city council, a warrant shall be drawn upon the city treasury for the same, which warrant shall be countersigned by the city clerk, or authorized representative, and the city treasurer or authorized representative, and shall specify for what purpose the same is drawn and out of what fund it is to be paid. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.090 Sufficient money in treasury.
     Except as otherwise provided, no warrant shall be drawn or evidence of indebtedness issued unless there be at the time sufficient money in the treasury legally applicable to the payment of the same. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.100 Acceptance by treasurer.
     Upon presentation of said warrant, properly executed and endorsed, the city treasurer shall pay the same out of the funds in the city treasury properly applicable to that purpose. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.110 Disapproval for want of funds.
     When an order or demand is not approved for want of funds and its amount does not exceed the income and revenue for the year in which the indebtedness was incurred, the city clerk shall endorse on it: “Not approved for want of funds,” with the date of presentation and his or her signature. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

3.16.120 Registration of demands.
     The city clerk shall number the endorsement, register the order or demand in his or her records, and deliver it to the claimant, or his or her order. From delivery the order or demand bears interest at six percent a year. Orders or demand shall be paid in the order they are registered. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 3.20 MILLS ACT *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 495. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 406.

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.010 Purpose.
     The city council desires to foster the preservation, rehabilitation and maintenance of landmark and historic properties in the city of La Cañada Flintridge. In furtherance of this policy, the purpose of this chapter is to implement the Mills Act (California Government Code Section 50280 et seq., as amended) and establish a process to enter into contracts with owners of qualified historic properties, as defined in the Mills Act, for property tax relief and for the preservation of those historic properties. The Mills Act preservation incentive will support the goals and objectives of the general plan by encouraging the maintenance and preservation of historic structures. (CNE Goal 3: Encourage the preservation of significant historical resources within the city.) (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.020 Definitions.
     “Adjacent properties” means real property abutting any side of the subject and real property directly across the street from the subject property within the property lines of the subject property.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “City clerk” means the city clerk of the city or designee.

     “City’s official register” means the city’s official list of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, or landmarks.

     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city.

     “Contract” means a Mills Act contract.

     “Director” means the city’s director of community development, or designee.

     “Mills Act contract” means an agreement authorized by this chapter and California Government Code Section 50280 et seq., as amended.

     “Qualified historical property” means privately owned property which is not exempt from property taxation and which is:

     A.    Listed in the National Register of Historic Places or located in a registered historic district, as defined in Section 1.191-2(b) of Title 26 of the Code of Federal Regulations; or

     B.     Listed in any California or county of Los Angeles official register of historical or architecturally significant sites, places, or landmarks; or

 

     C.     Listed in the city’s official register. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.030 Eligibility.
     Approval of Mills Act contracts shall have the following limitations on eligibility:

     A.    Mills Act contracts shall be limited to qualified historical properties, as defined in Section 3.20.020.

     B.     The total property tax reduction of all Mills Act contracts combined shall not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) to the city for each year.

     C.     Mills Act contracts shall be limited to:

     1.     Properties that are in need of restoration and/or rehabilitation at the time of application; or

     2.     Properties that have been restored and/or rehabilitated prior to the adoption of this chapter, provided that such restoration was conducted after January 1, 2000 and the applicant provides sufficient documentation to demonstrate the restorative work performed including, but not limited to, architectural plans, photographs, reports, and invoices.

     D.    A Mills Act contract shall not be used for routine maintenance work, except for exemplary or exceptional buildings that have financially burdensome maintenance requirements. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.040 City’s official register.
     A.    A property owner who desires his or her property to be included in the city’s official register shall submit an application to the director along with any required supporting documents and any required fees approved by the city council by resolution. The application shall be on a form approved by the director.

     B.     Upon receipt of a complete application, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission for its review and consideration of the application. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in writing to the property owners of adjacent properties at least ten days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall state the date and time of the public hearing and a brief description of the item. Notice shall be by first class U.S. mail.

     C.     Following the close of the public hearing, the commission shall recommend that the city council add the subject property on the city’s official register if the property satisfies at least one of the following criteria:

     1.     The property is identified with persons or events significant in local, regional, state or national history; and/or

     2.     The property is representative of the work of a notable builder, designer or architect; and/or

     3.     The property contributes to the significance of an historic area, being a geographically definable area; and/or

     4.     The property embodies one or more distinctive characteristics of style, type, period, design, materials, or craftsmanship; and/or

     5.     The property has a unique location or physical characteristics or represents an established and familiar visual feature of neighborhood, community, or the city.

     D.    The recommendation of the commission, whether it be to approve or deny the application, shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration at a noticed public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with subsection B. Following such hearing by the city council, it shall consider the matter and determine whether the subject property shall be added to the city’s official register based on the criteria set forth in subsection C. The city council’s determination shall be by resolution.

     E.     The city council may consider removal of a property from the city’s official register if the subject property no longer satisfies the criteria listed in subsection C. The matter shall be considered at a public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with subsection B.

     F.     The city’s official register shall be maintained by the director and available in his or her office. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.050 Procedure for approval of Mills Act contracts.
     A.    Applications for Mills Act contracts shall be accepted by the director between January 1st and March 31st of each year.

     B.     A property owner desiring to enter into a Mills Act contract shall submit an application to the director along with any required supporting documents and any required fees approved by the city council by resolution. The application shall be on a form approved by the director.

     C.     Following the deadline for submittal of applications, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission for its review and consideration of all completed applications timely received. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with Section 3.20.040(B).

     D.    Following the public hearing, the commission shall make a determination as to whether each proposed property is a qualified historic property, as defined in Section 3.20.020. Should it determine that a proposed property is a qualified historic property, the commission may, by resolution, recommend that the city council approve a Mills Act contract(s) if it can find that the completed and/or proposed work will provide a benefit to the public by restoring historic character defining features, preserving exemplary or exceptional features or structures, retrofitting unreinforced buildings, work that is necessary for the continued viability of the historic structure (systems upgrades), or the work is clearly visible from the street or public right-of-way.

     E.     The recommendation of the commission, whether it be to approve or deny the application, shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration at a noticed public hearing. Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with Section 3.20.040(B). Following such hearing by the city council, it shall consider the matter and determine whether the city shall enter into Mills Act contracts with the applicants. If the city council approves a Mills Act contract, the contract shall be executed by the city manager and approved as to form by the city attorney.

     F.     No later than twenty (20) days after the city council enters into a Mills Act contract with a property owner, the city clerk shall record with the county recorder a copy of the contract, which shall describe the property subject thereto. Recordation shall be at the property owner’s expense, if any. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.060 Concurrent review.
     An application for inclusion on the city’s official register and an application for approval of a Mills Act contract, may be reviewed concurrently. Final action on the city’s official register shall first be taken before final action on the approval of a Mills Act contract. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.070 Required provisions in Mills Act contracts.
     A Mills Act contract shall include provisions required by applicable state law and those provisions required by the city including, but not limited to:

     A.    The term of the Mills Act contract shall be for a minimum period of ten years.

     B.     Each Mills Act contract shall provide that on the anniversary date of the contract or such other annual date as is specified in the contract, a year shall be added automatically to the initial term of the contract unless notice of nonrenewal is given as provided in this section. Each contract shall also provide that after five years, and every five years thereafter, the director shall inspect the interior and exterior of the premises to determine the owner’s continued compliance with the contract. If the property owner or the city council desire in any year not to renew the contract, that party shall serve written notice of nonrenewal of the contract on the other party in advance of the annual renewal date of the contract. Unless the notice is served by the owner at least ninety (90) days prior to the renewal date or by the city council at least sixty (60) days prior to the renewal date, one year shall automatically be added to the term of the contract.

     C.     Each Mills Act contract shall provide that, for the preservation of the qualified historical property and, when necessary, the property owner restore and rehabilitate the property to conform to the rules and regulations of the office of historic preservation of the department of parks and recreation, the United States Secretary of the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation, and the State Historical Building Code.

     D.    Each Mills Act contract shall provide for an inspection of the interior and exterior of the premises by the city prior to a new agreement, and every five years thereafter, to determine the owner’s compliance with the Mills Act contract. The property owner further agrees to allow the city to photograph the subject property.

     E.     The owner agrees to permit periodic examination of the interior (if applicable) and exterior of the premises by the Los Angeles County assessor, the State Board of Equalization, the State Department of Parks and Recreation, and/or any other governing agency as may be necessary to verify the owner’s compliance with the Mills Act, and to provide any information requested to ensure compliance with the Mills Act.

     F.     The Mills Act contract shall be binding upon, and inure to the benefit of, all successors in interest of the owner. A successor in interest shall have the same rights and obligations under the contract as the original owner who entered into the contract. A new Mills Act contract shall be entered into with new owners of the subject property.

     G.    The Mills Act contract shall state that the city may cancel the contract after a duly noticed public hearing if it determines that the property owner has breached any of the conditions of the Mills Act contract or has allowed the property to deteriorate to the point that it no longer meets the criteria under which it was designated on the city’s official register. The Mills Act contract shall state that if the city cancels the contract pursuant to this section, the owner shall pay the state of California a cancellation fee of twelve and one-half (12 1/2) percent of the full value of the property at the time of cancellation, as determined by the Los Angeles County assessor without regard to any restriction on the property imposed by the Mills Act contract.

     H.    The Mills Act contract shall provide that, as an alternative to cancellation, the city may bring an action for specific performance, injunction, or other action necessary to enforce the Mills Act contract.

     I.      The Mills Act contract may provide that modifications to any approved work plan require review and approval by the director. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 3.20.080 Cancellation of Mills Act contracts.
     A.    If the city council determines that the owner has breached any of the conditions of a Mills Act contract or has allowed the property to deteriorate to the point that it no longer meets the standards for a qualified historical property, the city council shall do one of the following:

     1.     Bring any action in court necessary to enforce a contract, including, but not limited to, an action to enforce the contract by specific performance or injunction; or

     2.     Cancel the Mills Act contract in accordance with the procedures set forth in the Mills Act.

     B.     Prior to the proposed cancellation of a Mills Act contract, the city council will conduct a public hearing to determine if the contract shall be cancelled. Written notice of the public hearing shall be provided to the property owner at least ten days prior to the public hearing in addition to any other notice required under applicable state law.

     C.     Concurrent with any termination of a Mills Act contract, the city council may also consider removal of the subject property from the city’s official register if the subject property no longer satisfies the criteria to be listed on the city’s official register. (Ord. 441 § 1, 2015)

Title 4 PUBLIC WELFARE
Chapter 4.01 FIRE CODE
Chapter 4.04 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
Chapter 4.05 REGULATION OF PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 4.06 PARKING OR DISPLAY OF MOBILE BILLBOARDS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED
Chapter 4.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 4.12 FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 4.14 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
Chapter 4.23 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
Chapter 4.24 TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 4.28 COLLECTION OF SEWER MAINTENANCE CHARGES
Chapter 4.30 HUNTING, DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS AND USE OF BOWS AND ARROWS
Chapter 4.32 FIREWORKS AND PYROTECHNIC DEVICES
Chapter 4.33 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 4.40 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
Chapter 4.60 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 4.62 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERSKATES AND/OR OTHER WHEELED TOY RESTRICTIONS
Chapter 4.63 SKATE PARKS
Chapter 4.64 TRAILS
Chapter 4.70 DRONES

Chapter 4.01 FIRE CODE
4.01.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted as the fire code of the city, the 2017 Edition of Title 32 of the Los Angeles County Code, adopting and incorporating the 2016 Edition of the California Fire Code published by the California Building Standards Commission. (Ord. 458 § 1, 2017; Ord. 423 § 1, 2014; Ord. 393 § 8, 2011; Ord. 392 § 8, 2011; Ord. 370 § 9, 2008; Ord. 349 § 1, 2004; Ord. 274 § 1, 1997; Ord. 140 § 1, 1986; Ord. 41 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

4.01.020 Very high fire hazard severity zone.
     All parcels within the city limits are hereby designated as being within the “very high fire hazard severity zone.” (Ord. 370 § 10, 2008; Ord. 288 § 1, 1997; Ord. 260 §§ 1—3, 1996)

 

4.01.030 Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines applicability modified.
     The Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines shall not be applicable to properties in the core of the city as defined on the Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines Applicability Map available on file in the community development department. (Ord. 393 § 9, 2011; Ord. 392 § 9, 2011)

Chapter 4.04 TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
4.04.010 Adopted.
     With the exception of Section 15.200 relating to civil parking penalties and late payment fees, and except as hereinafter may be provided, Title 15 of the Los Angeles County Code, as amended from time-to-time, regulating vehicles and traffic, is hereby adopted and shall be and become the Traffic Code of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. A parking citation bail schedule, as authorized pursuant to Section 40203.5(a) of the California Vehicle Code, shall be adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 364 § 2, 2007; Ord. 138 § 1, 1986; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

4.04.020 Vehicles transporting hazardous materials.
     A.    A vehicle transporting a hazardous material or substance as identified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations must be attended at all times by its driver or a qualified representative of the motor carrier that operates it, and shall not be parked on any highway, highway shoulder, street, alley, public way or public place, or within five feet of the traveled portion thereof, within a residential zone or within one thousand (1,000) feet of any school or within three hundred (300) feet of any bridge or tunnel, except for brief periods when mechanical or equipment failure or disablement or malfunction of the vehicle, or the necessities of operation require the vehicle to be parked and make it impractical to park the vehicle in any other place.

     B.     Repair, maintenance, refuse, utility, termite and pesticide vehicles, fuel delivery vehicles, and vehicles delivering life support and health commodities, while servicing residential areas or schools, are exempt from the provisions of subsection A of this section. Additionally, such exempt vehicles need not be attended while the drivers are performing duties that are evident and necessary as the operator of the vehicle or the provider of the service.

     C.     For purposes of this section:

     1.     A motor vehicle is attended when the person in charge of the vehicle is on the vehicle, awake, and not in a sleeper berth, or is within one hundred (100) feet of the vehicle and has it within his or her unobstructed field of view.

     2.     A qualified representative of a motor carrier is a person who:

     a.     Has been designated by the carrier to attend the vehicle;

     b.     Is aware of the nature of the hazardous material or substance contained in the vehicle he or she attends;

     c.     Has been instructed on the procedures he or she must follow in emergencies concerning hazardous materials or substances.

     D.    The rules of this section do not relieve a driver from any obligation imposed by federal, state or local laws relating to the transportation of hazardous materials or explosives, motor carrier safety regulations or the placement of warning signs or devices when a motor vehicle is stopped on a public street or highway. (Ord. 66 § 1, 1980)

 

4.04.030 Speed limits.
The adopted speed limit for the streets hereinafter set forth shall be as designated:

 

 

85th %Percentile (mph)

Adopted Prima Facie (mph)

Alta Canyada Rd. (Fairmount Ave to 225′ s/o Louise)

30

 

25*

Alta Canyada Rd. (225′ s/o Louise to Foothill)

27

 

25

Alta Canyada Rd. (Foothill to Verdugo)

36

 

30

Berkshire Ave. (Chevy Chase to Highland)

28

 

30

Berkshire Pl. (Berkshire Ave. to Oak Grove)

28

 

25

Castle Rd. (Ocean View to Cross)

32

 

30

Chevy Chase Dr. (Foothill to Descanso)

34

 

30

Chevy Chase Dr. (Descanso to So. City Limit)

30

 

30

Cornishon Ave. (Foothill to Descanso)

35

 

30*

Corona Dr. (Highland to Inverness)

27

 

25

Crown Ave. (Starlight Crest to Santa Inez)

29

 

30

Crown Ave. (Santa Inez to Foothill)

31

 

30

Descanso Dr. (Verdugo to Chevy Chase)

36

 

35

El Vago St. (Alta Canyada to La Cañada Blvd.)

31

 

30

Fairmount Ave. (Palm to Alta Canyada)

29

 

25

Foothill Blvd. (West City Limit to Leata)

36

 

35

Foothill Blvd. (Leata to Alta Canyada)

40

 

35*

Foothill Blvd. (Alta Canyada to Angeles Crest Hwy.)

37

 

30*

Foothill Blvd. (Angeles Crest to Hampton)

34

 

30

Foothill Blvd. (Hampton to Oak Grove)

33

 

30

Gould Ave. (Paulette to Houseman)

36

 

30*

Gould Ave. (Houseman to I-210 WB on-ramp)

33

 

30

Gould Ave. (I-210 WB on-ramp to Foothill)

38

 

30

Green Ln. (Angeles Crest Hwy. to Princess Anne)

27

 

25

Highland Dr. (Chevy Chase to Berkshire Ave.)

34

 

30

Highland Dr. (Berkshire Ave. to bridge)

40

 

35

Inverness Dr. (Corona to St. Katherine)

26

 

25

Jessen Dr. (Los Amigos to Palm Dr.)

28

 

25

Knight Way (Oakwood to Crown)

31

 

25*

La Cañada Blvd. (El Vago to Fairview)

31

 

30

La Cañada Blvd. (Fairview to Foothill)

30

 

25*

Los Amigos St. (Castle Rd. to Jessen Dr.)

31

 

25*

Lynhaven Ln. (Green to Oakwood)

32

 

25

Oak Grove Dr. (JPL Entrance to Foothill Berkshire Pl.)

40

 

35*

Oakwood Ave. (Lynhaven to Foothill)

34

 

30

Oakwood Ave. (Foothill to Georgian)

30

 

25*

Oakwood Ave. (Georgian to Berkshire Ave.)

27

 

25

Ocean View Blvd. (Castle to Cross)

39

 

30

Ocean View Blvd. (Cross to Foothill)

38

 

30

Palm Dr. (Fairmount to Foothill)

34

 

25

St. Katherine Dr. (Figueroa to Wendover)

26

 

25

St. Katherine Dr. (Wendover to Palmerstone)

29

 

25

St. Katherine Dr. (Palmerstone to Inverness)

28

 

25

Starlight Crest Dr. (Angeles Crest to Crown)

35

 

30

Verdugo Blvd. (West City Limit to Foothill)

36

 

35

Vista Del Valle Rd. (La Cañada Blvd. to ACH)

34

 

30

 

     All speeds identified above with an asterisk (*) have been lowered five (5) miles per hour from the nearest 5 mph increment of the 85th-percentile speed based on findings made by the registered engineer that conditions exist on the roadway, not readily apparent to drivers, that warrant such a reduction in the prima facie speed. Specific findings for each street segment are identified in “2019 Engineering and Traffic Survey to Establish Speed Limits” report, 23 April 2019, containing the findings and determinations of the registered engineer, incorporated herein and on file in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 487 § 1, 2019; Ord. 452 § 1, 2016; Ord. 431 § 1, 2015; Ord. 379 § 2, 2009)

 

4.04.040 Handicapped parking.
     A.    The city manager is authorized to designate specific parking spaces on the street and in off-street parking facilities owned or operated by the city as reserved for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9.

     B.     Any person in lawful possession of an off-street parking facility may designate stalls or places in such facility for the exclusive use of vehicles which display a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22511.5 or 22511.9.

     C.     The designation of stalls or spaces pursuant to subsections A or B of this section shall be performed in the manner required by Vehicle Code Sections 22511.7 and 22511.8.

     D.    Any stall or space designated pursuant to subsection C of this section shall be deemed designated for physically handicapped persons pursuant to Vehicle Code Sections 22511.7 and 22511.8 for all purposes of the traffic code of the city, and of Vehicle Code Sections 22507.8, 22511.7, 22511.8, 22652 and 22652.5. (Ord. 107 § 1, 1984)

 

4.04.045 Parking restriction signage and curb markings.
     The city manager and/or designee is authorized, subject to the provisions and limitations of this title, to install and/or remove parking restriction signage and/or the following curb markings so as to indicate parking or standing regulations. The curb markings shall have the meanings as herein set forth:

     A.    Red Curb. No stopping, standing or parking at any time except as permitted by the vehicle code, and except that a bus may stop in a red zone marked or signed as a bus zone.

     B.     Yellow Curb. No stopping, standing or parking at any time between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials, provided that the loading or unloading of passengers shall not consume more than three minutes nor the loading or unloading of materials more than twenty (20) minutes.

     C.     White Curb. No stopping, standing or parking for any purpose other than loading or unloading of passengers or for the purpose of depositing mail in an adjacent mail box, which shall not exceed three minutes. Such restrictions shall apply between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day except Sundays and holidays.

     D.    Green Curb. Time limit parking, as applicable, between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. on any day except Sundays and holidays. Parking time-limitations shall be appropriately posted and/or marked for specific locations for any duration of period up to, but not exceeding, thirty (30) minutes as determined by the city manager and/or designee.

     E.     Blue Curb. No stopping, standing or parking by any person, other than a handicapped person whose vehicle displays a distinguishing license plate or placard issued pursuant to Section 22511.5 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 190 § 1, 1991)

 

4.04.047 Parking restrictions in the public right-of-way.
     The city manager and/or designee shall be authorized to install or remove parking restriction signage and/or curb markings upon any property contained within the public right-of-way, subject to the following provisions and limitations:

     A.    The city manager and/or designee must determine that parking restriction signage and/or curb markings shall be installed or removed for the purpose of alleviating traffic, traffic flow, congestion and/or hazards detrimental to the public’s health, safety and/or welfare.

     B.     No installation, removal and/or changes in any parking restriction, signage and/or curb markings shall occur without the specific recommendation of the city’s traffic engineer.

     C.     Any parking restriction signage and/or curb marking or curb marking removal activity shall be subject to the review and approval of the traffic and public works commission.

     D.    Nothing in this section shall be construed to preclude the right of individuals to appeal to the city council the decision of the city manager and/or designee to install or remove parking restriction signage and/or curb markings. (Ord. 484 § 1, 2019; Ord. 190 § 1, 1991)

 

4.04.050 Fire lanes.
     The county of Los Angeles fire department acting as the fire department of the city of La Cañada Flintridge is authorized to designate fire lanes on any highway, at any curb or in any location in a publicly or privately owned or operated offstreet parking facility. The city manager shall post signs or otherwise mark such fire lanes in the manner required by Vehicle Code Section 22500.1. Any place so designated shall be deemed a fire lane for all purposes of the traffic code of the city and of Vehicle Code Section 22500.1. (Ord. 107 § 2, 1984)

 

4.04.060 Application to private roads open for public use.
     If the city council, by ordinance or resolution, finds and determines that there are privately owned and maintained roads, as described in said ordinance or resolution, within the city that are generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel and which so connect with highways that the public cannot determine that such roads are not highways, then upon enactment of said ordinance or resolution, as authorized by Section 21107.5 of the California Vehicle Code, the provisions of the California Vehicle Code as designated below, shall be applicable on such privately owned and maintained roads. (Ord. 110 § 1, 1985)

 

4.04.070 Private roads not open to public use.
     If the city council finds and determines that a privately owned and maintained road(s) is (are) not generally held open for use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel but by reason of its (their) proximity to, or connection with, public streets or highways, the interest of residents residing along such road(s) and the motoring public will best be served by application of the provisions of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, and the ordinances and resolutions of the city, then the city, may by resolution, as authorized by Section 21107.7 of the California Vehicle Code, designate private streets which are subject to the provisions of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 110 § 2, 1985)

 

4.04.080 Overnight parking prohibited.
     A.    Notwithstanding Section 3203 of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 6544, and except as otherwise set forth in this section, no person may park or stand a vehicle on any of the following streets between the hours of two a.m. and five a.m. of any one day:

     1.     Foothill Boulevard;

     2.     Angeles Crest Highway between Foothill Boulevard and the northerly city boundary;

     3.     Any street or portion of a street located in a commercial/office district as designated on the city’s general plan land use map.

     B.     The city manager may issue a permit for overnight parking on one or more of the streets set forth in subsection A of this section to any resident and/or disabled person who proves to the satisfaction of the city manager that such parking is required for the health, safety or welfare of such person. For purposes of this section, a disabled person shall be defined as set forth in Section 22511.5 of the California Vehicle Code. (Ord. 354 § 1, 2005; Ord. 235 § 1, 1994; Ord. 115 § 1, 1985)

 

4.04.085 Commercial vehicle parking restrictions.
     A.    Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions in Residential Districts Between Two a.m. and Six a.m. A person shall not park any commercial vehicle weighing more than six thousand (6,000) pounds unladen on any highway or alley between two a.m. and six a.m. of any one day in a residential district. As used herein, the term “residential district” includes any residential zone as defined in the zoning code of the city. It is not a violation of this section to park such vehicles in residential districts when such vehicles are involved in:

     1.     Necessary loading and unloading;

     2.     The actual performance of a commercial service or activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land;

     3.     Making pick-ups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained; or

     4.     The construction or maintenance of a highway or alley.

     B.    Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions at Any Time. A person shall not park any commercial vehicle having a manufacturer’s gross vehicle weight rating of ten thousand (10,000) pounds unladen or more on any highway or alley in a residential district. As used herein, the term “residential district” includes any residential zone as defined in the zoning code of the city. It is not a violation of this section to park such vehicles in residential districts when such vehicles are involved in:

     1.     Necessary loading and unloading;

     2.     The actual performance of a commercial service or activity on the adjacent lot or parcel of land;

     3.     Making pick-ups or deliveries of goods, wares, and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on the restricted streets or highways or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon the restricted streets or highways for which a building permit has previously been obtained; or

     4.     The construction or maintenance of a highway or alley.

     C.    Commercial Vehicle Parking Restrictions Between Ten p.m. and Six a.m. Whenever the city council finds, by resolution, that the parking of commercial vehicles on certain public streets or alleys is creating a public nuisance or safety hazard, the director of public works shall erect and maintain adequate signs along such public streets and alleys specifying that a person shall not park any commercial vehicle weighing more than six thousand (6,000) pounds unladen between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day.

     D.    Violations and Penalties. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine established by resolution. (Ord. 354 § 1, 2005; Ord. 227 § 1, 1994)

 

4.04.090 Parking on private property.
     Any private property may be posted with one or more signs indicating the conditions under which the express or implied consent to park has been given by the owner or person in lawful possession of the property. Such conditions may limit parking to owners, tenants, customers, patrons, members or guests and may limit parking for fixed periods of time. Violation of the conditions set forth on such signs shall be deemed a violation of Section 3115 of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 6544 as adopted by the city. (Ord. 115 § 2, 1985)

 

4.04.095 Parking restrictions on city-owned property.
     The city manager and/or designee shall be authorized to install or remove parking restriction signage and/or curb markings on any city-owned property. (Ord. 484 § 2, 2019)

 

4.04.100 Parking prohibitions for vehicles over six feet in height, near intersections.
     No vehicle with a height of six feet or more shall be parked within one hundred (100) feet of an intersection. Signs or markings giving notice that the parking of vehicles with a height of six feet or more is prohibited within one hundred feet of the intersection shall be placed on the curb, street or other appropriate location. (Ord. 131 § 1, 1986)

 

4.04.110 Front yard parking and/or storage of vehicles prohibited.
     1.     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall the meaning set forth below:

 

 

     A.    “Vehicle” means “vehicle” as provided in Section 670 of the California Vehicle Code as that section may be amended from time to time, and shall include trucks, recreational vehicles, boats and trailers.

     B.     “Front yard” means that portion of the residential property as defined in Section 11.01.030 of the La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code.

     2.     No person shall park a vehicle on any portion of the unpaved area of the front yard of the property other than on the driveway or other paved area. (Ord. 286 § 1, 2001)

 

4.04.120 Administrative fees for properly impounded vehicles.
     Any person whose vehicle is properly impounded by a sworn or non-sworn representative of the city’s policing authority for violation of any section or provision of the California Vehicle Code, the Los Angeles County Code, or the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code relating to duly adopted parking restrictions and/or traffic and vehicle restrictions as is enumerated in the adopted parking citation bail schedule, shall be liable to the city for paying the corresponding administrative costs relating to the removal, impound, storage, or release of the vehicles as established by resolution of the city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. The administration charges imposed pursuant to this section shall be in addition to any other charges which have been assessed to the vehicle. (Ord. 366 § 1, 2007)

 

4.04.200 Violations and penalties.
     Any person who receives or is otherwise issued a parking citation from a sworn or non-sworn representative of the city’s policing authority for violation of any section or provision of the California Vehicle Code, the Los Angeles County Code, or the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code relating to duly adopted parking restrictions and/or traffic and vehicle restrictions as is enumerated in the adopted parking citation bail schedule, shall be liable to the city to pay the corresponding bail amount as established by resolution of the city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 364 § 3, 2007)

 

4.04.210 Additional assessments.
     A.    An assessment of five dollars ($5.00) shall be added to each parking penalty under Section 4.04.200, consisting of two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) assessed for the courthouse construction fund pursuant to Sections 76100 and 76219 of the California Government Code and two dollars and fifty cents ($2.50) assessed for the criminal justice facilities construction fund pursuant to Section 76101 of the California Government Code.

     B.     Under Section 1465.5 of the Penal Code of the state of California, an additional penalty of two dollars ($2.00) for every ten dollars ($10.00) or fraction thereof shall be assessed pursuant to Section 42001.5 of the Vehicle Code for violations of the handicapped parking laws set forth in Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code.

     C.     Under Section 1465.6 of the Penal Code of the state of California, the penalty assessed for a violation of Section 22507.8 of the Vehicle Code and the penalty assessed for a violation of Section 22522 of the Vehicle Code shall be increased by ten percent. (Ord. 364 § 4, 2007)

 

4.04.220 Additional penalties and related costs for delinquent parking violations.
     A.    Additional penalties and the administrative fee provided in this section for delinquent parking violations shall be assessed upon filing of notice of delinquent parking violation with the Department of Motor Vehicles, state of California, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Sections 40206 through 40220 of the Vehicle Code of the state of California.

     B.     If the penalties provided in Sections 4.04.200 and 4.04.210 are not paid by the day provided in the notice of parking violation, the penalty shall increase to the twenty-one-day late penalty for parking violation penalties not paid within twenty-one (21) days of the issuance of a notice of parking violation, and shall increase to the thirty-five-day late penalty for parking violation penalties not paid within thirty-five (35) days of the issuance of a notice of parking violation.

     C.     In addition to the penalty for delinquent parking penalty violation provided in subsection B of this section, and in addition to the penalty provided in Sections 4.04.200 and 4.04.210 in the case of a violation of Sections 22507.8, 22522, 22500, subdivision (i) or 22500, subdivision (1) of the Vehicle Code of the state of California, an administrative fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be assessed on all delinquent parking violations. (Ord. 364 § 5, 2007)

Chapter 4.05 REGULATION OF PARADES AND SPECIAL EVENTS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
4.05.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “La Cañada Flintridge based private citizen or private organization” means:

     A.    In the case of an individual, a person whose principal place of residence is in the city;

     B.     In the case of a group, an organization or collective of people, one in which at least half of its members, or at least three hundred fifty (350) members, whichever is less, have their principal place of residence in the city.

     C.     In the case of a business or nonprofit organization, one which has a bona fide place of business in the city.

     “Parade” means any march, demonstration, procession, race or motorcade consisting of persons, animals or vehicles, or combination thereof, upon the streets, parks or other public grounds within the city with an intent of attracting public attention that interferes with, or has a tendency to interfere with, the normal flow or regulation of traffic upon the streets, parks or other public grounds.

     “Parade or special event permit” means a permit as required by this chapter.

     “Person” means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

     “Sidewalk” means any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.

     “Special event” means any ceremony, pageant, review, carnival, fiesta, circus or athletic event which is not a race, in or upon any public street, sidewalk, park or alley which would otherwise be subject to normal and usual traffic regulation or field or park use regulation and controls.

     “Street” means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, right-of-way or median strip thereof.

     “Street vendor” or “street vending” means the transitory sale of goods, food or wares, including, but not limited to, balloons, toys, popcorn, confections, ice cream, souvenirs, etc., for purposes of commercial profit-making, by a vendor authorized by the permittee and who has obtained a valid city business license. Such vending must be transitory in nature, i.e., peddling/sales on foot, from a cart, bicycle or mobile stand, and not from a fixed stationary position, booth or structure nor from a motorized vehicle. (Ord. 467 § 1, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.020 Permit required.
     No person shall engage in or conduct any parade or special event unless a permit is issued by the city manager or designee. No permit shall be issued authorizing the conduct of a parade or special event which the city manager or designee determines is to be held solely for the purpose of advertising any product, goods, wares, merchandise or that is being conducted purely for private profit-making purposes. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.030 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to the following:

     A.    Funeral processions;

     B.     Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities;

     C.     A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions;

     D.    Spontaneous events occasioned by news or affairs coming into public knowledge within three days of such parade or special event provided that the organizer thereof gives written notice to the city at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such spontaneous event;

     E.     Film/still photography activity conducted pursuant to a valid city permit;

     F.     Special events which take place wholly on private property. Such events are regulated by other provisions of this code. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.040 Application.
     A.    A person seeking a parade or special event permit shall file an application with the city manager or designee on forms provided by the city and the application shall be signed by the applicant under oath.

     B.     For a single, nonrecurring parade or special event, an application for a permit shall be filed with the city manager or designee at least ten days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the parade or special event is proposed to commence. The city manager or designee may waive the minimum ten-day filing period and accept an application filed within a shorter period if, after due consideration of the date, time, place and nature of the parade or special event, the anticipated number of participants, and the city services required in connection with the event, the city manager or designee determines that the waiver will not present a hazard to public safety.

     C.     For parades or special events held on a regular or recurring basis at the same location, an application for a permit covering all such parades or special events during that calendar year may be filed with the city manager or designee at least sixty (60) days and not more than one hundred eighty (180) days before the date and time at which the first such parade or special event is proposed to commence. The city manager or designee may waive the minimum sixty (60) day period after due consideration of the factors specified in subsection B of this section.

     D.    The application for a parade or special event permit shall set forth the following information:

     1.     The name, address and telephone number of the person seeking to conduct such parade or special event;

     2.     The names, addresses and telephone numbers of the headquarters of the organization for which the parade or special event is to be conducted, if any, and the authorized and responsible heads of the organization;

     3.     If the parade or special event is designed to be held by, or on behalf of, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for such permit shall file a letter from that person with the city manager or designee authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his or her behalf;

     4.     The type of parade or special event, including a description of the activities planned during the event;

     5.     The purpose of the parade or special event;

     6.     The requested date of the parade or special event;

     7.     The route to be traveled, if any, including the starting point and the termination point;

     8.     The approximate number of persons who, and animals and vehicles which will constitute such parade or special event, and the type of animals and description of the vehicles that will be participating;

     9.     The hours when such parade or special event will start and terminate;

     10.   A statement as to whether such parade or special event will occupy all or only a portion of the width of the streets proposed to be traversed or occupied;

     11.   The location by street of any assembly areas for such parade or special event;

     12.   A copy of the liquor license issued by California Alcohol Beverage Control when alcoholic beverages are to be sold;

     13.   The number and location of sanitation or other health facilities including restrooms and first aid stations;

     14.   Whether any person(s) will ride, drive or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street;

     15.   The location and number of parking places which will accommodate the anticipated number of vehicles reasonably expected;

     16.   Whether any street vending will be authorized by the permittee and the name(s) and address(es) of such authorized street vendor(s);

     17.   The time at which units or equipment of the parade or special event will begin to assemble at any such area;

     18.   Minimum speed of parade units;

     19.   Maximum speed of parade units;

     20.   The intervals of space to be maintained between units of such parade or special event;

     21.   A description of any recording equipment, sound amplification equipment, lighting, banners, signs and attention-getting devices, to be used in connection with the parade or special event;

     22.   The approximate number of participants (spectators are, by definition, not participants);

     23.   The approximate number of spectators;

     24.   A designation of any public facilities or equipment to be utilized;

     25.   Any additional information that the city manager or designee finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.050 Fees.
     A.    A nonrefundable application fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) to cover administrative costs of processing the permit and coordinating various city services shall be paid to the city by the applicant when the application is filed. City services include, but are not limited to, costs incurred for traffic engineer review, traffic control devices, and Los Angeles County sheriff’s department fees.

     B.     If any city services shall be required for the parade or special event, the applicant shall, prior to the issuance of a permit, agree to reimburse the city, upon receipt of an invoice from the city, the actual costs for providing such services.

     C.     If the application is for the use of any city property, excepting sidewalks or streets, the fee shall be that which has been established by the current city ordinance or resolution pertaining to park/designated recreational facility use or public facility fee. All use fees shall be paid prior to commencement of the parade or special event. (Ord. 467 § 2, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.055 Waiver of fees or costs.
     Fees or costs imposed by this chapter may be waived under the circumstances described in this section and as shown in table below.

     A.    The following fees and costs are eligible for waiver:

     1.     Category A fees: Application fee;

     2.     Category B fees: Fees and costs totaling nine hundred ninety-nine dollars ($999.99) or less for traffic engineer review, traffic control devices, and Los Angeles County sheriff’s department fees; and

     3.     Category C fees: Fees and costs totaling one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or more for traffic engineer review, traffic control devices, and Los Angeles County sheriff’s department fees.

     B.     The following applicants are eligible for fee waivers:

     1.     Local public entities such as county agencies, school districts, and special districts;

     2.     501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations; and

     3.     La Cañada Flintridge based private citizens or private organizations such as neighborhood watch groups, sports groups/organizations, neighborhood engagement committees, and other informal citizens groups such as PTAs and student organizations.

     C.     Applicants seeking a waiver of fees shall submit a fee waiver application to the city manager or designee concurrently with the permit application. Fee waiver applications must be submitted on a form approved by the city.

     D.    The city manager or designee is authorized to waive Category A and Category B fees. Only the city council may waive Category C fees.

     E.     Fee waivers shall be granted to eligible applicants in accordance with the following criteria:

     1.     Local public entities:

     a.     Shall automatically receive a waiver of Category A fees;

     b.     Shall automatically receive a waiver of Category B fees; and

     c.     May receive a waiver of Category C fees if the city is a co-sponsor or endorser of the parade or special event.

     2.     501(c)(3) nonprofit organizations:

     a.     Shall automatically receive a waiver of Category A fees;

     b.     May receive a waiver of Category B fees if:

     i.      The organization has a bona fide place of business in the city, and

     ii.     The parade or special event provides a community benefit and has a community purpose; and

     c.     May receive a waiver of Category C fees if:

     i.      The organization has a bona fide place of business in the city,

     ii.     The parade or special event provides a community benefit and has a community purpose,

     iii.    The parade or special event is open to the public, and

     iv.    The parade or special event has a philanthropic, educational, or recreational purpose.

     3.     La Cañada Flintridge based private citizens or private organizations:

     a.     May receive a waiver of Category A fees if the parade or special event provides a community benefit and has a community purpose;

     b.     May receive a waiver of Category B fees if:

     i.      The parade or special event is open to the public or a segment thereof and is not a private or exclusive event, and

     ii.     The parade or special event aligns with a goal or objective adopted by the city council; and

     c.     May receive a waiver of Category C fees if:

     i.      The parade or special event provides a community benefit and has a community purpose,

     ii.     The parade or special event is open to the public or a segment thereof and is not a private or exclusive event,

     iii.    The parade or special event aligns with a goal or objective adopted by the city council,

     iv.    The parade or special event has a philanthropic, educational, or recreational purpose, and

     v.     The City is a co-sponsor or endorser of the parade or special event.

 

Fee Waiver Request Criteria

 

 

Category A

City Manager or Designee Approval

Category B

City Manager or Designee Approval

Category C

City Council Approval

 

Application Fee ($100.00)

Traffic Engineer/Devices/Sheriff’s Department Fee(s) (up to $999.99)

Traffic Engineer/Devices/Sheriff’s Department Fee(s) ($1,000.00+)

Local Public Entities

*

*

1. City is a co-sponsor or endorser of the event

501(c)(3) Organizations

*

1. LCF community based

2. Event provides a community benefit and purpose

3. Event is open to the public generally

4. Event has a philanthropic, educational or recreational purpose

LCF Based Private Citizens & Organizations

1. Event provides a community benefit and purpose

2. Event is open to the general public or segment thereof (not a private or exclusive event)

3. Aligns with an adopted city council goal or objective

4. Event has a philanthropic, educational or recreational purpose

5. City is a co-sponsor or endorser of the event

 

* indicates waiver of fee(s) is automatic.

 

     F.     Any decision regarding a fee waiver by the city manager or designee may be appealed to the city council by any interested party within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of decision. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk together with any required fees and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason to appeal. The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing, giving notice to the appellant at least ten days prior to the hearing. Following such hearing the city council shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse, or modify the determination of the city manager or designee.

     G.    Any determination of the city council, whether on appeal or on a determination of a Category C waiver, shall be final and effective immediately.

     H.    If a parade or special event occurs before a fee waiver request can be reviewed by the city, the applicant shall pay the permit fees prior to the issuance of the permit and the city shall reimburse any fees for which a waiver is subsequently approved. (Ord. 467 § 3, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.060 Law enforcement protection.
     The Los Angeles County sheriff’s department shall determine whether, and to what extent, additional law enforcement protection is reasonably necessary for the parade or special event for traffic control and public safety purposes. The sheriff’s department shall base its decision on the size, location, duration, time and date of the event, the expected sale or service of alcoholic beverages, the number of streets and intersections to be blocked or impacted, and the need to detour or preempt citizen travel and use of the sidewalks and streets. The speech content of the event shall not be a factor in determining the amount of law enforcement protection necessary. If possible, without disruption of ordinary law enforcement services or compromise of public safety, regularly scheduled on-duty personnel will police the event. If additional law enforcement protection is deemed necessary for the parade or special event, the sheriff’s department shall so inform the permit applicant. The applicant shall then have the duty to secure the law enforcement protection at his or her sole expense. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.065 Indemnification.
     An applicant for a parade or special event permit shall agree to indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the city of La Cañada Flintridge, its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all liability, and expense, including defense costs and legal fees, and claims for damages of any nature whatsoever, including, but not limited to, bodily injury, death or property damage arising from any negligent or intentional act or omission by permittee or event organizer/sponsor, its subcontractors, officers and employees, in the conduct of the parade or special event. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.070 Standards for issuance.
     A.    The city manager or designee shall issue a permit as provided for herein when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he or she finds that:

     1.     The application has been fully completed and signed by the applicant;

     2.     The conduct of the parade or special event will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other pedestrian or vehicular traffic contiguous to its route or location;

     3.     The conduct of the parade or special event will not require the diversion of so great a number of sheriff’s deputies to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal law enforcement protection of the city;

     4.     The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade or special event will not unduly interfere with proper fire and law enforcement protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas;

     5.     The conduct of the parade or special event is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property;

     6.     The parade or special event is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route;

     7.     Adequate sanitation and other required health facilities are or will be made available in or adjacent to any assembly areas;

     8.     There are sufficient parking places near the site of the parade or special event to accommodate the number of vehicles reasonably expected;

     9.     The applicant has secured the law enforcement protection, if any, as required under Section 4.05.060;

     10.   Such parade or special event is not for the primary purpose of advertising any product, goods or event that is primarily for private profit, and the parade or special event itself is not primarily for profit. The prohibition against advertising any product, goods or event shall not apply to signs identifying organizations or sponsors furnishing or sponsoring exhibits or structures used in the parade or special event;

     11.   No parade or special event permit application for the same time and location is already granted or has been received and will be granted;

     12.   No parade or special event permit application for the same time, but not location, is already granted or has been received and will be granted, and the law enforcement resources required for the prior parade or special event are so great that in combination with the subsequent proposed application, the resulting deployment of law enforcement services would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property;

     13.   No event is scheduled elsewhere in the city where the law enforcement resources required for that event are so great that the deployment of law enforcement services for the proposed parade or special event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons and property;

     14.   No parade or special event application shall be for an event occurring or operating for more than five consecutive days.

     B.     No permit shall be granted that allows for the erection or placement of any structure, whether permanent or temporary, on a city street, sidewalk, park or right-of-way, unless advance approval for the erection or placement of the structure is obtained from the director of public works. Such structure shall comply with the provisions of the city’s building code. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.080 Nondiscrimination.
     The city manager or designee shall uniformly consider each application upon its merits and shall not discriminate in granting or denying permits under this chapter based upon political, religious, ethnic, race, disability, sexual orientation or gender related grounds. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.090 Notice of denial of application.
     The city manager or designee shall act promptly upon a timely filed application for a parade or special event permit, but in no event shall grant or deny a permit less than forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event. If the city manager or designee determines that he or she will disapprove the application, he or she shall notify the applicant either by personal delivery or certified mail at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to his or her action and state the reasons for denial. The applicant may respond with additional information or clarification up to forty-eight (48) hours prior to the event, or may appeal such determination in accordance with Section 4.05.110. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.100 Alternative permit.
     A.    The city manager or designee, in denying an application for a parade or special event permit, may authorize the conduct of the parade or special event at a date, time, location or route different from that specified by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within five days after notice of the action of the city manager or designee, file a written notice of acceptance with the city manager or designee.

     B.     An alternate parade or special event permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of, a parade or special event permit issued under this chapter. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.110 Appeal procedure.
     A.    Any applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a parade or special event permit to the city council. The denied applicant shall make the appeal within five days after receipt of the denial by filing a written notice with the city manager or designee with a copy of the notice submitted to the city clerk. The city council shall act upon the appeal at the next regularly scheduled meeting following receipt of the written notice of appeal.

     B.     In the event that the next regularly scheduled city council meeting is to be held after the proposed commencement date of the event, or in the event the city council rejects an applicant’s appeal, the applicant may file an immediate request for review with a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.120 Notification to public agencies.
     Immediately upon the issuance of a parade or special event permit, the city manager or designee shall send a copy thereof to public agencies that will be impacted by, or whose services will be required for, the parade or special event. Such public entities may include, but are not limited to, the sheriff’s department, the fire department, and public utilities. (Ord. 467 § 4, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.130 Contents of permit.
     Each parade or special event permit shall state or include the following information:

     A.    Date(s), hours, starting and approximate ending time;

     B.     A statement of indemnification as required by this chapter;

     C.     Minimum speed of parade units;

     D.    Maximum speed of parade units;

     E.     Maximum interval of space to be maintained between parade units;

     F.     The portions of the sidewalks, streets, parks or other public property that may be occupied by the parade or special event;

     G.    The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof;

     H.    A copy of the liquor license issued by California Alcohol Beverage Control when alcoholic beverages are to be sold;

     I.      The authorized number and location of sanitation or other required health facilities including restrooms and first aid stations;

     J.      Whether any person(s) will be authorized to ride, drive or cause to be ridden or driven any animal or animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street;

     K.    The location(s) and number of parking places which will accommodate the anticipated number of vehicles reasonably expected;

     L.     Whether any street vending will be authorized by the permittee and the name(s) and address(es) of such authorized street vendor(s);

 

     M.    Such other information as the city manager or designee shall find necessary to the enforcement of this chapter. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.140 Duties of permittee.
     A.    A permittee hereunder shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances.

     B.     The parade or special event chairman, or other person heading such activity, shall carry the parade or special event permit upon his or her person during the conduct of the parade or special event. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.150 Prohibitions.
     The following prohibitions shall apply to all parades and special events:

     A.    It is unlawful for any person to stage, present or conduct any parade or special event without first having obtained a permit as provided herein.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person to participate in a parade or special event for which the person knows a permit has not been granted.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person in charge of, or responsible for, the conduct of a duly licensed parade or special event, to knowingly fail to comply with any condition of the permit.

     D.    It is unlawful for any person to engage in any parade or special event activity that would constitute a substantial hazard to the public safety or that would materially interfere with or endanger the public peace or rights of residents to the quiet and peaceful enjoyment of their property.

     E.     It is unlawful for any person participating in any parade or special event to carry or possess any length of metal, lumber, wood or similar material for purposes of displaying a sign, poster, plaque or notice, unless such object is one-fourth inch or less in thickness and two inches or less in width or, if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-fourths inch in its thickest dimension.

     F.     It is unlawful for any person to carry any sign, poster, plaque or notice, whether or not mounted on a length of material as specified in subsection E of this section, unless such sign, poster, plaque or notice is constructed or made of a cloth, paper or cardboard material.

     G.    It is unlawful for any person participating in a parade or special event to fail to comply with the provisions of Ch. 5.02, Regulation of Community Noise.

     H.    It is unlawful for any person to ride, drive or cause to be ridden or driven, any animal or any animal-drawn vehicle upon any public street unless specifically authorized by the permit.

     I.      It is unlawful for any person to conduct a parade or special event during the hours of eleven-thirty p.m. of any one day through six a.m. of the following day unless such conduct is specifically authorized by the city council. (Ord. 467 § 5, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.160 Interference prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, disrupt or impede a permitted parade or special event. The following acts are prohibited by this section when performed for the purpose, or with knowledge that an effect thereof, is to interfere with or disrupt the ability of the permittee to carry on the parade or special event:

     1.     To block, obstruct or impede the participation or passage of participants, vehicles or animals in the parade or special event;

     2.     When not an authorized participant or unit in the parade or special event, to walk, run, operate a skateboard, ride any wheeled vehicle or rollerskate or other wheeled toy, or drive a vehicle through, between, within or among the authorized participants, vehicles or animals in the parade or special event without the permission of the permit holder, except in cases of bona fide emergency;

     3.     To drop, roll, throw, toss, squirt or propel any gaseous, liquid, semi-solid or solid substance or object toward or among the participants, vehicles or animals in the parade or special event or toward or among the spectators of the parade or special event unless specifically authorized by the permittee;

     4.     To grab, take hold of, strike, hit, pull or push any participant, vehicle or animal in the parade or special event, or to mount any vehicle in the parade or special event, except with the permission of the permittee or in cases of bona fide emergency.

     B.     The city manager or designee shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a street constituting a part of the parade or special event. The applicant is responsible for requesting no parking signs from the public works department and posting them seventy-two (72) hours in advance from the date of the event. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violation of this chapter. (Ord. 467 § 6, 2018; Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.163 Street vending.
     All street vending on public sidewalks, streets, parks, rights-of-way or public property being utilized for a parade or special event pursuant to a validly issued permit, shall be prohibited unless it is specifically authorized by the permit and the street vendor(s) have been identified and specifically authorized by the permittee and the street vendor(s) have obtained a valid city-issued business license. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.165 Commercial vending.
     All commercial vending on public sidewalks, streets, parks, rights-of-way or public property shall be subject to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.170 Revocation of permit.
     The city manager or designee shall have the authority to revoke a parade or special event permit instantly upon violation of the conditions or standards for issuance as set forth in this chapter or when a public emergency arises where the law enforcement resources required for that emergency are so great that deployment of law enforcement services for the parade or special event would have an immediate and adverse effect upon the welfare and safety of persons or property. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

 

4.05.180 Violation and penalties.
     Any person who violates Section 4.05.160, 4.05.163 or 4.05.165 of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction. Any person violating provision(s) of any other section of this chapter, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Penalties for such violation(s) shall be imposed as set forth in Chapter 1.04 of this code. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 4.06 PARKING OR DISPLAY OF MOBILE BILLBOARDS IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY PROHIBITED
4.06.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to eliminate the parking or display of mobile billboards upon the public rights-of-way within the city to: (1) ensure and promote the safe movement of vehicular traffic; (2) reduce air pollution; (3) preserve scarce parking availability for the beneficial use of the general public; and (4) improve the aesthetic appearance of the city. (Ord. 472 § 1, 2018)

 

4.06.020 General requirements.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to park or leave standing any motor vehicle with a mobile billboard(s) attached, upon any public street, roadway, avenue, alley, other public right-of-way, or a publicly-owned parking lot within the city.

     B.     “Mobile billboard” includes any vehicle or other wheeled conveyance, which carries, conveys, pulls, displays as graphics upon its exterior (other than as exempt in Section 4.06.030(A)), or otherwise transports, any sign or billboard. For purposes of this section, “sign or billboard” shall include the use of any printed words, photos, graphics, lighting, symbols, lettering, or other depictions used for the purpose of promoting, advertising, or generating an interest/reaction, on some issue, belief, product or service, without reference to its content, whether it be commercial, political, religious or social. (Ord. 472 § 1, 2018)

 

4.06.030 Exemptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    Signs that are permanently affixed in a manner that is painted directly upon the body of a motor vehicle, applied as a decal on the body of a motor vehicle, or placed in a location on the body of a motor vehicle that was specifically designed by a vehicle manufacturer for the express purpose of containing an advertisement sign, such that it is an integral part of, or fixture of, a motor vehicle for permanent decoration, identification, or display and that does not extend beyond the overall length, width, or height of the vehicle.

     B.     Any vehicle or other wheeled conveyance that is parked or situated upon the public right-of-way or public parking lot(s) for a period of less than thirty (30) minutes, provided such vehicle has not been parked or situated upon any public rights-of-way or public parking lot(s) within the city for an accumulated period of time exceeding sixty (60) minutes during the immediately preceding twenty-four (24) hour period. (Ord. 472 § 1, 2018)

 

4.06.040 Violations/penalties.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and subject to such penalties as set forth in the penalties provisions of this code. (Ord. 472 § 1, 2018)

Chapter 4.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
4.08.010 Adopted.
     With the exception of Chapter 10.90 relating to fees, and except as hereinafter may be provided, the 1995 Edition of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code regulating the licensing, impounding, maintaining, sale and exhibition of animals, is adopted and shall be part of the animal code of the city. Animal keeping in residential zones shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 11.32. Animal control fees shall be adopted by city council resolution. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 283 § 1, 1997)

 

4.08.020 Amendment.
     Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted by the city council, is amended throughout to delete, “fees set forth in Section 10.90.010” and, in each occurrence, shall be replaced with, “fees as established by resolution of the city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.” (Ord. 255 § 2, 1996)

 

4.08.030 Violations and penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted by this chapter, is guilty of an infraction, except as herein provided or unless another penalty is provided for and identified within Title 10.

     Violations of the following sections of Title 10 of the Los Angeles County Code, as adopted by this chapter, shall constitute a misdemeanor:

 

     Section 10.12.190

     Section 10.12.200

     Section 10.20.280

     Section 10.20.310

     Section 10.28.060

     Section 10.32.020

     Section 10.32.070

     Section 10.32.080

     Section 10.37.030

     Section 10.37.050(c)

     Section 10.37.050(f)

     Section 10.40.010

     Section 10.40.040

     Section 10.86.010

 

(Ord. 255 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 4.12 FLOOD CONTROL
4.12.010 Title for citation.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as, and may be cited as, the “flood control channel ordinance.” (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 9746 § 1, 1969: LACC Ord. 1549 § 9, 1928)

 

4.12.020 Maintenance—Owner responsibilities.
     The owner of any natural watercourse, swale or manmade drainage channel shall maintain the same free of any vegetation, tin cans, rubbish or other obstructions to the extent necessary so that the natural flow will not be impeded at any time. When any such watercourse, swale or drainage channel flows in an easement granted for such purpose and the grantee has improved such watercourse, swale or drainage channel, then, as used in this section, the word “owner” means the person, firm, corporation or public body owning such easement. In other cases, the word “owner” means the owner of the land traversed by such watercourse, swale or drainage channel and any person in lawful possession thereof. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 9556 § 1, 1968: LACC Ord. 9533 § 1, 1968: LACC Ord. 1549 § 5, 1928)

 

4.12.030 Using property prohibited without permit—Terms and conditions.
     It is unlawful for any person, corporation, municipality or district to interfere with, cause damage to, destroy or use in any manner whatsoever any flood control, storm drain or water conservation structure, facility, appurtenance or any other property owned, constructed, maintained or controlled by or on behalf of the Los Angeles County flood control district, a body politic and corporate created by law for the purpose of controlling and conserving the flood, storm and other waste waters of said district, without having received a written permit therefor from the board of supervisors of the district, which permit shall be revocable whenever, in the opinion of the board of supervisors, the public interest and welfare require the revocation thereof. Application for the use of any property of the district shall be made to the chief engineer of the district, setting forth the particular use desired and the purpose and duration thereof, and the chief engineer shall investigate such application and make his or her recommendations thereon to the board of supervisors of the district, and the board of supervisors may impose such terms and conditions as may be necessary to insure the proper maintenance of the property for the purpose for which it was constructed, acquired or maintained. This section does not apply to any entry or use in the course of duty by any peace or police officer, or by a duly authorized employee of the Los Angeles County flood control district. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 5468 § 2, 1950: LACC Ord. 1549 § 1, 1928)

 

4.12.040 Placing obstructions, refuse and contaminating substances in channels prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation, municipality or district to place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed or bank of any river, stream, wash or arroyo in the county of Los Angeles, or within or upon any flood control channel, reservoir, debris basin, spreading ground or other property over which the Los Angeles County flood control district has an easement or fee title thereto for flood and/or conservation purposes duly recorded in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County, any wires, fence, building or other structure, or any refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter that may impede, retard or change the normal direction of the flow of the flood, storm and other waters in such river, stream, wash, arroyo, flood control channel, reservoir, debris basin or spreading ground, or that may catch or collect debris carried by such waters, or that may be carried downstream by such waters to the damage and detriment of either private or public property within or adjacent to said river, stream, wash, arroyo, flood control channel, reservoir, debris basin or spreading ground, nor shall any material, either solid or liquid, be placed in said river, stream, wash, arroyo, flood control channel, reservoir, debris basin or spreading ground that will deteriorate the quality of water flowing or stored therein or that which is stored within the water bearing zones underground. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 5468 § 3, 1950: LACC Ord. 1549 § 2, 1928)

 

4.12.050 Bridges and dip crossings permitted when.
     This chapter does not prohibit the construction or maintenance of dip crossings of natural drainage courses on private property if such dip crossings:

     A.    Do not exceed a height of two feet above the adjacent upstream natural stream bed; and

     B.     Do not change the stream flow characteristics to the detriment of upstream, downstream or adjacent properties; and

     C.     Are constructed from materials obtained in the adjacent stream bed, except for culvert pipe and asphaltic concrete or Portland cement concrete paving. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 9746 § 1, 1969: LACC Ord. 1549 § 6, 1928)

 

4.12.060 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
     This chapter does not prohibit anything either expressly prohibited or expressly permitted by state law. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 5468 § 5, 1950: LACC Ord. 1549 § 4, 1928)

 

4.12.070 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person, firm, corporation, municipality or district, or any officer or agent of any firm, corporation, municipality or district violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding one hundred (100) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 27, 1977: LACC Ord. 1549 § 3, 1928)

Chapter 4.14 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
4.14.010 Statutory authorization and purpose.
     A.    Statutory Authorization. The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of La Cañada Flintridge of Los Angeles County does adopt the following floodplain management regulations.

     B.     Statement of Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to:

     1.     Protect human life and health;

     2.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     3.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     4.     Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     5.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     6.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

     7.     Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     8.     Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.020 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.

     “Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

 

     “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100-year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

     Building. See “Structure.”

     “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     “Flood or flooding” means:

     1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; or mudslides (i.e., mudflows) which are proximately caused by flooding as defined herein and are akin to a river of liquid and flowing mud on the surfaces of normally dry land areas, as when earth is carried by a current of water and deposited along the path of the current.

     2.     The collapse or subsidence of land along the shore of a lake or other body of water as a result of erosion or undermining caused by waves or currents of water exceeding anticipated cyclical levels or suddenly caused by an unusual and unforeseeable event which results in flooding as defined in this definition.

     “Floodplain or flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

     “Floodplain administrator” is the individual appointed to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

     “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry.

     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states with approved programs.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

     “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

     “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by this community, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

     “One Hundred Year Flood” or “100-Year Flood.” See “Base flood.”

     “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

     1.     Built on a single chassis;

     2.     Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

     3.     Designed to be self propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and

     4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufacture home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

     “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other proposed new development of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

     1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations or state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.” (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.030 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas identified as flood-prone within the jurisdiction of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

4.14.040 Basis for establishing flood-prone areas.
     The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agencies or other source to identify flood-prone areas within the jurisdiction of the city. This data will be on file in the public works department at 1327 Foothill Boulevard, La Cañada Flintridge, 91011. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.050 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the term of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards established in connection with conditions) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of La Cañada Flintridge from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.060 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.070 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

     B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.080 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city of La Cañada Flintridge, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Insurance Administration, Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.090 Establishment of development permit.
     A development permit shall be obtained for all proposed construction or other development in the community, including the placement of manufactured homes, so that it may be determined whether such construction or other development is within flood-prone areas. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.100 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The city manager or his or her authorized designee is appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.110 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
     The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

     A.    Permit Review. Review all development permit applications to determine:

     1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;

     2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained; and

     3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding.

     B.     Review and Use of Any Other Base Flood Data. The floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood data available from other federal or state agency or other source. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.120 Standards of construction.
     If a proposed building site is in a flood-prone area, all new construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured homes, shall:

     A.    Be designed (or modified) and adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     B.     Be constructed:

     1.     With materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage;

     2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

     3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.130 Standards for subdivisions or other proposed new development.
     If a subdivision proposal or other proposed new development, including manufactured home parks or subdivisions, is in a flood-prone area, any such proposals shall be reviewed to assure that:

     A.    All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage within the flood-prone area;

     B.     All public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and

     C.     Adequate drainage is provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

 

4.14.140 Standards for utilities.
     A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

     1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

     2.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

     B.     On site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 357 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 4.23 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 219.

 

4.23.010 Purpose.
     A.    The State Legislature has found:

     1.     That the waters of the state are of limited supply and are subject to ever increasing demands;

     2.     That the continuation of California’s economic prosperity is dependent on the availability of adequate supplies of water for future uses;

     3.     That it is the policy of the state to promote the conservation and efficient use of water and to prevent the waste of this valuable resource;

     4.     That landscapes are essential to the quality of life in California by providing areas for active and passive recreation and as an enhancement to the environment by cleaning air and water, preventing erosion, offering fire protection, and replacing ecosystems lost to development;

     5.     That landscape design, installation, maintenance and management can and should be water efficient; and

     6.     That Section 2 of Article X of the California Constitution specifies that the right to use water is limited to the amount reasonably required for the beneficial use to be served and the right does not and shall not extend to waste or unreasonable method of use.

 

     B.     Consistent with these legislative findings, the purpose of this chapter is to:

     1.     Promote the values and benefits of landscaping practices that integrate and go beyond the conservation and efficient use of water;

     2.     Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

     3.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

     4.     Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount;

     5.     Promote the benefits of consistent landscape chapters with neighboring local and regional agencies;

     6.     Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water; and

     7.     Encourage cooperation between the city and other local agencies to implement and enforce this chapter. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.020 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to each of the following:

     1.     New construction projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

     2.     Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

     3.     Existing landscapes limited to Sections 4.23.190 and 4.23.200.

     B.     For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Section 4.23.100.

     C.     This chapter does not apply to:

     1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

     2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

     3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

     4.     Plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.030 Definitions.
     The terms used in this chapter have the meaning set forth below:

     A.    “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

     B.     “Automatic irrigation controller” means an automatic timing device used to remotely control valves that operate an irrigation system. Automatic irrigation controllers schedule irrigation events using either evapotranspiration (weather-based) or soil moisture data.

     C.     “Backflow prevention device” means a safety device used to prevent pollution or contamination of the water supply due to the reverse flow of water from the irrigation system.

     D.    “Certificate of completion” means the document required under Section 4.23.120.

     E.     “Certified irrigation designer” means a person certified to design irrigation systems by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization, or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense irrigation designer certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Irrigation Designer program.

     F.     “Certified landscape irrigation auditor” means a person certified to perform landscape irrigation audits by an accredited academic institution, a professional trade organization or other program such as the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s WaterSense Irrigation Auditor certification program and Irrigation Association’s Certified Landscape Irrigation Auditor program.

     G.    “Check valve” or “anti-drain valve” means a valve located under a sprinkler head, or other location in the irrigation system, to hold water in the system to prevent drainage from sprinkler heads when the sprinkler is off.

     H.    “Common interest developments” means community apartment projects, condominium projects, planned developments, and stock cooperatives per Civil Code Section 1351, as amended.

     I.      “Compost” means the safe and stable product of controlled biologic decomposition of organic materials that is beneficial to plant growth.

     J.      “Conversion factor (0.62)” means the number that converts acre-inches per acre per year to gallons per square foot per year.

     K.    “Distribution uniformity” means the measure of the uniformity of irrigation water over a defined area.

     L.     “Drip irrigation” means any non-spray low volume irrigation system utilizing emission devices with a flow rate measured in gallons per hour. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     M.    “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

     N.    “Effective precipitation” or “Eppt” means the portion of total precipitation which becomes available for plant growth.

     O.    “Emitter” means a drip irrigation emission device that delivers water slowly from the system to the soil.

     P.     “Established landscape” means the point at which plants in the landscape have developed significant root growth into the soil.

     Q.    “Establishment period of the plants” means the first year after installing the plant in the landscape or the first two years if irrigation will be terminated after establishment. Native habitat mitigation areas and trees may need three to five years for establishment.

     R.     “Estimated total water use” or “ETWU” means the total water used for the landscape as described in Section 4.23.070.

     S.     “ET adjustment factor” or “ETAF” means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

     T.     “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A located at the end of this chapter, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

     U.    “Flow rate” means the rate at which water flows through pipes, valves and emission devices, measured in gallons per minute, gallons per hour, or cubic feet per second.

     V.    “Flow sensor” means an inline device installed at the supply point of the irrigation system that produces a repeatable signal proportional to flow rate. Flow sensors must be connected to an automatic irrigation controller, or flow monitor capable of receiving flow signals and operating master valves. This combination flow sensor/controller may also function as a landscape water meter or submeter.

     W.    “Friable” means a soil condition that is easily crumbled or loosely compacted down to a minimum depth per planting material requirements, whereby the root structure of newly planted material will be allowed to spread unimpeded.

     X.    “Fuel Modification Plan Guideline” means guidelines from a local fire authority to assist residents and businesses that are developing land or building structures in a fire hazard severity zone.

     Y.    “Graywater” means untreated waste water that has not been contaminated by any toilet discharge, has not been affected by infectious, contaminated, or unhealthy bodily wastes, and does not present a threat from contamination by unhealthful processing, manufacturing, or operating waste. “Graywater” includes, but is not limited to, wastewater from bathtubs, showers, bathrooms washbasins, clothes washing machines, and laundry tubs, but does not include wastewater from kitchen sinks or dishwashers. Health and Safety Code Section 17922.12.

     Z.     “Hardscapes” means any durable material (pervious and non-pervious).

     AA. “Hydrozone” means a portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs. A hydrozone may be irrigated or non-irrigated.

     BB. “Infiltration rate” means the rate of water entry into the soil expressed as a depth of water per unit of time (e.g., inches per hour).

     CC. “Invasive plant species” means species of plants not historically found in California that spread outside cultivated areas and can damage environmental or economic resources. Invasive plant species may be regulated by county agricultural agencies as noxious weeds. List of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA invasive and noxious weed database.

     DD. “Irrigation audit” means an in-depth evaluation of the performance of an irrigation system conducted by a certified landscape irrigation auditor. An irrigation audit includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity or emission uniformity, reporting overspray or runoff that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule. The audit must be conducted in a manner consistent with the Irrigation Association’s Landscape Irrigation Auditor Certification program or other U.S. Environmental Protection Agency “WaterSense” labeled auditing program.

     EE. “Irrigation efficiency” or “IE” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this chapter is 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

     FF. “Irrigation survey” means an evaluation of an irrigation system that is less detailed than an irrigation audit. An irrigation survey includes, but is not limited to: inspection, system test, and written recommendations to improve performance of the irrigation system.

     GG. “Irrigation water use analysis” means an analysis of water use data based on meter readings and billing data.

     HH. “Landscape architect” means a person who holds a license to practice landscape architecture in the state of California Business and Professions Code Section 5615, as amended.

     II. “Landscape area” or “LA” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance calculation. The landscape area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

     JJ. “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

     KK. “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required under Section 4.23.060.

     LL. “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project as defined in “landscape area” for the purposes of this chapter, meeting requirements under Section 4.23.020.

     MM. “Landscape water meter” means an inline device installed at the irrigation supply point that measures the flow of water into the irrigation system and is connected to the totalizer to record water use.

     NN. “Lateral line” means the water delivery pipeline that supplies water to the emitters or sprinklers from the valve.

     OO. “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

     PP. “Low volume irrigation” means the application of irrigation water at low pressure through a system of tubing or lateral lines and low-volume emitters such as drip, drip lines, and bubblers. Low volume irrigation systems are specifically designed to apply small volumes of water slowly at or near the root zone of plants.

     QQ. “Main line” means the pressurized pipeline that delivers water from the water source to the valve or outlet.

     RR. “Master shut-off valve” is an automatic valve installed at the irrigation supply point, which controls water flow into the irrigation system. When the valve is closed water will not be supplied to the irrigation system. A master valve will greatly reduce any water loss due to a leaky station valve.

     SS. “Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 4.23.070. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscape area. The estimated total water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. Special landscape areas, including recreation areas, areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, and areas irrigated with recycled water are subject to the MAWA with an ETAF not to exceed 1.0. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].

     TT. “Median” is an area between opposing lanes of traffic that may be unplanted or planted with trees, shrubs, perennials, and ornamental grasses.

     UU. “Microclimate” means the climate of a small, specific area that may contrast with the climate of the overall landscape area due to factors such as wind, sun exposure, plant density, or proximity to reflective surfaces.

     VV. “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975, as amended.

     WW. “Mulch” means any organic material such as leaves, bark, straw, compost, or inorganic mineral materials such as rocks, gravel, and decomposed granite left loose and applied to the soil surface for the beneficial purposes of reducing evaporation, suppressing weeds, moderating soil temperature, and preventing soil erosion.

     XX. “New construction” means a new building with a landscape or other new landscape, such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

     YY. “Non-residential landscape” means landscapes in commercial, institutional, and public settings that may have areas designated for recreation or public assembly. It also includes portions of common areas of common interest developments with designated recreational areas.

     ZZ. “Noxious weeds” means any weed designated by the weed control regulations in the Weed Control Act and identified on a regional district noxious weed control list. Lists of invasive plants are maintained at the California Invasive Plant Inventory and USDA Invasive and Noxious Weeds Database.

     AAA. “Operating pressure” means the pressure at which the parts of an irrigation system are designed by the manufacturer to operate.

     BBB. “Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems” or “overhead spray irrigation systems” means systems that deliver water through the air (e.g., spray heads and rotors).

     CCC. “Overspray” means the irrigation water which is delivered beyond the target area.

     DDD. “Parkway” means the area between a sidewalk and the curb or traffic lane. It may be planted or unplanted, and with or without pedestrian egress.

     EEE. “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by the city for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.

     FFF. “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

     GGG. “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor that, when multiplied by ETo, estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this chapter, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1, the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3, the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6, and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this chapter are derived from the publication “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

     HHH. “Project applicant” means the individual or entity submitting a landscape documentation package required under Section 4.23.060, to request a permit, plan check, or design review from the city. A project applicant may be the property owner or designee.

     III. “Rain sensor” or “rain sensing shutoff device” means a component which automatically suspends an irrigation event when it rains.

     JJJ. “Record drawing” means a set of reproducible drawings which show significant changes in the work made during construction and which are usually based on drawings marked up in the field and other data furnished by the contractor.

     KKK. “Recreational area” means areas, excluding private single-family residential areas, designated for active play, recreation or public assembly in parks, sports fields, picnic grounds, or golf courses tees, fairways, roughs, surrounds, and greens.

     LLL. “Recycled water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

     MMM. “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix A, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowance so that regional differences in climate can be accommodated.

     NNN. “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that requires a permit, plan check, or design review, meets the requirements of Section 4.23.020, and the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

 

     OOO. “Residential landscape” means landscapes surrounding single or multifamily homes.

     PPP. “Runoff” means water which is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the landscape area. For example, runoff may result from water that is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a slope.

     QQQ. “Soil moisture sensor” means a device that measures the amount of water in the soil. The device may also suspend or initiate an irrigation event.

     RRR. “Soil texture” means the classification of soil based on its percentage of sand, silt, and clay.

     SSS. “Special landscape area” or “SLA” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants, areas irrigated with recycled water, or water features using recycled water.

     TTT. “Sprinkler head” or “spray head” means a device which delivers water through a nozzle.

     UUU. “Static water pressure” means the pipeline or municipal water supply pressure when water is not flowing.

     VVV. “Station” means an area served by one valve or by a set of valves that operate simultaneously.

     WWW. “Swing joint” means an irrigation component that provides a flexible, leak-free connection between the emission device and lateral pipeline to allow movement in any direction and to prevent equipment damage.

     XXX. “Submeter” means a metering device to measure water applied to the landscape that is installed after the primary utility water meter.

     YYY. “Turf” means a groundcover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermudagrass, Kikuyugrass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustinegrass, Zoysiagrass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

     ZZZ. “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in the irrigation system.

     AAAA. “Water conserving plant species” means a plant species identified as having a very low or low plant factor.

     BBBB. “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscape area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefor, are not subject to the water budget calculation.

     CCCC. “Watering window” means the time of day irrigation is allowed.

     DDDD. “WUCOLS” means the Water Use Classification of Landscape Species published by the University of California Cooperative Extension, and the Department of Water Resources 2014. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.040 Provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes.
     The applicant shall hire a landscape architect to prepare and self-certify landscaping plans. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.050 Compliance with landscape documentation package.
     A.    Prior to construction, the project applicant shall:

     1.     Submit a landscape documentation package to the city as described in Section 4.23.060.

     B.     Upon approval of the landscape documentation package by the city, the project applicant shall:

     1.     Receive an approval of the plan check and record the date of the approval in the certificate of completion;

 

     2.     Submit a copy of the approved landscape documentation package along with the record drawings, and any other information to the property owner or designee. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.060 Elements of the landscape documentation package.
     The landscape documentation package shall include the following six elements:

     A.    Project information:

     1.     Date;

     2.     Project applicant;

     3.     Project address (if available, parcel and/or lot number(s));

     4.     Total landscape area (square feet);

     5.     Project type (e.g., new, rehabilitated, public, private, cemetery, homeowner-installed);

     6.     Water supply type (e.g., potable, recycled, well) and identify the local water purveyor if the applicant is not served by a private well;

     7.     Checklist of all documents in landscape documentation package;

     8.     Project contacts to include contact information for the project applicant and property owner;

     9.     Project applicant signature and date with statement, “I agree to comply with the requirements of the water efficient landscape chapter and submit a complete landscape documentation package.”

     B.     Water efficient landscape worksheet:

     1.     Hydrozone information table;

     2.     Water budget calculations:

     a.     Maximum applied water allowance (MAWA),

     b.     Estimated total water use (ETWU).

     C.     Soil management report.

     D.    Landscape design plan.

     E.     Irrigation design plan.

     F.     Grading design plan. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.070 Water efficient landscape worksheet.
     A.    A project applicant shall complete the water efficient landscape worksheet which contains information on the plant factor, irrigation method, irrigation efficiency, and area associated with each hydrozone. Calculations are then made to show that the evapotranspiration adjustment factor (ETAF) for the landscape project does not exceed a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for non-residential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated total water use (ETWU) is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design. ETWU must be below the MAWA.

     1.     In calculating the maximum applied water allowance and estimated total water use, a project applicant shall use the ETo values from the Reference Evapotranspiration Table, Appendix A. For geographic areas not covered in Appendix A, use data from other cities located nearby in the same reference evapotranspiration zone, as found in the CIMIS Reference Evapotranspiration Zones Map, Department of Water Resources, 1999.

     B.     Water budget calculations shall adhere to the following requirements:

     1.     The plant factor used shall be from WUCOLS or from horticultural researchers with academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR). The plant factor ranges from 0 to 0.1 for very low water using plants, 0.1 to 0.3 for low water use plants, from 0.4 to 0.6 for moderate water use plants, and from 0.7 to 1.0 for high water use plants.

     2.     All water features shall be included in the high water use hydrozone and temporarily irrigated areas shall be included in the low water use hydrozone.

     3.     All special landscape areas shall be identified and their water use calculated as shown in the Water Efficient Landscape Worksheet.

     4.     ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.080 Soil management report.
     A.    In order to reduce runoff and encourage healthy plant growth, a soil management report shall be completed by the project applicant, or designee, as follows:

     1.     Submit soil samples to a laboratory for analysis and recommendations.

     a.     Soil sampling shall be conducted in accordance with laboratory protocol, including protocols regarding adequate sampling depth for the intended plants.

     b.     The soil analysis shall include:

     i.      Soil texture;

     ii.     Infiltration rate determined by laboratory test or soil texture infiltration rate table;

     iii.    pH;

     iv.    Total soluble salts;

     v.     Sodium;

     vi.    Percent organic matter; and

     vii.   Recommendations.

     c.     In projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) a soil sampling rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen (15) percent will satisfy this requirement. Large landscape projects shall sample at a rate equivalent to one in seven lots.

     2.     The project applicant, or designee, shall comply with one of the following:

     a.     If significant mass grading is not planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city as part of the landscape documentation package; or

     b.     If significant mass grading is planned, the soil analysis report shall be submitted to the city as part of the certificate of completion.

     3.     The soil analysis report shall be made available, in a timely manner, to the professionals preparing the landscape design plans and irrigation design plans to make any necessary adjustments to the design plans.

     4.     The project applicant, or designee, shall submit documentation verifying implementation of soil analysis report recommendations to the city with certificate of completion. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.090 Landscape design plan.
     A.    For the efficient use of water, a landscape shall be carefully designed and planned for the intended function of the project. A landscape design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

     1.     Plant Material.

     a.     Each hydrozone shall have plant materials with similar water use, with the exception of hydrozones with plants of mixed water use, as specified in Section 4.23.100(A)(1)(d).

     b.     Plants shall be selected and planted appropriately based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the project site. Methods to achieve water efficiency shall include one or more of the following:

     i.      Use the Sunset Western Climate Zone System which takes into account temperature, humidity, elevation, terrain, latitude, and varying degrees of continental and marine influence on local climate;

     ii.     Recognize the horticultural attributes of plants (i.e., mature plant size, invasive surface roots) to minimize damage to property or infrastructure (e.g., buildings, sidewalks, power lines); allow for adequate soil volume for healthy root growth; and

     iii.    Consider the solar orientation for plant placement to maximize summer shade and winter solar gain.

     c.     Turf is not allowed on slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent where the toe of the slope is adjacent to an impermeable hardscape and where twenty-five (25) percent means one foot of vertical elevation change for every four feet of horizontal length (rise divided by run x 100 = slope percent).

     d.     High water use plants, characterized by a plant factor of 0.7 to 1.0, are prohibited in street medians.

     e.     A landscape design plan for projects in fire-prone areas shall address fire safety and prevention. A defensible space or zone around a building or structure is required per Public Resources Code Section 4291(a) and (b), as amended. Avoid fire-prone plant materials and highly flammable mulches. Refer to the local Fuel Modification Plan guidelines.

     f.      The use of an invasive plan species, such as those listed by the California Invasive Plant Council, is strongly discouraged.

     g.     The architectural guidelines of a common interest development, which include community apartment projects, condominiums, planned developments, and stock cooperatives, shall not prohibit or include conditions that have the effect of prohibiting the use of low-water use plants as a group.

     2.     Water Features.

     a.     Recirculating water systems shall be used for water features.

     b.     Where available, recycled water shall be used as a source for decorative water features.

     c.     Surface area of a water feature shall be included in the high water use hydrozone area of the water budget calculation.

     d.     Pool and spa covers are highly recommended.

     3.     Soil Preparation, Mulch and Amendments.

     a.     Prior to the planting of any materials, compacted soils shall be transformed to a friable condition. On engineered slopes, only amended planting holes need meet this requirement.

     b.     Soil amendments shall be incorporated according to recommendations of soil report and what is appropriate for the plants selected (see Section 4.23.080).

     c.     For landscape installations, compost at a rate of a minimum of four cubic yards per one thousand (1,000) square feet of permeable area shall be incorporated to a depth of six inches into the soil. Soils with greater than six percent organic matter in the top six inches of soil are exempt from adding compost and tilling.

     d.     A minimum three-inch layer of mulch shall be applied on all exposed soil surfaces of planting areas except in turf areas, creeping or rooting groundcovers, or direct seeding applications where mulch is contraindicated. To provide habitat for beneficial insects and other wildlife, up to five percent of the landscape area may be left without mulch. Designated insect habitat must be included in the landscape design plan as such.

     e.     Stabilizing mulching products shall be used on slopes that meet current engineering design standards.

     f.      The mulching portion of the seed/mulch slurry in hydro-seeded applications shall meet the mulching requirement.

     g.     Organic mulch materials made from recycled or post-consumer shall take precedence over inorganic materials or virgin forest products unless the recycled post-consumer organic products are not locally available. Organic mulches are not required where prohibited by local Fuel Modification Plan Guidelines or other applicable local ordinances.

     B.     The landscape design plan, at a minimum, shall:

     1.     Delineate and label each hydrozone by number, letter, or other method;

     2.     Identify each hydrozone as low, moderate, high water, or mixed water use. Temporarily irrigated areas of the landscape shall be included in the low water use hydrozone for the water budget calculation;

     3.     Identify recreational areas;

     4.     Identify areas permanently and solely dedicated to edible plants;

     5.     Identify areas irrigated with recycled water;

     6.     Identify type of mulch and application depth;

     7.     Identify soil amendments, type, and quantity;

     8.     Identify type and surface area of water features;

     9.     Identify hardscapes (pervious and non-pervious);

     10.   Identify location and installation details, and twenty-four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity of any applicable stormwater best management practices that encourage on-site retention and infiltration of stormwater. Project applicants shall refer to the local agency or regional Water Quality Control Board for information on any applicable stormwater technical requirements. Stormwater best management practices are encouraged in the landscape design plan.

     11.   Identify any applicable rain harvesting or catchment technologies and their twenty-four (24) hour retention or infiltration capacity;

     12.   Identify any applicable graywater discharge piping, system components and area(s) of distribution;

     13.   Contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the chapter and applied them for the efficient use of water in the landscape design plan”; and

     14.   Bear the signature of a licensed landscape architect, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design a landscape. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agriculture Code.) (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.100 Irrigation design plan.
     A.    This section applies to landscaped areas requiring permanent irrigation, not areas that require temporary irrigation solely for the plant establishment period. For the efficient use of water, an irrigation system shall meet all the requirements listed in this section and the manufacturers’ recommendations. The irrigation system and its related components shall be planned and designed to allow for proper installation, management, and maintenance. An irrigation design plan meeting the following design criteria shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package.

     1.     System.

     a.     Landscape water meters, defined as either a dedicated water service meter or private submeter, shall be installed for all non-residential irrigated landscapes of one thousand (1,000) square feet but not more than five thousand (5,000) square feet (the level at which Water Code Section 535 applies) and residential irrigated landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or greater. A landscape water meter may be either:

     i.      A customer service meter dedicated to landscape use provided by the local water purveyor; or

     ii.     A privately owned meter or submeter.

     b.     Automatic irrigation controllers utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data utilizing non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems.

     c.     If the water pressure is below or exceeds the recommended pressure of the specified irrigation devices, the installation of a pressure regulating device is required to ensure that the dynamic pressure at each emission device is within the manufacturer’s recommended pressure range for optimal performance.

     i.      If the static pressure is above or below the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system, pressure-regulating devices such as inline pressure regulators, booster pumps, or other devices shall be installed to meet the required dynamic pressure of the irrigation system.

     ii.     Static water pressure, dynamic or operating pressure and flow reading of the water supply shall be measured at the point of connection. These pressure and flow measurements shall be conducted at the design stage. If the measurements are not available at the design stage, the measurements shall be conducted at installation.

     d.     Sensors (rain, freeze, wind, etc.), either integral or auxiliary, that suspend or alter irrigation operation during unfavorable weather conditions shall be required on all irrigation systems, as appropriate for local climatic conditions. Irrigation should be avoided during windy or freezing weather or during rain.

     e.     Manual shut-off valves (such as a gate valve, ball valve, or butterfly valve) shall be required, as close as possible to the point of connection of the water supply, to minimize water loss in case of an emergency (such as a main line break) or routine repair.

     f.      Backflow prevention devices shall be required to protect the water supply from contamination by the irrigation system. A project applicant shall refer to the applicable local agency code (i.e., public health) for additional backflow prevention requirements.

     g.     High flow sensors that detect and report high flow conditions created by system damage or malfunction are required for all non-residential landscapes and residential landscapes of five thousand (5,000) square feet or larger.

     h.     Master shut-off valves are required on all projects except landscapes that make use of technologies that allow for the individual control of sprinklers that are individually pressurized in a system equipped with low pressure shut down features.

     i.      The irrigation system shall be designed to prevent runoff, low head drainage, overspray, or other similar conditions where irrigation water flows onto non-targeted areas, such as adjacent property, non-irrigated areas, hardscapes, roadways, or structures.

     j.      Relevant information from the soil management plan, such as soil type and infiltration rate, shall be utilized when designing irrigation systems.

     k.     The design of the irrigation system shall conform to the hydrozones of the landscape design plan.

     l.      The irrigation system must be designed and installed to meet, at a minimum, the irrigation efficiency criteria as described in Section 4.23.070 regarding the maximum applied water allowance.

     m.    All irrigation emission devices must meet the requirements set in the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) standard, American Society of Agricultural and Biological Engineers’/International Code Council’s (ASABE/ICC) 802-2014 “Landscape Irrigation Sprinkler and Emitter Standard.” All sprinkler heads installed in the landscape must document a distribution uniformity low quarter of 0.65 or higher using the protocol defined in ASABE/ICC 802-2014.

     n.     It is highly recommended that the project applicant or city inquire with the local water purveyor about peak water operating demands (on the water supply system) or water restrictions that may impact the effectiveness of the irrigation system.

     o.     In mulched planting areas, the use of low volume irrigation is required to maximize water infiltration into the root zone.

     p.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall have matched precipitation rates, unless otherwise directed by the manufacturer’s recommendations.

     q.     Head to head coverage is recommended. However, sprinkler spacing shall be designed to achieve the highest possible distribution uniformity using the manufacturer’s recommendations.

     r.      Swing joints or other riser-protection components are required on all risers subject to damage that are adjacent to hardscapes or in high traffic areas of turfgrass.

     s.      Check valves or anti-drain valves are required on all sprinkler heads where low point drainage could occur.

     t.      Areas less than ten feet in width in any direction shall be irrigated with subsurface irrigation or other means that produces no runoff or overspray.

     u.     Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems shall not be permitted within twenty-four (24) inches of any non-permeable surface. Allowable irrigation within the setback from non-permeable surfaces may include drip, drip line, or other low flow non-spray technology. The setback area may be planted or unplanted. The surfacing of the setback may be mulch, gravel, or other porous material. These restrictions may be modified if:

     i.      The landscape area is adjacent to permeable surfacing and no runoff occurs; or

     ii.     The adjacent non-permeable surfaces are designed and constructed to drain entirely to landscaping; or

     iii.    The irrigation designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package and clearly demonstrates strict adherence to irrigation system design criteria in subsection (A)(1)(i). Prevention of overspray and runoff must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

     v.     Slopes greater than twenty-five (25) percent shall not be irrigated with an irrigation system with an application rate exceeding three-fourths-inch per hour. This restriction may be modified if the landscape designer specifies an alternative design or technology, as part of the landscape documentation package, and clearly demonstrates no runoff or erosion will occur. Prevention of runoff and erosion must be confirmed during the irrigation audit.

     2.     Hydrozone.

     a.     Each valve shall irrigate a hydrozone with similar site, slope, sun exposure, soil conditions, and plant materials with similar water use.

     b.     Sprinkler heads and other emission devices shall be selected based on what is appropriate for the plant type within that hydrozone.

     c.     Where feasible, trees shall be placed on separate valves from shrubs, groundcovers, and turf to facilitate the appropriate irrigation of trees. The mature size and extent of the root zone shall be considered when designing irrigation of the tree.

     d.     Individual hydrozones that mix plants of moderate and low water use, or moderate and high water use, may be allowed if:

     i.      Plant factor calculation is based on the proportions of the respective plant water uses and their plant factor; or

     ii.     The plant factor of the higher water using plant is used for calculations.

     e.     Individual hydrozones that mix high and low water use plants shall not be permitted.

     f.      On the landscape design plan and irrigation design plan, hydrozone areas shall be designated by number, letter, or other designation. On the irrigation design plan, designate the areas irrigated by each valve, and assign a number to each valve.

     B.     The irrigation design plan, at a minimum, shall contain:

     1.     Location and size of separate water meters for landscape;

     2.     Location, type and size of all components of the irrigation system, including controllers, main and lateral lines, valves, sprinkler heads, moisture sensing devices, rain switches, quick couplers, pressure regulators, and backflow prevention devices;

     3.     Static water pressure at the point of connection to the public water supply;

     4.     Flow rate (gallons per minute), application rate (inches per hour), and design operating pressure (pressure per square inch) for each station;

     5.     Recycled water irrigation systems as specified in Section 4.23.170;

     6.     The following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the chapter and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the irrigation design plan”; and

     7.     The signature of a licensed landscape architect, certified irrigation designer, licensed landscape contractor, or any other person authorized to design an irrigation system. (See Sections 5500.1, 5615, 5641, 5641.1, 5641.2, 5641.3, 5641.4, 5641.5, 5641.6, 6701, 7027.5 of the Business and Professions Code, Section 832.27 of Title 16 of the California Code of Regulations, and Section 6721 of the Food and Agricultural Code.) (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.110 Grading design plan.
     A.    For the efficient use of water, grading of a project site shall be designed to minimize soil erosion, runoff, and water waste. A grading plan shall be submitted as part of the landscape documentation package. A comprehensive grading plan prepared by a civil engineer for other city permits satisfies this requirement.

     1.     The project applicant shall submit a landscape grading plan that indicates finished configurations and elevations of the landscape area including:

     a.     Height of graded slopes;

     b.     Drainage patterns;

     c.     Pad elevations;

     d.     Finish grade; and

     e.     Stormwater retention improvements, if applicable.

     2.     To prevent excessive erosion and runoff, it is highly recommended that project applicants:

     a.     Grade so that all irrigation and normal rainfall remains within property lines and does not drain on to non-permeable hardscapes;

     b.     Avoid disruption of natural drainage patterns and undisturbed soil; and

     c.     Avoid soil compaction in landscape areas.

     3.     The grading design plan shall contain the following statement: “I have complied with the criteria of the chapter and applied them accordingly for the efficient use of water in the grading design plan” and shall bear the signature of a licensed professional as authorized by law. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.120 Certificate of completion.
     A.    The certificate of completion shall include the following six elements:

     1.     Project information sheet that contains:

     a.     Date,

     b.     Project name,

     c.     Project applicant name, telephone, and mailing address,

     d.     Project address and location, and

     e.     Property owner name, telephone, and mailing address;

     2.     Certification by either the signer of the landscape design plan, the signer of the irrigation design plan, or the licensed landscape contractor that the landscape project has been installed per the approved landscape documentation package:

     a.     Where there have been significant changes made in the field during construction, these “as-built” or record drawings shall be included with the certification,

     b.     A diagram of the irrigation plan showing hydrozones shall be kept with the irrigation controller for subsequent management purposes;

     3.     Irrigation scheduling parameters used to set the controller (see Section 4.23.130);

     4.     Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule (see Section 4.23.140);

     5.     Irrigation audit report (see Section 4.23.150); and

     6.     Soil analysis report, if not submitted with landscape documentation package, and documentation verifying implementation of soil report recommendations (see Section 4.23.080).

     B.     The project applicant shall:

     1.     Submit the signed certificate of completion to the city for review;

     2.     Ensure that copies of the approved certificate of completion are submitted to the local water purveyor and property owner or designee.

     C.     The city shall:

     1.     Receive the signed certificate of completion from the project applicant;

     2.     Approve or deny the certificate of completion. If the certificate of completion is denied, the city shall provide information to the project applicant regarding reapplication, appeal, or other assistance. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.130 Irrigation scheduling.
     A.    For the efficient use of water, all irrigation schedules shall be developed, managed, and evaluated to utilize the minimum amount of water required to maintain plant health. Irrigation schedules shall meet the following criteria:

     1.     Irrigation scheduling shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers.

     2.     Overhead sprinkler irrigation systems shall be scheduled between eight p.m. and ten a.m. unless weather conditions prevent it. If allowable hours of irrigation differ from the local water purveyor, the stricter of the two shall apply. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

     3.     For implementation of the irrigation schedule, particular attention must be paid to irrigation run times, emission device, flow rate, and current reference evapotranspiration, so that applied water meets the estimated total water use. Total annual applied water shall be less than or equal to maximum applied water allowance (MAWA). Actual irrigation schedules shall be regulated by automatic irrigation controllers using current reference evapotranspiration data (e.g., CIMIS) or soil moisture sensor data.

     4.     Parameters used to set the automatic controller shall be developed and submitted for each of the following:

     a.     The establishment period of the plants;

     b.     The established landscape; and

     c.     Temporarily irrigated areas.

     5.     Each irrigation schedule shall consider for each station all of the following that apply:

     a.     Irrigation interval (days between irrigation);

     b.     Irrigation run times (hours or minutes per irrigation event to avoid runoff);

     c.     Number of cycle starts required for each irrigation event to avoid runoff;

     d.     Amount of applied water scheduled to be applied on a monthly basis;

     e.     Application rate setting;

     f.      Root depth setting;

     g.     Plant type setting;

     h.     Soil type;

     i.      Slope factor setting;

     j.      Shade factor setting; and

     k.     Irrigation uniformity or efficiency setting. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.140 Landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule.
     A.    Landscapes shall be maintained to ensure water use efficiency. A regular maintenance schedule shall be submitted with the certificate of completion.

     B.     A regular maintenance schedule shall include, but not be limited to, routine inspection; auditing, adjustment and repair of the irrigation system and its components; aerating and dethatching turf areas; topdressing with compost, replenishing mulch; fertilizing; pruning; weeding in all landscape areas, and removing obstructions to emission devices. Operation of the irrigation system outside the normal watering window is allowed for auditing and system maintenance.

     C.     Repair of all irrigation equipment shall be done with the originally installed components or their equivalents or with components with greater efficiency. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.150 Irrigation audit, irrigation survey, and irrigation water use analysis.
     A.    All landscape irrigation audits shall be conducted by a third party certified landscape irrigation auditor. Landscape audits shall not be conducted by the person who designed the landscape or installed the landscape.

     B.     In large projects or projects with multiple landscape installations (i.e., production home developments) an auditing rate of one in seven lots or approximately fifteen (15) percent will satisfy this requirement.

     C.     For new construction and rehabilitated landscape projects installed after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, the project applicant shall submit an irrigation audit report with the certificate of completion to the city that may include, but is not limited to: inspection, system tune-up, system test with distribution uniformity, reporting overspray or run off that causes overland flow, and preparation of an irrigation schedule, including configuring irrigation controllers with application rate, soil types, plant factors, slope, exposure and any other factors necessary for accurate programming. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.160 Irrigation efficiency.
     For the purpose of determining estimated total water use, average irrigation efficiency is assumed to be 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip system devices. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.170 Recycled water.
     A.    The installation of recycled water irrigation systems shall allow for the current and future use of recycled water.

     B.     All recycled water irrigation systems shall be designed and operated in accordance with all applicable local and state laws.

     C.     Landscapes using recycled water are considered special landscape areas. The ET adjustment factor for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.180 Model homes.
     A.    All model homes that are landscaped shall use signs and written information to demonstrate the principles of water efficient landscapes described in this chapter.

     B.     Signs shall be used to identify the model as an example of a water efficient landscape featuring elements such as hydrozones, irrigation equipment, and others that contribute to the overall water efficient theme. Signage shall include information about the site water use as landscape; and demonstrate low water use approaches to landscaping such as using native plants, graywater systems, and rainwater catchment systems.

     C.     Information shall be provided about designing, installing, managing, and maintaining water efficient landscapes. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.190 Provisions for existing landscaping.
     The city may by mutual agreement, designate another agency, such as a local water purveyor, to implement some or all of the requirements contained in this chapter. The city may collaborate with local water purveyors to define each entity’s specific responsibilities relating to this chapter. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.200 Effective precipitation.
     If the city considers effective precipitation (twenty-five (25) percent of annual precipitation) in tracking water use it will use the following equation to calculate maximum applied water allowance:

     MAWA = (ETo - Eppt)(0.62)[(0.55 x LA) + (0.45 x SLA)] for residential areas.

     MAWA = (ETo - EPPT)(0.62)[(0.45 x LA) + (0.55 x SLA)] for nonresidential areas. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

4.23.210 Penalties.
     A.    The following actions are prohibited and are violations of this code:

     1.     Failure to comply with provisions of an approved landscape documentation package.

     B.     Any violation of subsection A shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code. (Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

 

 

Appendix A Reference Evapotranspiration (ETo) Table.

County and City

Jan

Feb

Mar

Apr

May

Jun

Jul

Aug

Sep

Oct

Nov

Dec

Annual ETo

LOS ANGELES

Burbank

2.1

2.8

3.7

4.7

5.1

6.0

6.6

6.7

5.4

4.0

2.6

2.0

51.7

Claremont

2.0

2.3

3.4

4.6

5.0

6.0

7.0

7.0

5.3

4.0

2.7

2.1

51.3

El Dorado

1.7

2.2

3.6

4.8

5.1

5.7

5.9

5.9

4.4

3.2

2.2

1.7

46.3

Glendale

2.0

2.2

3.3

3.8

4.7

4.8

5.7

5.6

4.3

3.3

2.2

1.8

43.7

Glendora

2.0

2.5

3.6

4.9

5.4

6.1

7.3

6.8

5.7

4.2

2.6

2.0

53.1

Gorman

1.6

2.2

3.4

4.6

5.5

7.4

7.7

7.1

5.9

3.6

2.4

1.1

52.4

Hollywood Hills

2.1

2.2

3.8

5.4

6.0

6.5

6.7

6.4

5.2

3.7

2.8

2.1

52.8

Lancaster

2.1

3.0

4.6

5.9

8.5

9.7

11.0

9.8

7.3

4.6

2.8

1.7

71.1

Long Beach

1.8

2.1

3.3

3.9

4.5

4.3

5.3

4.7

3.7

2.8

1.8

1.5

39.7

Los Angeles

2.2

2.7

3.7

4.7

5.5

5.8

6.2

5.9

5.0

3.9

2.6

1.9

50.1

Monrovia

2.2

2.3

3.8

4.3

5.5

5.9

6.9

6.4

5.1

3.2

2.5

2.0

50.2

Palmdale

2.0

2.6

4.6

6.2

7.3

8.9

9.8

9.0

6.5

4.7

2.7

2.1

66.2

Pasadena

2.1

2.7

3.7

4.7

5.1

6.0

7.1

6.7

5.6

4.2

2.6

2.0

52.3

Pearblossom

1.7

2.4

3.7

4.7

7.3

7.7

9.9

7.9

6.4

4.0

2.6

1.6

59.9

Pomona

1.7

2.0

3.4

4.5

5.0

5.8

6.5

6.4

4.7

3.5

2.3

1.7

47.5

Redondo Beach

2.2

2.4

3.3

3.8

4.5

4.7

5.4

4.8

4.4

2.8

2.4

2.0

42.6

San Fernando

2.0

2.7

3.5

4.6

5.5

5.9

7.3

6.7

5.3

3.9

2.6

2.0

52.0

Santa Clarita

2.8

2.8

4.1

5.6

6.0

6.8

7.6

7.8

5.8

5.2

3.7

3.2

61.5

Santa Monica

1.8

2.1

3.3

4.5

4.7

5.0

5.4

5.4

3.9

3.4

2.4

2.2

44.2

 

(Ord. 443 § 1, 2015; Ord. 416 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 4.24 TREES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 331.

 

4.24.010 Applicability.
     The chapter applies to city trees, as defined in Section 4.24.020. For regulation of protected trees on private property, see Chapter 11.40 of Title 11 of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.020 Definitions.
     The following words shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions for purposes of this chapter:

     “Arborist” means an individual who is certified as an arborist, possesses and maintains a city business license, and is on the official list of city approved arborists at the time the work is performed.

     “Capital improvement project” means the city’s acquisition, expansion or rehabilitation of its land facilities, buildings, equipment or other infrastructure.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city, or designee.

     “City tree” or “city trees” means trees located in the public right-of-way.

     “Commission” means the city’s public works and traffic commission.

     “Damage” or “damaging” means any act which causes or tends to cause significant injury or disfigurement to a city tree, including the root system, or impairs its structural integrity. This includes, but is not limited to, poisoning, burning, or girdling a city tree.

     “Development activity” means any development work upon private property including, but not limited to:

     A.    Construction, installation, reconstruction, demolition, or moving of a building or structure; or

     B.     Grading, excavation, or compaction of soil; or

     C.     Flatwork.

     “Director” means the director of public works or designee.

 

     “Incidental trimming” means pruning or cutting out of water sprouts, suckers, twigs, or branches less than three inches in diameter whereby the existing shape and size of the city tree is unaffected. Removal of dead wood, broken branches, and stubs are permitted within this definition. Trimming or pruning of roots is not permitted within this definition.

     “Letter of appeal” means a written letter signed by an appellant. Said term shall not include electronic mail.

     “Maintain” or “maintenance” means trimming, spraying, bracing, staking, treating for disease or injury, or other work performed to promote the life, growth, health or beauty of a city tree, excluding watering.

     “Official list of city approved arborists” means the list prepared and maintained by the director identifying all approved arborists that may perform work on city trees. A copy of said list shall be available in the office of the director.

     “Official map of city trees” means the city’s official map of city trees, a copy of which shall be available in the office of the director, which shall identify the species of all city trees as determined by the city council.

     “Person” means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity.

     “Project area” means any development activity within thirty (30) feet of a city tree.

     “Property owner” means a person who is the record owner, as shown on the Los Angeles County assessor’s latest secured real property assessment roll.

     “Pruning” shall have the same meaning as “trimming.”

     “Public right-of-way” means any city-owned or controlled property used for public travel and/or as a buffer between road use and private property.

     “Removal,” “remove,” or “removed” means transplanting a tree, complete extraction of a tree, or cutting of a city tree so that only a stump remains.

     “Street block” means property on either side of any street.

     “Tree replacement fund” means the fund established by the city council for purposes of planting, maintaining and protecting city trees.

     “Trimming” (also known as “pruning”) means detaching or separating either in whole or in part, any limb, branch, and/or root, from any part of a city tree. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.030 Official map of city trees.
     A.    The city council shall, by resolution, designate the species of all city trees pursuant to the following criteria:

     1.     Desirable characteristics of growth, including avoidance of conflicts with any overhead utilities; and

     2.     Adaptability to local climate, soil and street conditions; and

     3.     Ease of maintenance, including avoidance of invasive roots and limb breakage; and

     4.     Aesthetics, consistency, and compatibility with the neighborhood.

     B.     Prior to any designation or re-designation of species of city tree on a street block, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the city council and provide a minimum of ten days’ notice of the public hearing to the property owners on the affected street block. Notice shall be by first-class U.S. mail.

     C.     The director shall prepare and maintain the official map of city trees, a copy of which shall be available in the office of the director, which shall identify the species of all city trees as determined by the city council.

     D.    The city council hereby authorizes the director, in consultation with the city’s arborist, to determine the number, spacing, and method of planting of all city trees. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.040 Petition for amendment to official map of city trees for entire street block.
     A.    Property owners within a street block may file a petition to amend the official map of city trees in order to request a different species of city tree for a street block than the species of city tree designated in the official map of city trees as follows:

     1.     The petition must be signed by at least eighty (80) percent of the property owners on the street block and must indicate agreement on the species of city tree proposed to be planted.

     2.     The petition shall be delivered to the director along with any fees required as adopted by city council resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

     3.     Upon receipt of the petition and the required fees, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the city council and provide a minimum of ten days’ notice of the public hearing to the property owners on the affected street block. Notice shall be by standard first-class U.S. mail.

     4.     The city council shall approve the petition if it can find that the proposed species of city tree to be planted is consistent with the findings set forth in Section 4.24.030(A).

     5.     Following the public hearing, the city council shall either approve or deny the petition. Should the city council approve the petition, the city council shall amend, by resolution, the species of city tree designated for that street block.

     B.     The city shall replace the city trees on that street block with the new approved species as existing city trees die. Should the petitioning property owners wish to remove the existing city trees and replace with the new species earlier, the property owners shall be subject to the following:

     1.     The city and property owners shall not be subject to the requirements of Sections 4.24.060 and 4.24.070, respectively; and

     2.     Removal of the city trees and planting of the newly approved city trees shall be performed by the city; however, the city shall be fully reimbursed for its costs by each of the petitioning property owners jointly and severally. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, cost of removal of existing city trees, the cost of the new city trees, cost of planting the new city trees, and cost of an arborist to monitor the new city trees for a period of one year. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.050 Petition to remove existing city tree and replace with a different species.
     A.    An individual property owner may petition to remove an existing city tree(s) immediately abutting the property owner’s property and replace it with a new species as follows:

     1.     The property owner shall submit a petition which shall identify:

     a.     The location of the subject city tree(s) to be re-designated; and

     b.     The facts supporting the requested exemption; and

     c.     The species of city tree proposed to be planted, if any.

     2.     The petition shall be delivered to the director along with any fees required.

     3.     Upon receipt of the petition and the required fees, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the city council and provide a minimum of ten days’ notice of the public hearing to the property owners on the affected street block. Notice shall be by first-class U.S. mail.

     4.     The city council shall approve the petition if it can find that the proposed species of city tree to be planted is consistent with the findings set forth in Section 4.24.030(A).

     5.     Following the public hearing, the city council shall either approve or deny the petition.

     B.     Should the petitioning property owner receive city council approval and wish to remove the existing city tree(s) and replace with the new species of city tree immediately, the property owners shall be subject to the following:

     1.     The city and property owner shall not be subject to the requirements of Sections 4.24.060 and 4.24.070, respectively; and

     2.     Removal of the city tree(s) and planting of the newly approved city tree(s) shall be performed by the city; however, the city shall be fully reimbursed for its costs by each the petitioning property owner. Such costs shall include, but are not limited to, cost of removal of existing city tree(s), the cost of the new city tree(s), cost of planting the new city tree(s), and cost of an arborist to monitor the new city tree(s) for a period of one year. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.060 Removal of city trees as initiated by city.
     A.    The director may authorize and direct the removal of a city tree at city expense subject to the following requirements:

     1.     The director finds that, in his or her judgment, one or more of the following conditions exist:

     a.     A city tree is dead; or

     b.     A city tree is diseased and cannot be cured with reasonable effort and cost; or

     c.     A city tree is a hazard; or

     d.     A city tree creates such an unreasonable burden upon an abutting property owner, it would be unfair or unjust to allow the city tree to remain and/or creates an unreasonable economic burden or hardship upon the property owner.

     2.     The director’s finding(s) is supported by a written recommendation from either the city’s arborist or an independent arborist selected by the director. This requirement shall not be applicable for removal pursuant to subsection (A)(1)(a).

     3.     Prior to the removal of a city tree, the city shall provide notice to the property owner of each property on the affected street block. The notice shall state the location of the city tree to be removed, the conditions that exist which support removal, and the appeal process to challenge the director’s decision to remove a tree as set forth in subsection C. Notice shall be by first-class U.S. mail.

     4.     A determination by the director shall be final and effective unless the decision is timely appealed to the commission as set forth in subsection C.

     5.     The director shall replant a new city tree when possible following the removal of a city tree.

     B.     Notwithstanding the procedure set forth in subsection A, the director may elect to defer his or her decision to remove a city tree and to have the commission make the findings set forth in subsection (A)(1). In such case, the director shall make a recommendation to the commission supported by the written recommendation from either the city’s arborist or an independent arborist selected by the director. The commission shall proceed in accordance with the notice and hearing procedure set forth in subsections (C)(2) and (C)(3) prior to rendering a final decision.

     C.     A determination by the director shall be final and effective unless appealed to the commission in accordance with the following procedure:

     1.     Any interested party shall submit a letter of appeal to the city clerk, together with any required fees, within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of issuance of the city’s notice of proposed city tree removal, and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal and any supporting evidence.

     2.     If a letter of appeal is timely received by the city clerk, the decision of removal shall be stayed and the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission no later than sixty (60) days following the city’s receipt of the letter of appeal. Should the appellant desire a new arborist report to be considered by the commission, the appellant shall include such request in his or her letter of appeal. The appellant shall be responsible for selecting the arborist from the official “city approved arborist and tree trimmers list,” a copy of which shall be available in the offices of the director of community development, and paying for the arborist report and submitting it to the director within thirty (30) days after filing the letter of appeal.

     3.     Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in writing to the property owner of each property on the affected street block at least ten days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall state the date and time of the public hearing and a brief description of the appeal. Notice shall be by first-class U.S. mail.

     4.     Following such hearing by the commission, it shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse or modify the director’s decision. If the director made a recommendation in accordance with subsection B, the commission may approve, deny, or approve/deny in part, the recommendation. The commission may include any reasonable conditions as part of its decision.

     D.    Appeal to City Manager. The determination by the commission shall be final and effective unless appealed to the city manager in accordance with the following procedure:

     1.     Any interested party shall submit a letter of appeal to the city manager, together with any required fees, within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of the commission’s decision, and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal and any supporting evidence. For purposes of this section, the date of the commission’s decision shall be the meeting date at which the commission took action on the appeal.

     2.     If a letter of appeal and any required fees are timely received by the city clerk, the city clerk will provide a notice of appeal to the property owner of each property on the affected street block. The notice of appeal shall provide a date by which any written comments or statements, including any supporting documents, may be submitted for consideration by the city manager. Following said date, the city manager shall review the minutes of the commission, the letter of appeal and any supporting documents, and any other statements timely received during the appeal. Following such review and consideration de novo, and without any public hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse or modify the decision by the commission. The city manager’s decision shall be in writing and may include any reasonable conditions as part of his or her decision.

     E.     Appeal to City Council. The determination by the city manager shall be final and effective unless appealed to the city council in accordance with the following procedure:

     1.     Any interested party shall submit a letter of appeal to the city clerk, together with any required fees, within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of the city manager’s decision, and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal and any supporting evidence. For purposes of this section, the date of the city manager’s decision shall be the date shown on the city manager’s written decision.

     2.     If a letter of appeal is timely received by the city clerk, he or she shall schedule a public hearing before the city council no later than sixty (60) days following the city clerk’s receipt of the letter of appeal.

     3.     Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in accordance with subsection (C)(3).

     4.     Following such hearing by the city council conducted de novo, it shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse or modify the decision by the commission. The city council may include any reasonable conditions as part of its decision.

     5.     The determination of the city council shall be final and effective immediately.

     F.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, a city tree may be removed without notice or the right to appeal if:

 

     1.     In the reasonable judgment of the city manager and in consultation with the city arborist or an independent arborist selected by the director, the delay involved in issuing said notice, conducting public hearing(s) and potential appeals would constitute an imminent hazard to persons or property; or

     2.     Removal of a city tree is necessary in furtherance of a capital improvement project.

     G.    In any case, where the commission, the city manager, or the city council desires another arborist report before it renders a decision, the selection of the arborist shall be mutually agreed upon by both the city and the appellant and the cost of the report shall be equally shared by the city and the appellant. If the parties are unable to mutually agree upon an arborist, the commission, the city manager, or the city council, as applicable, shall select the arborist. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.070 Removal of city trees as initiated by abutting property owner.
     A.    Any property owner desiring to remove a city tree abutting his or her property shall submit an application, along with any required fees, to the director requesting such removal to be undertaken by the city. The application shall be on a form approved by the director and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the request and any supporting evidence.

     B.     Upon receipt of an application and the required fees, the director shall schedule a public hearing before the commission.

     C.     Notice of the public hearing shall be provided in writing to the property owner of each property on the street block at least ten days prior to the public hearing. The notice shall state the date and time of the public hearing and a brief description of the action. Notice shall be by first-class U.S. mail.

     D.    The commission shall approve the request for removal if it finds any of the following:

     1.     The city tree creates an unreasonable burden upon the abutting property owner; and/or

     2.     The city tree creates an unreasonable economic burden or hardship upon the abutting property owner; and/or

     3.     The city tree creates a disproportionate impact on the abutting property owner and/or street frontage based on the size of the city tree.

     E.     Following the public hearing by the commission, it shall consider the matter and may approve, deny, or approve/deny in part. The commission may include any reasonable conditions as part of its decision.

     F.     The determination by the commission shall be final and effective unless appealed to the city manager and/or the city council in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 4.24.060(D) and (E), respectively, except that the city manager and city council shall render the decision based on the findings set forth in subsection D.

     G.    In any case, where the commission, the city manager, or the city council desires another arborist report before it renders a decision, the selection of the arborist shall be mutually agreed upon by both the city and the appellant and the cost of the report shall be equally shared by the city and the appellant. If the parties are unable to mutually agree upon an arborist, the commission, the city manager, or the city council, as applicable, shall select the arborist.

     H.    Where the applicant receives a final decision of approval by either the commission or city manager and wishes to remove the city tree immediately, the costs to do so shall be shared equally by the city and the applicant.

     I.      The director shall replant a new city tree when possible following the removal of a city tree. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.080 Removal of city trees as initiated by public utility.
     A.    Non-Emergency Removal of a City Tree.

     1.     In such case as a public utility determines that a city tree should be removed in a non-emergency situation, the public utility shall submit a letter to the director setting forth the location of the tree, the reasons for removal of the tree, and any supporting documentation.

     2.     The director shall approve said request upon the showing of good cause, in his or her reasonable determination.

     3.     In addition to receiving approval from the director, the public utility shall obtain an encroachment permit from the director before removal.

     4.     The procedures set forth in Sections 4.24.060 and 4.24.070 shall not be applicable.

     B.     Emergency Removal of a City Tree. The requirements of subsection A shall not be applicable where removal of a city tree is required in an emergency situation to protect or maintain overhead public utility lines, or existing subsurface water, sewer, or other utility lines. In such case, a representative of the public utility shall notify the city manager in writing within seventy-two (72) hours of removal of the city tree setting forth the location of the city tree, the justification for removal, and any supporting evidence, including, but not limited to, pictures, arborist reports, and other supporting documentation justifying removal of the city tree. Failure to comply with this provision shall be deemed a misdemeanor and be subject to the fines and related penalties set forth in Section 4.24.110.

     C.     The public utility shall bear the full cost of removal of any city tree pursuant to removal under this section. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.090 Maintenance and watering of city trees.
     A.    The city shall maintain all city trees except as follows:

     1.     A property owner may maintain a city tree in accordance with the terms and conditions of the city’s Adopt-a-Tree Program, as established by the city council and implemented by the director.

     2.     A property owner may perform incidental trimming, as defined in Section 4.24.020, on city trees abutting his or her property subject to prior city approval of an incidental tree trimming permit.

     3.     A public utility may perform maintenance on city trees to protect utility lines or equipment, or existing subsurface water, sewer, or other utility lines, subject to obtaining an encroachment permit from the director. Trimming shall be performed in a manner that is consistent with the requirements of the California Public Utilities Commission.

     4.     A public utility may perform maintenance on city trees without an encroachment permit in an emergency situation in order to protect or maintain overhead public utility lines, or existing subsurface water, sewer, or other utility lines. In such case, a representative of the public utility shall notify the city manager in writing within seventy-two (72) hours of emergency maintenance of the city tree(s) setting forth the location of the city tree(s), the justification for emergency maintenance, and any supporting evidence, including, but not limited to, pictures, arborist reports, and other supporting documentation of the city tree. Failure to comply with this provision shall be deemed a misdemeanor and be subject to the fines and related penalties set forth in Section 4.24.110.

     B.     Any person who performs maintenance on any city tree, except as may be authorized in subsection A, shall be in violation of this chapter.

     C.     It shall be the duty and responsibility of a property owner to water city trees abutting their property. For watering guidelines of various species of trees, the city has adopted the “Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines,” which are available in the office of the director of community development and on the city’s website. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

4.24.100 Protection requirements during development activity.
     A.    In recognition that development activity may present harm to city trees, this section is intended to ensure that reasonable safeguards are taken to ensure that city trees are protected during development activity.

     B.     Prior to commencing development activity in a project area, a property owner or applicant shall cause an arborist report to be prepared by an arborist from the official list of city approved arborists with respect to all city trees that are located in the project area. Said arborist report shall be delivered to the director for his or her review to determine what measures, if any, are required to protect the health of the city tree(s).

     1.     The arborist report shall contain the following information:

     a.     The name, address and daytime telephone number of the preparer.

     b.     For each city tree, the circumference and diameter of the trunk, measured fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade or, in the case of multiple trunks, the cumulative diameter of all trunks that are fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade.

     c.     The locations of the city tree(s) and the outlines and dimensions of the respective canopies on a corresponding site plan.

     d.     Aesthetic assessment of the city tree(s), considering factors such as, but not limited to, symmetry, broken branches, unbalanced crown, excessive horizontal branching.

     e.     Recommendations to remedy structural problems where required.

     f.      Evidence of disease.

     g.     Identification of insects or pests.

     h.     Evaluation of vigor, such as new tip growth, leaf color, abnormal bark, presence of deadwood and thinning of crown.

     i.      Health rating based on the archetype tree of the same species.

     j.      Recommendations to improve the health of the city tree(s), such as insect or disease control, trimming and fertilization.

     k.     Evaluation of the proposed development activity as it impacts each city tree, including suggested mitigation and/or future maintenance measures where required.

     2.     In lieu of the property owner or applicant obtaining an arborist report, the property owner may authorize the director to obtain the arborist report on behalf of the property owner or applicant, subject to a deposit and full reimbursement of the cost of the arborist report.

     3.     All arborist reports will be reviewed by city staff, in consultation with an arborist, if necessary. If arborist review is required, such review is subject to a deposit, based on a reasonable estimate of the director’s and/or consultant’s/arborist’s costs to be incurred by the city to conduct the review, or as may be established by fee resolution of the city council, whichever is greater.

     4.     The property owner shall comply with the recommendations of the arborist.

     C.     Remedies for Non-Compliance. In the event of non-compliance with any requirement in this section, the director may issue a stop work order for all or part of the development activity on the property. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

 

4.24.110 Violations and enforcement.
     A.    The following actions are prohibited and are violations of this code:

     1.     Performing any maintenance on a city tree, unless authorized to do so pursuant to Section 4.24.090(A).

     2.     Failing of a property owner to water a city tree abutting his or her property.

     3.     Damaging any city tree.

     4.     Causing a city tree to die.

     5.     Failure to comply with the protection requirements of Section 4.24.100.

     B.     Any violation of subsection A shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, and/or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code.

     C.     In addition to the penalties imposed in subsection B, a person who is in violation of subsection A shall be required to pay restitution to the city to mitigate the loss of the city tree(s) as follows:

     1.     Persons who commit the following violations are required to pay restitution:

     a.     Damaging any city tree, such that the city tree dies within one year from the act causing damage.

     b.     Causing a city tree to die.

     2.     The amount of restitution shall be established in the city’s tree restitution chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     3.     Restitution shall be paid into the city’s tree replacement fund.

     4.     Failure to pay restitution after the date ordered shall constitute a new, continuing, and separate offense each day that the restitution amount remains unpaid. All civil, criminal, and/or administrative remedies may be exercised for each such offense.

     5.     Any person who is required to pay restitution and who meets the low, very-low, or extremely-low income categories as established annually by the California Department of Housing and Community Development may apply for a financial hardship waiver as follows:

     a.     The request for waiver shall be on a form approved by the director and available in the office of the director;

     b.     The completed form shall be submitted to the director within ten days of the notification of required payment of restitution;

     c.     Upon receipt of such application, the director shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing;

     d.     At the time fixed for the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence demonstrating a financial hardship;

     e.     A financial hardship shall be determined to exist if the person requesting the waiver meets the then-current low, very-low, or extremely-low income categories as established annually by the California Department of Housing and Community Development; and

     f.      If the hearing officer finds that a financial hardship does not exist, the hearing officer shall deny the application. If the hearing officer finds that a financial hardship exists, the hearing officer may modify and/or waive the amount of restitution that is required to be paid. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final. (Ord. 424 § 1, 2014)

Chapter 4.28 COLLECTION OF SEWER MAINTENANCE CHARGES
4.28.010 Declaration of nuisance.
     Nonpayment of sewer charges set by ordinance constitutes a nuisance. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

4.28.020 Responsibility of the utility company.
     The Crescenta Valley Water District (“district”), or its successor in interest, shall determine the amount of the sewer charges (“charge”) for properties located in the city of La Cañada Flintridge. These charges shall be derived on the same basis as the sewer maintenance and operational charge which district is assessing for other properties within the district, but outside of the boundaries of the city. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

4.28.030 Responsibility of property owners.
     Every person owning property within the city of La Cañada Flintridge and which is served with sanitary sewers maintained by the district shall pay the charges set by the district. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

4.28.040 Procedures for collection.
     If a property owner and/or resident of this city has not paid district the amount of the charges to that property, then on or before May 1st of each year, district shall provide the city clerk with a list of those properties which have not paid the charges, and a statement of the amount of said charge, including delinquent penalties and other proper assessed charges along with a summary of the district’s efforts in collecting the charges and other amounts owing. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

4.28.050 Procedure for hearing before city council.
     A.    The clerk shall then set the report for hearing before the city council and shall, not less than ten days prior to the date set for such hearing, serve a notice of assessment upon all of the owners of property affected, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council shall hear and pass upon the report together with any objections or protests thereto. Such service shall be made by certified mail addressed to the owner of the property at the address of the property and also to the address shown on the latest assessment roll. The failure of any such owner to receive notice of assessment shall not affect the power of the city or its officers or employees to proceed as provided in this chapter, nor shall it invalidate the assessment against the involved parcel or parcels.

     B.     Upon the date and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report together with any objections or protests which may be raised by any of the owners of any property liable to be assessed for the charges and other costs. The city may confirm or reject the report. Before confirming the report, the city council may make revisions, corrections or modifications in the report as it deems just. The city council may adjourn the hearing from time to time. The decision of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive.

     C.     Upon confirmation of the report, the city council shall adopt the resolution specifying the amount assessed against each lot, as shown on the latest available assessment roll in accordance with the report. Unless otherwise provided in such resolution, any such assessment, together with a charge to cover the expenses incurred by the city, in the amount of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per parcel, shall become due thirty (30) days after adoption of such resolution and shall thereafter bear interest at the rate of seven percent per year. The city council may provide in the resolution for payment to become due at any later date, in total sum or in installments.

     D.    All assessments may be paid by tender of the amount due to the city treasurer. The city treasurer, prior to August 10th of each year, shall determine if any assessment or portion thereof is due or unpaid and if he or she so determines, he or she shall file with the county auditor his or her statement of the amount due specifying the property on which such amount is assessed, together with a certified copy of the assessment resolution. Such assessment shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall be applicable to such special assessment. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

 

4.28.060 Payment of moneys to the district.
     The city treasurer shall pay over to the district moneys received pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, less moneys authorized to be retained by the city for the costs of collecting the charges. (Ord. 86 § 2, 1982)

Chapter 4.30 HUNTING, DISCHARGE OF WEAPONS AND USE OF BOWS AND ARROWS
4.30.010 Hunting prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer or animal control officer acting in the performance of his or her official duties, or other person authorized by the city manager, to hunt any animal within the city boundaries. (Ord. 257 § 2, 1996)

 

4.30.020 Prohibition on discharge of weapons.
     It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer or animal control officer acting in the performance of his or her official duties, to shoot, fire or discharge, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged, in the city, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, firearm or other device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging, any dangerous missile or any cartridge, shell, ammunition or device containing any explosive substance designed or intended to be used in or fired from any gun, revolver, pistol or firearm, except when it may be deemed necessary to do so in order to protect life or property, or to destroy, kill, distract, scare or immobilize any predatory or dangerous animal which poses an immediate threat. For purposes of this section, the use and/or discharge of arrows from bows shall be inapplicable. (Ord. 257 § 2, 1996)

 

4.30.030 Prohibition on use of bows and arrows on city-owned property and public rights-of-way.
     It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer or animal control officer acting in the performance of his or her official duties, to use, shoot or discharge, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be used, shot or discharged, on any city-owned property or public rights-of-way, any bow and arrow or similar device. For purposes of this section, such prohibition shall not apply to motion or still photography productions operating under a valid city issued permit nor shall this provision apply to any person who uses, shoots or discharges an arrow from a bow when necessary to do so in order to protect life or property, or to destroy, kill, distract, scare or immobilize any predatory or dangerous animal which poses an immediate threat. (Ord. 257 § 2, 1996)

 

4.30.040 Penalty.
     Every person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Chapter 1.04 of this code. (Ord. 257 § 2, 1996)

Chapter 4.32 FIREWORKS AND PYROTECHNIC DEVICES
4.32.010 Sale prohibited.
     No person shall offer for sale or sell any fireworks or pyrotechnic device of any kind in the city. This section shall not apply to any person licensed by the state of California to sell fireworks or pyrotechnic devices where the city is not authorized to require an additional permit pursuant to Section 12640 of the Health and Safety Code of the state of California. (Ord. 108 § 2, 1984)

 

4.32.020 Use or discharge prohibited.
     No person shall use or discharge any fireworks or pyrotechnic device of any kind in the city, except in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 4.01 of this code, known as the fire code of the city. (Ord. 108 § 2, 1984)

 

4.32.030 Exception.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to toy pistols, toy cranes, toy guns, or other similar devices in which paper caps containing not more than twenty-five hundredths grain of explosive compound per cap are used. (Ord. 108 § 2, 1984)

 

4.32.040 Penalty for violation.
     Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment of a period not exceeding six months or both. (Ord. 108 § 2, 1984)

Chapter 4.33 PROPERTY MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS
4.33.010 Purpose.
     The city council has determined that properties which are kept or maintained in such a condition as to be in a substantially worse condition than surrounding properties results in the diminution in the enjoyment, use and property values of such surrounding properties and may, if allowed to exist, create a danger to such surrounding properties or the residents of the city. The purpose of this chapter is to correct and prevent such substandard conditions and, thus, enhance the appearance and value of property in the city, improve the quality of life of the city’s residents and decrease potential hazards to the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.020 Nuisances.
     It is declared a public nuisance for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any premises in this city to maintain such premises in such a manner that any of the following conditions are found to exist or the following acts are found to have been committed thereon:

     A.    Fire Hazards. Any dry or dead shrub or tree, combustible refuse and waste, or any growing material which, by reason of its size, manner of growth or location, constitutes a fire hazard to a building, structure, crop or other property.

     B.     Public Burning. The intentional outdoor burning of any material, structure, matter or thing unless specifically authorized by the Los Angeles County fire department.

     C.     Refuse and Waste. The keeping of any refuse or waste, outside of a receptacle appropriate for the keeping of such refuse or waste, on any property for a period in excess of ten calendar days. “Refuse or waste” means any rubbish, refuse, trash or debris of any kind including without limitation: rubble, asphalt, concrete, plaster, tile, rocks, bricks, soil, building materials, crates, cartons, containers, boxes, machinery or parts thereof, scrap metal or other pieces of metal, trimmings from plants or trees, cans, bottles or barrels.

     D.    Polluted Water. A swimming pool, pond, or other body of water which is abandoned, unattended, unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. Polluted water means that the water in a swimming pool, pond, or other body of water contains bacterial growth, algae, remains of insects, remains of deceased animals, rubbish, refuse, debris, papers, or any other foreign matter or material which, because of its quantity or nature, constitutes an unhealthy, unsafe or unsightly condition.

     E.     Improper Storage. The storage or maintenance upon the property, of any of the following:

     1.     Motor vehicles, trailers, campers, boats, or other mobile equipment within any front yard area as defined in Section 11.31.010 of this code, excluding driveways.

     2.     Inoperative, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled motor vehicles or parts thereof upon any property for a period in excess of ten days. “Motor vehicle” as used in this chapter shall be defined as set forth in Section 670 of the Vehicle Code. An “inoperative motor vehicle” includes, but is not limited to, vehicles which cannot be immediately started and driven due to a lack of fuel, lack of necessary parts, a malfunctioning engine or other malfunctioning systems or parts, a lack of one or more wheels or tires or a complete or nearly complete lack of air in any of the vehicle’s tires. This section shall not apply to a vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner or where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property.

     3.     Abandoned, broken or discarded furniture, household appliances or equipment visible from a public street or other public or private property for periods in excess of ten days.

     4.     Garbage cans or refuse receptacles in front or side yards and visible from a public street, except as permitted by Section 9.12.110 of this code.

     5.     Furniture, other than lawn or patio furniture, on porches or in required front or side yards, for a period in excess of ten days.

     F.     Improper Maintenance.

     1.     Maintaining property where buildings exist in any of the following conditions:

     a.     The structure(s) has been left boarded up for a period in excess of ten days without a valid demolition or building permit on file with the La Cañada Flintridge building department.

     b.     The structure(s) has been left open and unsecured from trespassers, children or vandals.

     c.     The structure(s) has been left in a state of partial construction and, where for ten days or more, no current (unexpired) building permit was on file with the La Cañada Flintridge building department to complete the construction.

     2.     The property contains unpainted buildings or buildings with chipped or peeling paint causing, or likely to cause, dry rot, warping, or termite infestation.

     3.     The structure(s) contains broken windows, in excess of ten days.

     4.     The property contains overgrown vegetation that:

     a.     Results in a detriment to neighboring properties or property values or causes a hazardous condition to pedestrians and/or vehicular traffic;

     b.     Is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other nuisances.

     5.     The property maintains any type of dead vegetation.

     6.     The property lacks proper landscaping in accordance with the general landscaping requirements as set forth in the La Cañada Flintridge zoning code or as otherwise specifically required by this code.

     7.     There exists an encroachment(s) into required yard areas which is not specifically permitted under this code.

     8.     The property is allowed to maintain an attractive nuisance dangerous to children in the form of:

     a.     Abandoned and broken equipment;

     b.     Hazardous or unfenced pools, ponds and excavations;

     c.     Neglected, unsecured or abandoned machinery.

     9.     The property is in such a condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Civil Code Section 3480.

     10.   The property maintains any device, decoration, design, fence, vehicle or structure which, by reason of its condition, is unsightly or deteriorated or maintained in a state of disrepair.

     11.   The property is so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use, or property values of such adjacent properties.

     G.    Graffiti. Permitting or allowing any graffiti to remain on any building, wall, fence, vehicle or structure for a period in excess of five days.

     H.    Unsafe Buildings and Other Structures. Any building, driveway, or structure which has any of the following conditions or defects:

     1.     Whenever any door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other means of exit is not of sufficient width or size, or is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of exit, in case of fire or panic, for all persons housed or assembled therein who would be required to, or might use such door, aisle, passageway, stairway or other means to exit.

     2.     Whenever any portion thereof has been damaged by earthquake, wind, flood, or by any other cause, in such a manner that the structural strength or stability thereof is appreciably less than the minimum requirements of this code for a new building of similar structure, purpose or location.

     3.     Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance or ornamentation thereof is likely to fall, or to become detached or dislodged, or to collapse and thereby injure persons or damage property.

     4.     Whenever any portion or member or appurtenance or ornamentation on the exterior thereof is not of sufficient strength or stability or is not so anchored, attached, or fastened in place so as to be capable of resisting wind, earthquake, live-load or dead-load as specified in the Los Angeles County Building Code, without exceeding the working stresses permitted.

     5.     Whenever any portion thereof has settled to such an extent that walls or other structural portions have materially less resistance to winds or earthquakes than is required in the case of new construction.

     6.     Whenever any portion thereof, because of dilapidation, deterioration, decay, faulty construction, or because of the removal or movement of some portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building or portion thereof, or some other cause, is likely to partially or completely collapse or some portion of the foundation or underpinning is likely to fall or give way.

     7.     Whenever any portion thereof is manifestly unsafe for the purpose for which it is used.

     8.     Whenever any portion thereof has been so damaged by fire, wind, earthquake, flood, or other calamity, or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to become an attractive nuisance to children who might play therein to their detriment, or as to afford a harbor for vagrants, criminals or immoral persons, or as to enable persons to resort thereto for the purpose of committing a nuisance or unlawful or immoral acts.

     9.     Whenever any portion thereof has been constructed or which now exists or is maintained in violation of any specific requirement or prohibition applicable to such building or structure of the building regulations of this city as set forth in the Los Angeles County Building Code as adopted by La Cañada Flintridge, or of any law or ordinance of this state or city relating to the construction, condition, location or structure of buildings.

     10.   Whenever any portion thereof, that is used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, is unsanitary or unfit for human habitation or is in a condition that is likely to cause sickness or disease when so determined by the health officer, or is likely to cause injury or be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of those living within.

     11.   Whenever any portion thereof, that is used or intended to be used for dwelling purposes, has light, air, and sanitation facilities inadequate to protect the health, safety or general welfare of persons living within.

     12.   Whenever any portion thereof that is, by reason of obsolescence, dilapidated condition, deterioration, damage, electric wiring, gas connections, heating apparatus, or other cause, in such condition as to be a fire hazard and is so situated as to endanger life or other buildings or property in the vicinity or provide a ready fuel supply to augment the spread and intensity of fire arising from any cause.

     13.   Whenever any portion thereof does not conform to fire resistive requirements of the Los Angeles County Building Code or Los Angeles County Fire Code as adopted by the city.

     14.   Whenever any sidewalk or driveway is debilitated, broken, damaged, or raised to such a degree as to be unsightly if it can be viewed from public property, or to be injurious to property or injurious to persons using said driveway or sidewalk.

     I.      Improper Uses. The following uses of property are not permitted:

     1.     The recreational driving of any form of motorized or motor-driven bike, scooter or vehicle as defined by California Vehicle Code Section 670.

     2.     For living, sleeping or cooking purposes for which the property or structure were not designed or intended to be used for such occupancies.

     J.      Trees, Shrubs, Groundcovers, or Other Plants. Any tree, shrub, groundcover or other plant located on private property shall constitute a public nuisance if any one or more of the following conditions is present: the tree, shrub, groundcover or other plant:

     1.     Is infested with a disease or insect, which in the opinion of the city manager is infectious and may spread disease or insects to other trees or shrubs in the city;

     2.     Interferes with lawfully erected utility equipment constructed or maintained in the city right-of-way;

     3.     Interferes with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or visibility of streets, sidewalks or intersections by any person or vehicle lawfully using the same;

     4.     Restricts visibility of any traffic-marking sign or street light;

     5.     Impedes the flow of runoff water along city curbs;

     6.     Interferes with the maintenance, repair or sweeping in the city’s curbs, gutters or street surfaces;

     7.     Becomes diseased or weakened in such a manner as to be dangerous to persons or vehicles lawfully using the street or sidewalk;

     8.     Harbors rats or other vermin;

     9.     Is in such a condition due to overgrowth, disease, decay or death that it depreciates the aesthetic environment or property values of surrounding property;

     10.   Is otherwise a danger to the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 425 § 1, 2014; Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.030 Conditions or activities immediately deemed nuisances.
     Any condition or activity described in Section 4.33.020 of this chapter which presents an imminent threat to the health, property, safety or welfare of the public or the occupants of the subject property shall be deemed a nuisance regardless of how long the condition or activity has existed. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.040 Abatement by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or removal.
     All or any part of a premises found to constitute a public nuisance, as provided herein, shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, or repair pursuant to the procedures set forth herein. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.050 Authority for adoption, application and purpose.
     The procedure set forth in this chapter for the abatement of a nuisance and the making of the cost of abatement of a nuisance which exists upon a parcel of land, a special assessment against that parcel is adopted pursuant to Government Code Section 38773.5. The procedure set forth in this chapter for abatement applies to any condition which the city declares is a nuisance either by another provision of this chapter or by any other provision of this code or any other law.

     The procedure set forth in this chapter is not exclusive and is in addition to the procedure for abatement which is conferred upon the city by Civil Code Section 3494, Code of Civil Procedure Section 731, Government Code Section 38773 or other lawful authority. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.060 Determination of nuisance.
     The city manager or designee may determine that any premises within the city may constitute a public nuisance pursuant to any provision of Section 4.33.020, and may initiate abatement proceedings pursuant to this chapter. The city manager or designee shall set forth his or her findings in a letter of determination which shall identify the premises and the conditions which constitute the nuisance and shall require that such conditions be corrected within thirty (30) days from the date of receipt of the letter of determination, or within such different time as the city manager or designee deems appropriate. The letter of determination shall be posted on the premises and served upon the owner as provided in Section 4.33.070 of this chapter. “Owner” as used in this chapter shall mean any person in possession and also any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in said premises as disclosed by a current title search from any accredited title company. If the conditions are not remedied within the stated time, the city manager or designee may schedule a hearing to determine whether or not a nuisance exists. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.070 Service of notice of hearing and letter of determination.
     If a hearing is scheduled, the city manager or designee shall cause to be served on the owner of the premises, who is the subject of the letter of determination issued pursuant to Section 4.33.060, a copy of such letter of determination and a notice of hearing.

     The letter of determination and notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, on the owner of the premises, as reflected on the latest tax assessment roll. The letter of determination and notice shall also be posted prominently on the premises. The notice shall be served and posted not less than ten calendar days before the date of the hearing. Failure of the owner to accept or otherwise receive the certified mail shall not affect the validity of any proceeding pursuant to this chapter.

     The notice shall be headed “NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR PART” in letters of not less than one inch in height and shall be substantially in the following form:

 

        NOTICE OF HEARING TO DETERMINE

 

        EXISTENCE OF PUBLIC NUISANCE

 

        AND TO ABATE IN WHOLE OR PART

 

        Notice is hereby given that on the ____ day of ____________ , 20___ , the ___________________ of the City of La Cañada Flintridge determined that a nuisance subject to abatement may exist on the premises situated in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, State of California, known and designated as
________________________ , in said City, and more particularly described as Lot No. ____ , Tract No. ____ . If said premises, in whole or in part, are found to constitute a public nuisance as defined by Section 4.33.020 of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code and if the same are not promptly abated by the owner, such nuisance may be abated by municipal authorities, in which case the cost of such abatement, rehabilitation, repair, or demolition will be assessed upon such premises and such cost will constitute a lien upon the property until paid.

 

Said alleged violations consist of the following:

 

_________________________________________

 

 

On _________ , ______ , at ______ o’ clock, in the City Hall of the City of La Cañada Flintridge, a hearing officer appointed by the City Council, shall conduct a public hearing to hear any and all evidence and testimony as to whether existing conditions on the premises constitute a public nuisance and whether such conditions shall be ordered abated.

(Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.080 Hearing.
     At the time fixed in the notice, a hearing officer appointed by the city council shall hear the testimony of all competent persons desiring to testify respecting the condition constituting the nuisance, including the estimated cost of its abatement and any other matter which may be pertinent. At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether a nuisance exists; and if the hearing officer so concludes, he or she may declare the conditions existing to be a nuisance and direct the person owning the property upon which the nuisance exists to abate it within thirty (30) days after the date of posting on the premises a notice of the order. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.090 Extension of time.
     The hearing officer may grant an extension of time to allow for the abatement of the nuisance if, in his or her opinion, good cause exists for an extension. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.100 Abatement by city.
     If the nuisance is not abated within the time set forth, the city may proceed to abate the nuisance, unless an appeal has been filed pursuant to Section 4.33.150. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.110 Record of expenses.
     The city manager or designee shall cause to be kept an itemized account of the costs involved in enforcing the code and abating the nuisance. The city manager or designee shall cause to be posted conspicuously on the property, and shall also mail to the owner of the property, a statement showing the aforementioned costs. The statement shall be accompanied by a notice to the owner that the costs may be protested as set forth in Section 4.33.110. If the costs are not protested, within ten calendar days after service, it shall be deemed final. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.120 Hearing on statement of expenses.
     The owner may protest the record of expenses by requesting a hearing before the hearing officer or body which initially determined such nuisance to exist, within ten calendar days of service of the statement of costs described in Section 4.33.110. Upon receipt of such a request, the city manager or designee shall schedule a hearing, with at least ten calendar days notice to the owner and in the manner provided in Section 4.33.070. At the time fixed for the hearing on the statement of costs, the hearing officer shall consider the statement and protests or objections raised by the person liable to be assessed for the costs identified in the record of expenses. The hearing officer may revise, correct, or modify the statement as he or she considers just and thereafter shall confirm the cost. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be served by mail as described in Section 4.33.070. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final in the absence of a timely filed appeal as provided in Section 4.33.150 of this chapter. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

 

4.33.130 Abatement costs as special assessment against the property.
     If the property owner does not pay the cost of abating the nuisance within thirty (30) calendar days after the costs become final or the hearing officer confirms the costs of abatement, or after the costs have been confirmed by the city council, if appealed, the costs shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the nuisance was abated and a notice of lien shall be filed. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes apply to this special assessment. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.140 Notice of special assessment.
     In the event of an assessment pursuant to Section 4.33.130, the city clerk shall file, in the office of the county recorder, a certificate substantially in the following form:

 

        NOTICE OF SPECIAL ASSESSMENT

 

        Under the authority of Government Code Section 38773.5 and Section 4.33.020 et seq. of Ordinance No. ______ , the City did on ____________ , 20____ , abate a nuisance upon the real property hereafter described and then on ____________ , 20____ , did assess the costs of the abatement upon the real property. The record owner (or possessor) of such property was ________________________ (name and address). The City of La Cañada Flintridge claims a special assessment on the real property for the expense of doing the work in the amount of $_________ . This amount is a special assessment against the real property until it is paid, with interest at the rate of ____% a year from ____________ , 20____ , (insert date of confirmation of statement), and discharged of record. The real property referred to above, and upon which the special assessment is claimed is that certain parcel of land situated within the City of La Cañada Flintridge, County of Los Angeles, State of California, more particularly described as follows:

 

_______________________________________________________________________________

_______________________________________________________________________________

_______________________________________________________________________________

_______________________________________________________________________________

 

Dated: ______________ , 20____ .

 

        City of La Cañada Flintridge

 

By __________________________

        City Clerk

(Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.150 Appeals.
     A.    Any decision of the hearing officer may be appealed to the city council by the owner of the property or by any member of the city council. Notice of the appeal shall be filed with the city clerk within ten calendar days after the decision becomes final. Late notices of appeal will not be considered. Hearings on appeals shall be limited to those issues raised in the notice of appeal. The city clerk shall give notice of the hearing on the appeal in the manner and to the persons described in Section 4.33.060 not less than ten calendar days prior thereto.

     B.     The filing of a timely notice of appeal shall stay any further proceedings under the determination appealed from until the city council has made its determination.

     C.     The city council may uphold, reverse or modify any determination appealed. The decision of the city council shall become final upon service thereof by certified mail upon those persons described in Section 4.33.060. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.160 Alternates.
     Nothing in the foregoing sections shall be deemed to prevent the city manager or city council from ordering the city prosecutor to commence a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance under applicable Civil or Penal Code provisions as an alternative to the proceedings set forth herein. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.170 Procedure in case of emergency.
     When the conditions which constitute the nuisance pose an immediate threat to the public peace, health or safety, the city council may order the nuisance abated immediately or take steps itself to abate the nuisance after adoption of a resolution declaring the facts which constitute the immediate threat. The resolution shall be adopted by four-fifths vote of the city council. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.180 Penalty for maintaining nuisance.
     A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter may be charged as a misdemeanor or an infraction at the sole discretion of the prosecutor.

     B.     A misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punishable in the manner provided in Chapter 1.04

     C.     An infraction under this chapter shall be punishable by a fine as provided in Chapter 1.04. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

 

4.33.190 Definitions.
     The term “Los Angeles County Building Code,” as used in this chapter, means that certain building code adopted pursuant to Chapter 7.08 of Title 7 of the La Cañada Flintridge municipal code. (Ord. 361 § 2, 2006)

Chapter 4.40 GRAFFITI ABATEMENT
4.40.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Affected property owner” means the owner, renter, lessee, caretaker or other person or entity authorized and responsible for the care and maintenance of the property upon which graffiti has been applied.

     “Graffiti” means any inscription, word, marking, drawing, figure, writing or design, which has been marked, placed, etched, scratched, drawn, painted or otherwise applied to any real property or structure located within the city without the expressed consent or prior knowledge of the affected property owner.

     “Graffiti activity” shall mean the act or process of applying graffiti to any real property or structure located within the city.

     “Real property” means all portions of a lot or parcel excluding that portion subject to the right-of-way owned by the city which is developed for right-of-way purposes. Real property includes all objects located on such portion of the lot or parcel, whether natural or manmade, including, without limitation, walls and fences, trees and other landscaping, and pavement for sidewalks or patios.

     “Structure” means and includes all objects which are manmade, whether affixed to the ground or not, including, without limitation, buildings, street furniture, light posts, street paving, sidewalks and vehicles. A structure may be located on real property or within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1991)

 

4.40.020 Graffiti activity prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in graffiti activity. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1991)

 

4.40.030 Graffiti removal by violator.
     A.    Any person engaging in graffiti activity shall be responsible for the removal and/or elimination of the graffiti within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city and/or affected property owner. Failure of any person to so remove graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter.

     B.     Pursuant to Civil Code Section 1714.1. when a minor has engaged in the graffiti activity, such conduct shall be imputed to the parent or guardian having custody and control of the minor, and such parent or guardian shall be responsible for all such actions to the extent permitted by law. (Ord. 205 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 4.60 SMOKING IN PUBLIC PLACES
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 181.

 

4.60.010 Purpose.
California state law prohibits smoking of tobacco products in all enclosed places of employment and various other locations in California. The purpose of this chapter is to supplement state law by prohibiting smoking and electronic cigarette use in unenclosed places of employment and unenclosed places open to the public. The city council finds that prohibiting smoking and electronic cigarette use in certain areas, as set forth in this chapter, is necessary to protect the public health, safety and general welfare and to ensure a cleaner and more hygienic environment for the city, its residents, and its visitors. (Ord. 444 § 2, 2015; Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.020 Definitions.
     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “Common area at a shopping center” means any indoor or outdoor common area of a shopping center accessible to and usable by the occupants or customers of more than one retail establishment including, but not limited to, a hall, lobby, outdoor eating area, play area, gathering area with either seats or benches provided, or gathering areas having a water feature such as a fountain, and parking lots.

     “Electronic cigarette” means any electronic or battery operated device, which can be used to inhale liquid nicotine, e-liquid, or a similar substance and may resemble smoking.

     “E-liquid” means a solution that is generally used to be atomized into vapor through use of an electronic cigarette.

     “Enclosed” means any area enclosed by a roof and walls with appropriate openings for ingress and egress.

     “Nicotine” means a toxic colorless or yellowish oily liquid that is the chief active constituent of tobacco.

     “Outdoor dining area” means any unenclosed area located on private or public property that is made available to, or customarily used by, the general public and that is designed, established, or regularly used for consuming food and/or beverages or where food and/or beverages are served, whether or not for compensation.

     “Place of employment” means every place that trade or business is carried on, or where any process or operation, directly or indirectly related to any industry, trade or business, is carried on, and where any person is, directly or indirectly, employed by another for direct or indirect gain or profit.

     “Private electronic cigarette lounge” means any enclosed area in or attached to a retail electronic cigarette shop that is dedicated to the use of electronic cigarette products.

     “Public event” means an activity, ceremony, event, fair, farmer’s market, function, gathering, meeting, pageant, or program—whether athletic, civic, cultural, charitable, community, entertainment, intellectual, recreational, or social—that: (1) is open to the general public whether or not a ticket or an admission fee is required; (2) takes place outside of an enclosed structure or building; (3) is sponsored, hosted, organized, or operated by a person, employer, business, nonprofit entity, or the city; and (4) is located at a fixed location.

     “Recreational trail” means any trail identified in the city’s Trails Master Plan, as adopted by the city council and as amended from time to time.

     “Retail or wholesale electronic cigarette shop” means any business establishment the main purpose of which is the sale of electronic cigarette products.

     “Shopping center” means any parcel(s) of land zoned and used for retail sales by more than one retailer that is jointly operated or which includes shared parking facilities.

     “Smoke” or “smoking” means to possess or use a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted weed or plant (including, but not limited to, a lighted pipe, lighted hookah pipe, lighted cigar, or lighted cigarette of any kind), or the lighting of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other weed or plant (including, but not limited to, a pipe, a hookah pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind), or any electronic cigarette device containing liquid nicotine, e-liquid, or other similar substance.

     “Smoking outpost” means a nonenclosed area, location, place, or site where smoking is permitted subject to the requirements of Section 4.60.060.

     “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including, but not limited to, cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, bidis, or any other preparation of tobacco.

     “Vaping” or “vapor” means the use of any electronic cigarette device by inhaling and exhaling electronic cigarette device substances (including, but not limited to, liquid nicotine, or e-liquid.) (Ord. 444 § 3, 2015; Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.030 Prohibition of smoking in public places.
     It is unlawful for any person to smoke in the following places:

     A.    At, or within twenty (20) feet of an entrance to, any park, any recreation facility, or any enclosed or unenclosed city owned or controlled property including, but not limited to, City Hall, city yards and facilities; or

     B.     In, or within twenty (20) feet of, an outdoor dining area, except while actively passing by on the way to another destination; or

     C.     At, or within twenty (20) feet of, a public event, except within a smoking outpost that satisfies the criteria of Section 4.60.060; or

     D.    In, or within twenty (20) feet of, a common area at a shopping center, except within a smoking outpost that satisfies the criteria of Section 4.60.060; or

     E.     On a recreational trail. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.040 Where smoking is allowed.
     Smoking is permitted in any of the following areas:

     A.    Any outdoor area not listed above in Section 4.60.030, unless otherwise prohibited by state law; and

     B.     In up to twenty (20) percent of guest rooms in any hotel or motel, if the hotel or motel permanently designates at least eighty (80) percent of its guest rooms as nonsmoking rooms, appropriately signs nonsmoking rooms and permanently removes ashtrays and matches from them. Smoking rooms shall be segregated from nonsmoking rooms on separate floors, wings, or portions of either; smoking and nonsmoking rooms shall not be interspersed. Nothing in this chapter shall require a hotel or motel to provide smoking rooms and the owner or operator of a hotel or motel to provide smoking rooms and the owner or operator of a hotel or motel may choose to prohibit smoking throughout the property. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.050 Disposal of smoking waste.
     It is unlawful for any person to dispose of any cigarette, cigar or tobacco, or any part of a cigarette or cigar, in any place where smoking is prohibited under this chapter, except in a designated waste disposal container. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.060 Specifications for a smoking outpost.
     Where smoking is permitted in a smoking outpost pursuant to Section 4.60.030, the smoking outpost must satisfy the following requirements:

     A.    It must be located the greatest distance practicable, but at least twenty (20) feet away, from an opening, or an entrance or exit, to an enclosed area; and

     B.     It must measure fifty (50) square feet or less in total area; and

     C.     It must not be combined or merged with another on-site smoking outpost; and

     D.    It must not be located within twenty (20) feet of any place where food or beverage is being prepared or sold; and

     E.     It must have a clearly marked perimeter; and

     F.     It must not be located within two hundred (200) feet of another designated smoking outpost; and

     G.    It must be identified by one or more conspicuously posted signs; and

     H.    It must have at least one smoker’s waste receptacle. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.070 Nuisance.
     For all purposes within the jurisdiction of the city, nonconsensual exposure to secondhand smoke in violation of this chapter is a nuisance, and the uninvited presence of secondhand smoke on property in violation of this chapter is a nuisance and a trespass. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.080 Other applicable laws.
     This chapter shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. (Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.090 Electronic cigarette prohibitions.
     A.    All the prohibitions or laws set forth in Section 4.60.030 through 4.60.080, inclusive, apply the same for the use of electronic cigarettes.

     B.     The following are additional prohibitions for the use of electronic cigarettes:

     1.     Vaping and/or the use of electronic cigarettes are prohibited in any enclosed place of employment and any form of public transportation with the following exceptions:

     a.     Retail or wholesale electronic cigarette shops.

     b.     Private electronic cigarette lounges.

     c.     Any area stated to not be included as a “place of employment” in California Labor Code 6404.5. (Ord. 444 § 4, 2015; Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

 

4.60.100 Possession of nicotine by minors prohibited.
     It is a violation of this municipal code for a minor to possess nicotine in any form, including, but not limited to, liquid nicotine, nicotine-containing e-liquids, and/or any tobacco product. (Ord. 444 § 5, 2015)

 

4.60.110 Violations and enforcement.
     Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as an infraction, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010(B) of this code, or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code. (Ord. 444 § 6, 2015; Ord. 414 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 4.62 SKATEBOARDS, ROLLERSKATES AND/OR OTHER WHEELED TOY RESTRICTIONS
4.62.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Place of public assembly” includes all publicly-owned property where persons congregate from time-to-time including, but not limited to, schools, parks, parking lots and civic facilities.

     “Rollerskates” includes any device, including but not limited to rollerblades, worn on the feet having three or more wheels, or rollers, for use on a sidewalk, street or other surface offering traction.

     “Skateboards” includes all wheeled objects, except bicycles, including coasters, scooters, conveyances or similar devices, used for transportation or sport, which are propelled by human power or mechanical power and which are not classified elsewhere in this chapter.

     “Sidewalk” means that area adjacent to a traveled roadway, whether hard surfaced or not, upon which the public is customarily invited or permitted to walk or otherwise use.

     “Wheeled toys” includes all other wheeled objects used for the transportation of a person, regardless of motive power, and not classified as bicycles nor as vehicles in the Vehicle Code of the state. Exclusions from this definition shall include baby strollers, baby buggies, wheelchairs and/or other devices which aid in the mobility of the handicapped, elderly and/or disabled. (Ord. 196 §1(part), 1991)

 

4.62.020 Regulation of use.
     A.    Use of skateboards and/or other wheeled toys shall be prohibited on Angeles Crest Highway, and on all public sidewalks of Angeles Crest Highway, between Foothill Boulevard and the 210 Freeway, but use of rollerskates shall not be so prohibited.

     B.     Use of skateboards, rollerskates and/or other wheeled toys shall be prohibited on all public rights-of-way, streets, sidewalks and places of public assembly located in the city of La Cañada Flintridge not specified in this chapter, where such use is declared by resolution of the city council to be hazardous to pedestrians, motorists or other persons. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1991)

 

4.62.030 Private property enforcement.
     Provisions of this chapter shall apply to any privately owned property in the city of La Cañada Flintridge once signs prohibiting the use of skateboards, rollerskates and/or other wheeled toys have been properly posted and the city manager has been notified in writing of such posting. Signage must adhere to requirements as set forth in Section 4.60.040 (B) of this chapter. Costs for signage and posting shall be borne by the private property owner. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1991)

 

 

4.62.040 Posting of signs.
     A.    The city manager is authorized to post or erect, or cause to be posted or erected, signs prohibiting the use of skateboards, rollerskates and/or other wheeled toys on public sidewalks, authorized private properties and/or other areas designated by this chapter and/or resolution of the city council.

     B.     The prohibition against using or operating skateboards, rollerskates and/or other wheeled toys shall be deemed properly posted when the prohibition is displayed, in plain view at all entrances to the property, on a sign not less than eighteen by twenty-four (24) inches in size, with lettering not less than one inch in height. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1991)

 

4.62.050 Reckless conduct prohibited.
     No person shall operate a skateboard, rollerskates and/or other wheeled toy in a reckless fashion so as to be a danger to the health, safety or welfare of him or herself or others. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1991)

 

4.62.060 Punishment for violation.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine as follows:

     A.    Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first violation;

     B.     Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second violation occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation;

     C.     One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a third or more violations occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation. (Ord. 196 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 4.63 SKATE PARKS
4.63.010 Skate park defined.
     As used in this chapter, the term “Skate Park” means any skate facility owned or operated by the city of that is identified by signage as a “City of La Cañada Flintridge Skate Park.” (Ord. 320 § 1, 2001)

 

4.63.020 Protective Gear at a Skate Park Required.
     Any person riding, skating, propelling or using a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates or similar device at a skate park shall wear a helmet, elbow pads and knee pads at all times. (Ord. 320 § 1, 2001)

 

4.63.030 Infraction—Declared.
     Any person who rides, skates, propels or uses a skateboard, roller skates, in-line skates or similar device at a skate park without the required protective gear is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 320 § 1, 2001)

 

4.63.040 Penalty.
     A violation of this chapter, or of any provisions thereof, is punishable by a fine as follows:

     A.    Twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a first violation;

     B.     Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a second violation occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation;

     C.     One hundred dollars ($100) for a third or more violations occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation. (Ord. 320 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 4.64 TRAILS
4.64.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, and/or phrases shall be defined as follows:

     “City official” means the city manager, director of community development or the director of public works, or their respective agents, deputies or designees.

     “City-owned trail(s)” means a trail owned by, or dedicated and accepted by, the city of La Cañada Flintridge, or a trail located on an easement that has been accepted by the city. City-owned trails are herein designated as a city “park/recreational facility” as provided under this code.

     “Non-city-owned trail(s)” means a trail which is not a city-owned trail.

     “Person” means an individual or entity (excluding public utilities or governmental agencies or their employees and agents including, but not limited to, public safety and maintenance personnel while engaged in official duties on behalf of the utility or agency).

     “Trail(s)” means any pathway, avenue, course, accessway or route, improved or unimproved, commonly used for hiking, walking, horseback riding or other recreational purpose and identified as a “trail” on the city trail map, as may be amended from time to time. Trail(s) includes both city-owned trails and non-city-owned trails, as defined in this section. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2006)

 

4.64.020 Applicability.
     To the extent allowed by law, this chapter shall apply to all trails within the boundaries of the city:

     A.    With respect to city-owned trails, Section 4.64.030(A) shall apply;

     B.     With respect to non-city-owned trails, Section 4.64.030(B) shall apply; and

     C.     With respect to all persons owning or controlling property abutting or adjoining any trail, Section 4.64.030(C) shall apply. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2006)

 

4.64.030 Acts prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to engage in the following conduct or activity:

     A.    Conduct on a city-owned trail.

     1.     No person shall start or maintain a fire on a city-owned trail.

     2.     No person shall smoke or discard any lighted match, lighter, or tobacco product, or any other burning or combustible material, on a city-owned trail.

     3.     No person shall place any solid or liquid waste on a city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from a city official.

     4.     No person shall drive or operate motorized vehicles including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, all-terrain vehicles, Bobcats, tractors, scooters with a motor, or electric vehicles, on a city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from a city official (wheelchairs, authorized maintenance or utility vehicles, and emergency vehicles are exempt from this subsection.)

     5.     No person shall dig or plow on any portion of a city-owned trail, in any manner, without first obtaining the written permission from a city official.

     6.     No person shall place, or allow to remain in place, any litter or debris, including, but not limited to, nonequine waste and/or construction materials, generated directly or indirectly by that person’s use of such city-owned trail.

     7.     No person shall obstruct any portion of a city-owned trail in any manner including, but not limited to, the use of materials, plants, signs, or vehicles.

     8.     No person shall use a city-owned trail for the purpose of obtaining ingress and/or egress to/from his or her property for construction purposes without first obtaining the written permission from a city official (unless such access is specifically granted to such person pursuant to the documents creating the city-owned trail.)

     9.     No person shall place or erect any structure on a city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from a city official.

     10.   No person shall plant oleander, yew, cacti, castor bean plant or any poisonous or potentially harmful species, on or within five feet of a city-owned trail.

     11.   No person may bring a dog and/or cat onto a city-owned trail unless such dog and/or cat is kept on a leash or chain not longer than six feet in length and is kept under full control of its owner or custodian.

     12.   No person shall place or erect a sign or placard on a city-owned trail without first obtaining written approval from a city official.

     13.   No person shall mark, disfigure, destroy, damage, remove or tamper with any trail sign located on a city-owned trail.

     14.   No person shall possess, consume or distribute alcohol or an open container of alcohol on a city-owned trail except with a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 4.05 of this code.

     15.   No person shall fail to yield on a city-owned trail as follows: pedestrians, including hikers, shall yield the right-of-way to equestrians. Bicyclists shall yield the right-of-way to equestrians and pedestrians, including hikers.

     16.   No person shall operate a bicycle or ride a horse in a negligent, unsafe or reckless manner such that his or her conduct would endanger any person or property on a city-owned trail.

     17.   No person shall possess, shoot, fire, discharge, or cause to be possessed, shot, fired or discharged, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, firearm, or other device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging, any missile, cartridge, shell, ammunition, paintball, pellet, BB, or other device capable of penetrating human epidermal, on a city-owned trail.

     B.     Conduct on a Non-City-Owned Trail.

     1.     No person shall start or maintain a fire on a non-city-owned trail.

     2.     No person shall smoke or discard any lighted match, lighter or tobacco product, or any other burning or combustible material, on a non-city-owned trail.

     3.     No person shall place any solid or liquid waste on a non-city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from the property owner of such non-city-owned trail.

     4.     No person shall drive or operate motorized vehicles including, but not limited to, cars, trucks, motorcycles, motorbikes, go-carts, all-terrain vehicles, Bobcats, tractors, scooters with a motor, or electric vehicles on a non-city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from the property owner of such non-city-owned trail (wheelchairs, authorized maintenance or utility vehicles, and emergency vehicles are exempt from this subsection.)

     5.     No person shall dig or plow on any portion of a non-city-owned trail, in any manner, without first obtaining written permission from the owner of such non-city-owned trail.

     6.     No person shall place, or allow to remain in place, any litter or debris, including, but not limited to, nonequine waste and/or construction materials, generated directly or indirectly by that person’s use of such non-city-owned trail.

     7.     No person shall obstruct any portion of a non-city-owned trail in any manner including, but not limited to, the use of materials, plants, signs, or vehicles.

     8.     No person shall use a non-city-owned trail for the purpose of obtaining ingress and/or egress to/from his or her property for construction purposes without first obtaining written permission from the owner of such non-city-owned trail (unless such access is specifically granted to such person pursuant to the documents creating the non-city-owned trail.)

     9.     No person shall place or erect any structure on a non-city-owned trail without first obtaining written permission from the owner of such non-city-owned trail.

     10.   No person shall plant oleander, yew, cacti, castor bean plant or any poisonous or potentially harmful species, on or within five feet of a non-city-owned trail.

     11.   No person may bring a dog and/or cat onto a non-city-owned trail unless such conduct is expressly permitted by the owner of such non-city-owned trail and the dog and/or cat is kept on a leash or chain not longer than six feet in length and such dog and/or cat is kept under full control of its owner or custodian.

     12.   No person shall place or erect a sign or placard on a non-city-owned trail without first obtaining written approval from the owner of such non-city-owned trail.

     13.   No person shall mark, disfigure, destroy, damage, remove or tamper with any trail sign located on a non-city-owned trail.

     14.   No person shall possess, consume or distribute alcohol or an open container of alcohol on a non-city-owned trail except with a permit issued pursuant to Chapter 4.05 of this code.

     15.   No person shall fail to yield on a non-city-owned trail as follows: pedestrians, including hikers, shall yield the right-of-way to equestrians. Bicyclists shall yield the right-of-way to equestrians and pedestrians, including hikers.

     16.   No person shall operate a bicycle or ride a horse in a negligent, unsafe or reckless manner such that his or her conduct would endanger any person or property on a non-city-owned trail.

     17.   No person shall possess, shoot, fire, discharge, or cause to be possessed, shot, fired or discharged, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, firearm, or other device designed or intended to discharge, or capable of discharging, any missile, cartridge, shell, ammunition, paintball, pellet, BB, or other device capable of penetrating human epidermal, on a non-city-owned trail.

     C.     Conduct on Property Adjoining and Abutting Trails.

     1.     No person shall plant oleander, yew, cacti, castor bean, plant or any poisonous or potentially harmful species, on or within five feet of a trail.

     2.     No person shall allow his or her trees (except where the tree is a protected species as identified in Chapter 4.26 of this code) to encroach upon the free use and enjoyment of a trail including, but not limited to, allowing trees or vegetation to overhang a trail below a height of ten feet over the trail bed.

     3.     No person shall allow his or her trees or vegetation to block or impinge upon reasonable line-of-sight views of trail users including, but not limited to, equestrians on horseback who are crossing a street or roadway. Clearance levels shall be determined by a city official.

     4.     No person shall drain, or allow the flow of water from, a pool, spa, shower, bath, kitchen, laundry, bathroom, or any form of sewage, onto a trail. No person shall build, maintain, or use a pipe, drain or artificial device, or regrade their property in such a manner as to result in a concentrated or non-sheet flow of surface water including, but not limited to, landscape and irrigation system drainage, onto a trail. Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit the nonconcentrated draining of stormwater from adjoining property onto a trail provided that such flow has not been artificially diverted onto the trail.

     5.     No person shall install any type or kind of irrigation system, other than drip irrigation, within five feet of a trail.

     6.     No person shall allow sprinklers or irrigation systems to spray, seep, or flow onto a trail.

     7.     Notwithstanding any provision of the city’s building or zoning codes, no person shall erect or modify a fence or wall within five feet of a trail, regardless of the height of the fence or wall, without having first obtained a building permit from the building and safety division. No building permit shall be issued for a fence which is determined by a city official to be hazardous to trail users or horses on the trail, including, without limitation, barbed wire fencing and sharp or pointed wrought iron fencing. No fence or wall located within five feet of a trail shall be covered with fabric, wood sheeting, or plastic sheeting unless expressly approved by a city official. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2006)

 

4.64.040 Penalty.
     A.    Misdemeanor and Infraction Characterization.

     1.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A) and/or (B)(1), (5), (7), (9), (10), (12), (13), (14), (17), and/or (C)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5) and/or (7), shall constitute a misdemeanor.

     2.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A) and/or (B)(2), (3), (4), (6), (8), (11), (15), (16), and/or (C)(6), shall constitute an infraction.

     3.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A)(3) and/or (B)(3), shall constitute a misdemeanor if the solid waste involved is more than three cubic feet in size or the liquid waste involved is more than one gallon.

     4.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A)(7) and/or (B)(7), shall constitute an infraction if the obstruction involved is in place for less than three hours.

     5.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A)(8) and/or (B)(8), shall constitute a misdemeanor for the fourth and subsequent violation(s).

     6.     Violation of Section 4.64.030(A)(12) and/or (B)(12), shall constitute an infraction if the sign or placard is temporary and made of paper or cardboard.

     B.     Penalty.

     1.     A misdemeanor under this chapter shall be punishable as provided under this code.

     2.     An infraction under this chapter shall be punishable as provided under this code; however, any person who has committed seven violations of this chapter, regardless of the amount of time between such violations, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each and every subsequent violation and may be punished as such as provided under this code.

     C.     Prosecutorial Discretion. Any offense that is designated a misdemeanor under this chapter may be prosecuted as an infraction provided that the prosecuting attorney files a complaint charging the offense as an infraction and the defendant, at the time of arraignment, does not object to having the case proceed as an infraction. (Ord. 355 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 4.70 DRONES
4.70.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to reasonably regulate the use of drones, as defined in Section 4.70.020, during city-sponsored community events, as defined in Section 4.70.020, at Memorial Park in order to protect the public peace, health and safety of those attending the events. (Ord. 437 § 2, 2015; Ord. 436-U § 3, 2015)

 

4.70.020 Definitions.
     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City-sponsored community event” means a social, philanthropic, cultural, recreational, dramatic, educational or musical event sponsored solely by the city or co-sponsored by the city.

     “Drone” means an unmanned aircraft that can fly under the control of a remote pilot or via a geographic positions system guided autopilot mode including, but not limited to, toy or model airplanes, helicopters, and/or other similar personal and/or recreational devices. (Ord. 437 § 2, 2015; Ord. 436-U § 3, 2015)

 

4.70.030 Prohibition.
     No person shall fly, or cause to fly, a drone in any airspace below four hundred (400) feet within or over Memorial Park during a city-sponsored community event. (Ord. 437 § 2, 2015; Ord. 436-U § 3, 2015)

 

4.70.040 Exemptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to the use of drones by:

     A.    Any local, state, or federal law enforcement agency for lawful purposes and in a lawful manner; or

     B.     The city, or any authorized agent thereof. (Ord. 437 § 2, 2015; Ord. 436-U § 3, 2015)

 

4.70.050 Violations.
     Any violation of Section 4.70.030 shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and related penalties of Chapter 1.04 of this code, an infraction, subject to the fines and related penalties of Chapter 1.04 of this code, and/or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code. (Ord. 437 § 2, 2015; Ord. 436-U § 3, 2015)

Title 5 PUBLIC PEACE
Chapter 5.01 BINGO
Chapter 5.02 REGULATION OF COMMUNITY NOISE
Chapter 5.04 BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARM PROVISIONS
Chapter 5.12 CONDUCT OF PARTIES
Chapter 5.13 GAMBLING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
Chapter 5.14 NUDE PERFORMERS AND WAITERS
Chapter 5.15 VENDING ON CITY SIDEWALKS
Chapter 5.17 PEDDLING NEAR SCHOOLS PROHIBITED
Chapter 5.18 PINBALL MACHINES
Chapter 5.19 LOITERING AND LITTERING
Chapter 5.20 VIOLATIONS OF THE PEACE, HEALTH OR SAFETY
Chapter 5.22 DAYTIME RESTRICTIONS FOR MINORS
Chapter 5.24 USE OF PARK/DESIGNATED RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
Chapter 5.26 MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS
Chapter 5.28 CHARGE FOR EXCESS SHERIFF’S SERVICES
Chapter 5.40 SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLES
Chapter 5.50 LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS

Chapter 5.01 BINGO
5.01.010 Authority to enact.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the authority contained in Article IV, Section 19 of the Constitution of the state of California and Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state of California. (Ord. 35 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

5.01.020 License required.
     It is unlawful to conduct or play a game of bingo as defined in Section 326.5 of the Penal Code in the city of La Cañada Flintridge except pursuant to a license issued for the game pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 35 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

5.01.030 Authority to issue licenses and prescribe rules and regulations.
     The office of the city manager shall have the authority, pursuant to this chapter and applicable state law, to issue licenses for games of bingo by organizations exempt from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701(a), (b), (d), (e), (f), (g), and (l) of the Revenue and Taxation Code and by senior citizens organizations. The office of the city manager shall enforce the provisions of this chapter and shall have authority to promulgate and administer rules to implement the regulation of bingo in the city of La Cañada Flintridge; such rules shall be submitted to and approved by the La Cañada Flintridge city council. (Ord. 35 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

5.01.040 Regulation of games.
     All bingo games and all activities in connection therewith shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code of the state of California. Said provisions, as adopted by the State Legislature in 1977, are incorporated herein by reference and made a part hereof. (Ord. 35 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 5.02 REGULATION OF COMMUNITY NOISE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 421.

 

5.02.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “community noise ordinance.” (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.020 Findings, purpose and scope.
     Whereas excessive sound is a serious hazard to the public health, welfare, safety, and the quality of life; and

     Whereas a substantial body of science and technology exists by which excessive sound may be substantially abated; and

     Whereas the people have a right to, and should be ensured of, an environment free from excessive sound.

     Now, therefor, it is the policy of the city of La Cañada Flintridge (hereafter the “city”) to prevent excessive sound that may jeopardize the health, welfare, or safety of the citizens or degrade the quality of life.

     This chapter shall apply to the control of sound originating from sources within the city. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.030 Definitions.
     “Annoying noise” means noise with a repetitive pattern, shrill frequencies, and/or static-like sounds, including loud music and noise attributable to, but not limited to, leaf blowers, alarms, engines, machinery, radios, stereo equipment, vehicles, barking dogs, and other animals.

     “Average sound level” means the level in decibels of the mean-square A-weighted sound pressure during a stated time period, with reference to the square of the standard reference sound pressure of twenty (20) micropascals. The “average sound level” is equivalent to the industry standard LEQ.

     “A-weighted sound level” means the sound level in decibels as measured on a sound level meter using the A-weighted network. The A-weighted network is the network for measuring sound that most closely resembles what the human ear hears. Sound measured using the A-weighted network is designated dBA.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

 

     “Construction equipment” means tools, machinery or equipment including “special construction equipment” defined in the Vehicle Code, used in a construction operation on any construction site.

     “Cumulative period” means an additive period of time composed of individual time segments that may be continuous or interrupted.

     “Decibel” means a unit for measuring the amplitude of sound, equal to twenty (20) times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound measured to the reference pressure, which is twenty (20) micropascals.

     “Emergency work” means work: (1) necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a natural disaster such as an earthquake, fire, or flood, or a public calamity, or other cause or event not within the control of the person undertaking the work; (2) required to protect a person or property from injury or damage; or (3) by a public or private utility to restore utility service.

     “Excessive noise” means any unnecessary noise which persists for ten minutes or more; such period of noise need not be witnessed by enforcement personnel personally.

     “Fixed noise source” means a stationary device, which creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including, but not limited to, residential, and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, air-conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

     “Holidays” means the following:

     New Year’s Day - January 1

     Martin Luther King Jr.’s Birthday - 3rd Monday in January

     President’s Day - 3rd Monday in February

     Memorial Day - Last Monday in May

     Independence Day - July 4

     Labor Day - 1st Monday in September

     Columbus Day - 2nd Monday in October

     Veteran’s Day - November 11

     Thanksgiving Day – Fourth Thursday of November

     Friday after Thanksgiving Day

     Christmas Eve - December 24

     Christmas Day - December 25

     New Year’s Eve - December 31

     “Impulsive sound” means a sound of short duration, usually less than one second, with an abrupt onset and rapid decay. Examples of sources of impulsive sound include explosions, drop forge impacts, and the discharge of firearms.

     “Intrusive noise” means that noise which intrudes over and above the existing normal background noise at a given location. The relative intrusiveness of a sound depends upon its amplitude, duration, frequency, time of occurrence, and tonal or informational content, as well as the prevailing background noise level.

     “Minor maintenance” means work required to preserve residential real property in an acceptable state of repair.

     “Mobile noise source” means any noise source other than a fixed noise source.

     “Motor vehicle” means any and all self-propelled vehicles as defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, including all on-highway type motor vehicles subject to registration under said Code and all off-highway type motor vehicles subject to identification under said Code.

     “Muffler or sound dissipative device” means a device for abating the sound of escaping gases of an internal combustion engine.

     “Noise disturbance” means any sound which: (1) endangers or injures the safety or health of humans or animals; (2) annoys, disturbs, causes, or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on a reasonable person of normal sensitivity; (3) is so harsh or prolonged as to be injurious to the health, peace and comfort of any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area; or (4) which causes excessive noise vibrations that endangers or injures personal or real property.

     “Noise sensitive uses” means hospitals, medical care facilities, nursing homes, schools, day care facilities, courthouses, religious assembly or similar facilities during their hours of operation.

     “School” means any private or public educational institution, grade K-12.

     “Street” means any “highway,” “road,” “roadway” or “street” as defined by the Vehicle Code of the state of California, or any other public right-of-way which is used or may be used for purposes of vehicular traffic, this includes private streets. The term “street,” however, shall be limited to any street, or portion thereof, which is located within the boundaries of the city.

     “Vehicle” means any vehicle as defined by the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.040 General prohibition.
     It is unlawful for any person, corporation, organization, partnership, firm or association, either directly or indirectly, to make, create or continue, or cause, permit, maintain, or suffer to be made or continued, any loud, raucous, unnecessary, or unusual noise which disturbs the peace or quiet of any neighborhood or which causes discomfort or annoyance to any reasonable person of normal sensitiveness residing in the area or that exceeds the maximum dBA levels set forth herein or that violates any provision of this chapter. The standard for determining whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists may include, but is not limited to, the following:

     A.    The volume, level and intensity of the noise;

     B.     Whether the nature of the noise is usual or unusual;

     C.     Whether the origin of the noise is natural or unnatural;

     D.    The level and intensity of the background noise, if any;

     E.     The proximity of the noise to residential dwellings;

     F.     The proximity of the noise to residential sleeping facilities;

     G.    The nature and zoning of the area within which the noise emanates;

     H.    The density of the inhabitation of the area within which the noise emanates;

     I.      The time of day or night the noise occurs;

     J.      The duration of the noise;

     K.    Whether the noise is recurrent, intermittent, a cumulative period, or constant;

     L.     Whether the noise is produced by a commercial or non-commercial activity;

     M.    Whether the noise can be heard more than twenty-five (25) feet away from any adjoining property boundary line in a residential district;

     N.    The intrusiveness of the noise;

     O.    Whether it is a mobile noise source;

     P.     The number of persons affected by the noise;

     Q.    Whether noise exceeds the maximum dBA levels set forth in Sections 5.02.100 and 5.02.110. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.050 Specific prohibitions.
     In addition to and separate from any provision of this code, the following acts, and the causing, suffering or permitting thereof, shall be considered intrusive, excessive and annoying noises creating a nuisance and disturbing the peace and shall constitute a violation of this code. The listing of the following specific prohibited acts is not intended to limit the city’s authority to regulate any and all loud, unnecessary and unusual noises and even if not included herein, such noise disturbances shall be subject to regulation pursuant to Section 5.02.040:

     A.    Mechanical or Electronic Devices. Using any mechanical or electronic device for the intensification of any sound or noise into the public streets that produces excessive or annoying noise;

     B.     Advertisement. Using any instrument, whistle, drum or bell or making any other unnecessary noise for the purpose of advertising, announcing, or otherwise calling attention to any goods, wares, merchandise, or to any show, entertainment, or event. The provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit the selling by verbally announcing the sale of merchandise, food, or beverages at licensed sporting events, parades, fairs, circuses or other similar licensed public entertainment events;

     C.     Animals and Birds. Owning, possessing, or harboring any animal or bird which howls, barks, meows, squawks, or makes other annoying noises continuously and/or incessantly for an unreasonable period of time so as to create a noise disturbance across a real property line. For the purposes of this chapter, the animal or bird noise shall not be deemed a noise disturbance if a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated, or is using any other means to tease or provoke the animal or bird. This provision shall not apply to licensed veterinarian facilities, an approved dog park, or to an animal control officer while executing his or her official duties and responsibilities;

     D.    Emergency Signaling Device. The intentional sounding or permitted sounding outdoors of any fire, burglar, or civil defense alarm, siren, whistle, or similar stationary emergency signaling device not in compliance with subsection (D)(1) unless occurring for emergency purposes or required by local, state, or federal regulations or the weekly testing of community emergency warning system:

     1.     The testing of a stationary emergency signaling device shall not occur before eight a.m. or after five p.m. Any such testing shall use only the minimum cycle test time, in no case shall such test time exceed sixty (60) seconds and shall not occur more than once during any thirty (30) day period;

     E.     Stationary Non-Emergency Signaling Devices. Sounding of any electronically amplified signal from any stationary bell, chime, siren, whistle, or similar device, intended primarily for non-emergency purposes, from any place, for more than ten seconds in any one-hour period. Parking structure exit alarms and any warning and/or signaling devices required by state or federal law shall be exempt from the operation of this provision;

     F.     Burglar or Fire Alarm. Sounding of any exterior burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm that is not terminated within fifteen (15) minutes of activation or which occurs as a result of mechanical or human error on more than three occasions in any thirty (30) day period;

     G.    Loading and Unloading. Loading, unloading, opening, closing, or other handling of boxes, crates, containers, building materials, refuse, or similar objects between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. in such a manner as to cause a noise disturbance across a residential real property line or at any time to violate the applicable noise provisions of the city’s municipal code. This subsection shall not apply to the collection and disposal of garbage and recyclable materials by the city’s franchises or with a franchise agreement with the city;

     H.    Noise Sensitive Uses. Creation of any noise disturbance adjacent to or within one thousand (1,000) feet of a hospital or medical care facility, nursing home, school during school hours, day care during hours of operation, religious assembly use during hours of worship services, or similar facility, so as to interfere with the functions of such activity.

     1.     Where construction activities on a construction project which is adjacent to any noise sensitive use(s) are anticipated to last for a year or more, temporary noise barriers shall be constructed that break the line of sight between the noise-sensitive use(s) and the construction project, and that minimize noise impacts;

     I.      Noise resulting from construction and demolition activities, the operation of commercial refrigeration units, air conditioning systems, compressors, exhaust systems, ventilation units, use of any instrumentality that results in impulsive sound, and other commercial or industrial noises associated with land use activities, shall be regulated pursuant to standards contained within the noise regulations of the city’s municipal code;

     J.      Vehicular Attachments. Attaching any accessory or device to any vehicle that results in the creation of unnecessary noise;

     K.    Radios, Television Sets, Musical Instruments or Similar Devices. Operating, playing, or permitting the operation or playing of any radio, television set, compact disc player, stereo, drum, musical instrument or similar device which reproduces sound so as to create a noise disturbance or cause any violation of this chapter;

     L.     Sound Amplifier. Using or operating or permitting or allowing the using or operating, for any purpose, a sound amplifier except in compliance with and under a sound amplifier permit issued pursuant to Chapter 11.46 of this code is prohibited. Provided, however, that the use of amplification as part of an official school event at a properly permitted and operating school in the city shall not be subject to this subsection, including noise reasonably related to official and/or authorized school activities or events, such as: (1) bands, (2) athletic activities, and (3) entertainment events;

     M.    Places of Public Entertainment. Operating or permitting or allowing the operation or playing of any loudspeaker, musical instrument, motorized racing vehicle, or other source of sound in any place of public entertainment as to create a noise disturbance or which can be heard more than five hundred (500) feet from the property line of the property on which the public entertainment is located after eight p.m. or before eight a.m., except if the public entertainment is permitted or occurs on property that is not located within one thousand (1,000) feet of residential dwellings;

     N.    Tampering. The removal or rendering inoperative, other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement, of any noise control device, muffler, or other sound dissipative device or element thereof; as required under federal, state or local law, and the use of said product after its noise control device has been removed or rendered inoperable, other than for purpose of maintenance, repair or replacement. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.060 Persistent noises.
     Failure to comply with the following provisions shall constitute a nuisance and violation of this chapter:

     A.    All construction equipment powered by internal combustion engines shall be properly muffled and maintained.

     B.     Unnecessary idling of internal combustion engines is prohibited.

     C.     All stationary noise-generating construction equipment such as tree grinders and air compressors are to be located as far as is practical from existing residences.

     D.    Quiet construction equipment, particularly air compressors, are to be selected whenever possible. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.070 Noise from radios, etc., in vehicles—Appeal.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to use or operate a radio, tape player, tape recorder, record player, compact disc player, digital audio player, television or similar device in a vehicle on a street, which can be defined as an “annoying noise” to a person of normal hearing sensitivity more than twenty-five (25) feet from said vehicle.

     B.     Any penalties that may be imposed under this chapter may be subject to being offset by the performance of community service work as determined by a court commissioner, judge or administrative hearing officer.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall be enforced by the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department and any authorized peace officer.

     D.    Provisions of Section 5.02.070 are to be supplementary and complementary to all of the provisions of this code, the laws of the state of California and any other applicable law, and nothing in this chapter shall be read, interpreted or construed in any manner so as to limit any existing or future right or power of the city to control or limit excessive noise caused by radios or other devices in vehicles. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.080 Noise—Exceptions.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall apply to the playing of music by a band, or the blowing of a musical horn, or the announcing of any show, entertainment, or event upon the public streets or parks for which band music, horn blowing or announcing of an event has been granted a special permit by the city manager or designee, specifying the time and place that such music may be played or such horn blown or such announcement made; nor shall this chapter apply to the blowing of any whistle or horn or the ringing of any bell or other noise necessary as a vehicular or pedestrian traffic warning or signal; nor to any regularly licensed peddler calling his or her wares in an ordinary tone of voice.

     B.     Emergency vehicles, including police vehicles, fire vehicles and ambulances are exempt from the requirements of this chapter.

     C.     Emergency work, provided that the person performing the work notifies the proper city department in advance, or as soon as practicable after the emergency and any vehicle, device, apparatus or equipment used, related to or connected with the emergency work is designed, modified or equipped to reduce noise produced to the lowest possible level consistent with effective operation of the vehicle, device, apparatus or equipment.

     D.    Noise reasonably related to authorized religious assembly events.

     E.     Warning bells, sirens, horns, whistles or similar audible warning devices operated in accordance with state or federal law.

     F.     Noise reasonably related to official or authorized school activities or events, including bands, athletic activities and entertainment events. This exclusion shall include the use of bells, sirens or similar audible devices used by schools to give notice to students and faculty.

     G.    Sporting, entertainment and public events, which are conducted pursuant to a license or permit issued by the city, within the scope of the license or permit. This provision is not intended to exempt the act or behavior of an individual—whether or not participating in the event—who violates this chapter.

     H.    The operation of an emergency generator after a power failure, by an employee or agent of a law enforcement agency, city, fire department, hospital or other medical or surgical facility that is providing emergency medical, city services or public or private utility to restore utility service. The reasonable testing of an emergency generator by any person provided that the testing is conducted between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m.

     I.      Minor Maintenance to Residential Real Property. Noise sources associated with the minor maintenance of residential real property, provided said activities take place as follows: between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m. on any weekday or between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m., on Saturday, Sunday, or holidays.

     J.      Noise associated with normal mechanical ventilation from heat and air condition units located on residential properties.

     K.    Any activity preempted by county, state or federal law or regulation. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.090 Noise enforcement procedures.
     The director of community development, or designee, shall be responsible for the overall enforcement of this chapter, including assigning or referring the investigation and enforcement to the appropriate city department.

     A.    If it is determined that a noise in violation of this chapter exists at a fixed location, the following procedures shall be followed:

     1.     A written or verbal warning shall be issued by the investigating officer or designee to the person(s) responsible for the event causing the noise disturbance.

     2.     If the noise disturbance persists following the issuance of a written or verbal warning, or reoccurs within a ninety (90) day period from the issuance of a written or verbal warning, then the person responsible for the event causing the noise disturbance shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter.

     B.     If the noise disturbance is on real property and it reoccurs, in addition to the person responsible for the incident causing the noise disturbance, the property owner shall also be guilty of a violation of this chapter. As with all nuisance per se violations occurring on private property, property owners shall use all reasonable means available to them to abate the violation, up to and including bringing legal eviction proceedings against the tenant or occupant causing or maintaining the noise violation if necessary. The property owner may use all written notices issued by the city to the person causing the violation and to the property owner regarding the violation in support of any legal proceedings, or notice of termination of a lease or rental agreement, to the extent permitted by the laws of the state of California.

     C.     If the noise violation occurs in a vehicle in violation of Section 5.02.070, the procedures in subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) herein do not apply and those violations are enforced pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 5.02.070. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.100 Alternative use of maximum noise limits by dBA levels.
     In addition to determining noise violations under the standard set forth elsewhere in this chapter, the enforcing officer may alternatively use the one-hour average decibel (“dBA”) levels to determine a violation of this chapter. The one-hour average sound level is measured at the property line of the property on which the noise is produced or at any location on a property that is receiving the noise. The standard chosen by the enforcing officer for the specific incident shall be the sole means used to determine if a violation has occurred. Neither standard shall be considered superior, nor controlling, nor preempt the other.

     If the enforcing officer selects the alternative standard to using the dBA level standard, evidence of dBA levels within the permitted levels may be presented in defense of the charged violation only if the proffered dBA reading was taken at the exact time and location and under identical conditions, including wind, and temperature, as those encountered by the enforcing officer encountered at the time he or she charged the violation and by a decibel meter with valid current calibration records and evidence of the training or expertise of the person offering the dBA reading as evidence of compliance with this chapter.

     A.    It is unlawful to maintain, permit, allow or suffer any use or activity that creates noise levels which exceed the following standards:

 

Zoning District

One Hour Average Noise Level in dBA Between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. Measured at Property Line or District Boundary

One Hour Average Noise Level in dBA Between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. Measured at Any Boundary of a Residential Zone

Single-Family Residential (R-1)

60

50

Multifamily Residential (R-3 & RPD)

65

55

Commercial (CPD & FCD)

70

60

Mixed Use

75

65

Public/Semi Public and Open Space

65

55

 

     B.     Restricted hours may be modified through a condition of an approved conditional use permit or temporary use permit. Sections and subsections of this chapter also provide for additional restricted hours and the most restrictive hours shall be controlling.

     C.     The sound level limit at a location on a boundary between two zones is the most restrictive of the respective limits for the two zones.

     D.    If the measured ambient noise level exceeds the applicable limit in the above, the allowable one-hour average sound level shall be the one-hour average ambient noise level, plus three decibels. The ambient noise level shall be measured when the alleged noise violation source is not operating.

     E.     In determining whether any noise exceeds the exterior noise limits set forth in this section, measurements shall be taken at the property line of the property from which the noise emanates.

     F.     No person shall operate or cause to be operated within a dwelling unit, any source of sound that causes the sound level when measured inside a neighboring receiving dwelling unit to exceed the allowable noise level, for any period of time.

     G.    In the event the noise, as judged by the enforcing authority, contains a steady, pure tone such as a whine, screech or hum, or is an impulsive sound such as hammering or riveting, or contains music or speech, the standard limits set forth above shall be reduced by five decibels. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

 

5.02.110 Temporary construction activities.
     Where technically and economically feasible, temporary construction activity shall be conducted in such a manner that the one hour average sound levels at affected properties shall not exceed the following dBA levels:

 

 

R-1 Zone (Single-Family Residential)

R-3, RPD, Mixed Use Zones (Multifamily Residential)

CPD, FCD, Public/Semi-Public, Open Space Zones (Commercial)

Weekdays*

75 dBA

80 dBA

85 dBA

7:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.

Saturdays**

60 dBA

65 dBA

70 dBA

9:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.

*       During Daylight Savings Time, weekday hours shall be from 7:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m.

**    Construction, except emergency work, is not permitted on Sunday or holidays.

(Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

5.02.120 Violations and penalties.
     Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor or as an infraction subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code. In addition to the penalties herein provided, any condition caused, maintained or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a public nuisance and shall be punishable as such.

     A.    Strict Liability. In addition to the person causing the offending sound, the owner, tenant, occupant or lessee of the property, or the manager, operator, agent or other person lawfully entitled to possession of the property from which the offending sound is emanating may be liable for any violation of this chapter. It is not a lawful defense that another person caused the noise violation.

     B.     Continuing Violation. Unless otherwise provided, a person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day, or portion thereof, for which the violation of this chapter is committed, continued, suffered, maintained or permitted.

     C.     Remedies Not Exclusive. Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other remedies including administrative citations, civil and/or criminal actions. The remedies provided for herein shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 450 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 5.04 BURGLAR AND ROBBERY ALARM PROVISIONS
5.04.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “burglary, robbery and fire alarm ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.” (Ord. 145 § 1, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.020 Findings.
     The city council finds:

     A.    The majority of burglar and robbery alarms to which law enforcement responds are false. Such false alarms result in an enormous waste of manpower. That there are such a large percentage of false alarms as may lull law enforcement officers into a false sense of security. In responding to an alarm, they will probably assume it is a false alarm and may be wounded or killed by criminals at the location.

     B.     Alarm systems which automatically and directly dial any emergency phone number are very prone to be activated by current failures or other events having no connection with criminal activity and tie up such emergency phones making them unavailable to receive genuine emergency calls.

     C.     The danger to citizens through emergency response created by false alarms is unnecessary and hazardous.

     D.    The unnecessary waste of tax dollars through responses to false alarms must be eliminated.

     E.     False burglar and holdup alarms have created conditions causing danger and annoyance to the general public.

     F.     The majority of fire alarms to which the fire department responds are false. Such alarms are a waste of manpower and response to these alarms endangers citizens and is hazardous to fire department personnel. (Ord. 145 § 2, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

 

5.04.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the words hereinafter defined are used as so defined unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.031 Alarm system.
     “Alarm system” means any device, whether known as a burglary, robbery or intrusion alarm, direct dial telephone device, fire alarm, audible or silent alarm, or by any other name, which is used for the detection of an unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, to signal the commission of an unlawful act, or to detect smoke, heat or particles of combustion. It shall include those devices which emit a signal within the protected premises only, are supervised by the proprietor of the premises where located, and are otherwise known as “proprietary alarm systems.” Auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect telephone company systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system are not included in this definition. (Ord. 145 § 3, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.032 Alarm owner.
     “Alarm owner” means the person who owns, leases, rents, uses or makes available for use by his or her agents, employees, representatives or family, any alarm system. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.033 False alarm.
     “False alarm” means an alarm signal activated by causes other than the commission or attempted commission of an unlawful act or by a fire which the alarm system is designed to detect. An alarm system activated by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances not subject to the control of the alarm owner shall not constitute a false alarm. (Ord. 145 § 4, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.034 Audible alarm.
     “Audible alarm” means a device designed to notify persons in the immediate vicinity of the protected premises by emission of an audible sound of a fire or unauthorized entry on the premises or of the commission of an unlawful act. (Ord. 145 § 5, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.035 Direct dial device.
     “Direct dial device” means a device which is connected to a telephone line and upon activation of an alarm system, automatically dials a predetermined telephone number and transmits a message or signal indicating a need for emergency response. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.040 Direct dial telephone devices.
     No person shall use any alarm system which is equipped with a direct dial device, and which when activated, automatically dials any telephone number in any office of the sheriff or fire department. (Ord. 145 § 6, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.050 Audible alarm requirement.
     For every audible alarm, the alarm owner thereof shall post the names and telephone numbers of persons to be notified to render repairs or service during any hour of the day or night during which the audible alarm is operated. An audible alarm shall terminate its operations or the audible alarm shall automatically reset within thirty (30) minutes of its being activated. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

 

5.04.060 False alarm.
     A person shall not knowingly turn in a false alarm. This section does not prohibit a test of an alarm system as permitted in advance by the sheriff. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.070 Repair.
     After any false alarm, the alarm owner shall, upon request by the sheriff, submit a written report to the sheriff describing actions taken or to be taken to eliminate the cause of the false alarm. This report shall be submitted within ten days of the date of request by the sheriff. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.080 Maintaining a public nuisance alarm.
     An alarm owner shall not operate an alarm system which generates more than three false alarms in any twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.090 Exemptions.
     The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to motor vehicles or to a public telephone utility whose only duty is to furnish telephone service pursuant to tariffs on file with the California Public Utilities Commission. (Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.100 Misdemeanor.
     Any person, firm or corporation whether as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by: (1) a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation; (2) a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year; (3) a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same provision of this chapter within one year. Any offense which would otherwise be an infraction is a misdemeanor if a defendant has been convicted of three or more violations of the same provision of this chapter within the twelve (12) month period immediately preceding the commission of the offense and such prior convictions are admitted by the defendant or alleged in the accusatory pleading. Such person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, corporation and shall be punishable as herein provided. (Ord. 136 § 2, 1986; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.110 Violation of Section 5.04.080.
     A.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, a violation of Section 5.04.080 shall not be prosecuted if the alarm owner presents evidence satisfactory to the sheriff that the alarm system generating false alarms has been removed, repaired or replaced and pays the service charge established by Section 5.04.120 within ten days after service of the notice specified in subsection B of this section.

     B.     Upon violation of Section 5.04.080 of this chapter, the sheriff shall serve a written notice on the violator describing the violation, setting forth the service charge due under Section 5.04.120 of this chapter, and specifying that the causes of the violation shall be corrected within ten days of the date of service of the written notice. Service of such notice shall be deemed completed upon the sheriff posting such notice on the property at which the alarm system generating the false alarm is located.

     C.     Other than as specified in this section, violations of this chapter may be prosecuted in the same manner as other infractions, or misdemeanors, as appropriate. (Ord. 145 § 7, 1987; Ord. 49 § 2, 1979)

 

5.04.120 Service charges.
     In addition to any other penalty or fine imposed by this chapter, there shall be a service charge in an amount as set forth by resolution of the city council assessed against an alarm owner for each response by the sheriff or fire department which occurs as a result of a false alarm, after three false alarms have previously occurred at the same address or location within a twelve (12) month period. (Ord. 145 § 8, 1987; Ord. 136 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 5.12 CONDUCT OF PARTIES
5.12.010 Prohibition.
     It is unlawful for any person to charge admission to any party conducted in a residential zone. (Ord. 134 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 5.13 GAMBLING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
5.13.010 Person defined.
     As used in this chapter, “person” includes a person, firm and corporation. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 1 § 1, 1917)

 

5.13.020 Acts regulated by state.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter does not prohibit any act either positively permitted or prohibited by state law. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 1 § 3, 1917)

 

5.13.030 Gambling activities prohibited.
     A person shall not deal, play, carry on, or conduct:

     A.    Any game where players bet or wager money, checks, credits or other things of value against each other; or

     B.     Any game of chance for money, checks, credits or other things of value. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 11114 § 1, 1975: LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 2 § 21, 1917)

 

5.13.040 Betting and wagering prohibited.
     A person shall not bet or wager at or on any game. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 11114 § 2, 1975: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 2 § 21.1, 1917)

 

5.13.050 Permitting gambling activities prohibited when.
     A person shall not knowingly permit any game prohibited by this chapter to be played, conducted or dealt in any house or other premises owned by, rented by, or in the lawful possession of such person. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 2 § 22, 1917)

 

5.13.060 Attending places where gambling occurs prohibited.
     A person shall not resort to, attend, visit or be in any house, room or other place in the city where there is any gambling being conducted, played or carried on. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 2 § 23, 1917)

 

5.13.070 Gambling paraphernalia—Destruction authorized when.
     The sheriff shall destroy anything which is used, kept, placed or maintained in violation of any statute or of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any other ordinance after any person owning, possessing or having control of such cards, game or thing has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of such violation, and such plea of guilty or conviction has become final. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 3 § 33, 1917)

 

5.13.080 Money received during enforcement procedure—Deposit requirements.
     The sheriff shall deposit in the city treasury to the credit of the general fund all money received or obtained in the enforcement of this chapter, after any person owning, possessing or having control of such money has pleaded guilty to or has been convicted of violating this chapter, and such plea of guilty or conviction has become final. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 3 § 34, 1917)

 

5.13.090 Release of cards, games or money from court custody authorized when.
     The sheriff shall apply to the judge of any court which has custody of anything subject to destruction or money subject to deposit in the general fund under the terms of Sections 5.13.070 through 5.13.090 of this chapter, the disposition of which is not otherwise provided for by state law, for an order releasing such cards, game, things, or money to him or her for the purpose of complying within this chapter. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 3 § 35, 1917)

 

5.13.100 Premises deemed nuisance when—Abatement.
     Any premises occupied for the purpose of, or used for the purpose of conducting the business of illegal gambling as prohibited by this chapter is a public nuisance and may be abated as such by action brought by the district attorney. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 1 § 5, 1917)

 

5.13.110 Violation—Penalty.
     Every person violating any provision of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 1 § 4, 1917)

 

5.13.120 Severability.
     If any provision of this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; Ord. 9555 § 2, 1968: LACC Ord. 461 Art. 1 § 2, 1917)

Chapter 5.14 NUDE PERFORMERS AND WAITERS
Article 1. Indecent Exposure
5.14.010 Statutory authority for indecent exposure provisions—Definitions.
     The ordinance codified in this article is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this article which also are used in Sections 318.5 and 318.6 are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same as the same respective words used in the Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9884 § 1, 1969)

 

5.14.020 Acts constituting misdemeanors designated.
     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who:

     A.    Exposes his or her private parts or buttocks or employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate the private parts or pubic hair while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer; or

     B.     Permits, procures or assists any person to so expose him or herself, or to employ any such device. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9884 § 3, 1969)

 

5.14.030 Exceptions to applicability.
     This article does not apply to:

     A.    A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

     B.     Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9884 § 4, 1969)

 

5.14.040 Violation—Penalty.
     A violation of this article is punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9884 § 12, 1969)

 

5.14.050 Severability.
     If any provision or clause of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9884 § 11, 1969)

 

Article 2. Female Performers and Waitresses
5.14.060 Statutory authority for provisions—Definitions.
     The ordinance codified in this article is adopted pursuant to Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. All words used in this article, which also are used in the said Sections 318.5 and 318.6, are used in the same sense and mean the same as the same respective words used in the Sections 318.5 and 318.6 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 1, 1969)

 

5.14.070 Acts constituting misdemeanors designated.
     Every female is guilty of a misdemeanor who, while participating in any live act, demonstration or exhibition in any public place, place open to the public or place open to public view, or while serving food or drink or both to any customer:

     A.    Exposes any portion of either breast below a straight line so drawn that both nipples, and all portions of both breasts which have a different pigmentation than that of the main portion of the breasts, are below such straight line; or

     B.     Employs any device or covering which is intended to simulate such portions of the breast; or

     C.     Wears any type of clothing so that any portion of such part of the breast may be observed. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 3, 1969)

 

5.14.080 Counseling or assisting prohibited acts deemed misdemeanor.
     Every person is guilty of a misdemeanor who permits, counsels or assists any person to violate any provision of this article. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 4, 1969)

 

5.14.090 Exceptions to applicability.
     This article does not apply to:

     A.    A theater, concert hall or similar establishment which is primarily devoted to theatrical performances;

     B.     Any act authorized or prohibited by any state statute. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 5, 1969)

 

5.14.100 Violation—Penalty.
     A violation of this article is punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 12, 1969)

 

5.14.110 Severability.
     If any provision or clause of this article or application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, such invalidity shall not affect other provisions or applications of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 9885 § 11, 1969)

Chapter 5.15 VENDING ON CITY SIDEWALKS
5.15.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:

     A.    “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path.

     B.     “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

     C.     “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2019)

 

5.15.020 Selling food or merchandise—Operational requirements.
     A.    No sidewalk vendor shall operate without a sidewalk vending permit pursuant to Chapter 6.06 and a valid business license pursuant to Chapter 6.08 of this code.

     B.     All permits shall be displayed in a visible and conspicuous location at all times during the operation of the vending business.

     C.     It shall be prohibited for any sidewalk vendor to operate under any of the following conditions:

     1.     Vend in a residential zone during the hours solicitation is prohibited in Section 6.06.120;

     2.     Leave any stand unattended;

     3.     Store, park, or leave any stand overnight on any public street, sidewalk, or park;

     4.     Sell food or beverages for immediate consumption unless there is a litter receptacle available for patrons’ use;

     5.     Leave any location without first disposing all trash or refuse remaining from sales conducted. Trash and refuse generated by the vending cart operations shall not be disposed of in public trash receptacles;

     6.     Allow any items relating to the operation of the vending business to be placed anywhere other than in, on, or under the stand;

     7.     Set up, maintain, or permit the use of any additional table, crate, carton, rack, or any other device to increase the selling or display capacity of his or her stand where such terms have not been described by his or her application;

     8.     Solicit or conduct business with persons in motor vehicles;

     9.     Sell anything other than that which he or she is licensed to vend;

     10.   Sound or permit the sounding of any device that produces a loud and raucous noise, or use or operate any loud speaker, public address system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to attract the attention of the public;

     11.   Operate within fifty (50) feet of a fire hydrant or twenty-five (25) feet of a transit stop;

     12.   Operate within fifteen (15) feet of the outer edge of a driveway or vehicular entrance to public or private property in residential zones;

     13.   Operate in a manner that does not maintain four feet of clear space on a public sidewalk;

     14.   Operate on any street that does not have a public sidewalk;

     15.   Operate a stationary vending cart in exclusively residential zones;

     16.   Operate a stationary sidewalk vending cart in any city park that has a concessionaire during the hours the concessionaire is open;

     17.   Operate within fifty (50) feet of an abutting residential zone within a city park;

     18.   Operate a sidewalk vending cart within a parking lot within a city park;

     19.   Operate a sidewalk vending cart within one thousand (1,000) feet from any public or private school property, during school hours or one hour before or after school hours;

     20.   Operate a sidewalk vending cart within five hundred (500) feet of a certified farmers’ market or events issued a temporary use permit during the operating hours of that certified farmers’ market or permitted event; and

     21.   Operate in violation of any other generally applicable law.

     D.    No advertising shall be permitted, except to identify the name of the product or the name of the vendor and the posting of prices. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2019)

 

5.15.030 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Violations of Section 5.15.020, other than failure to possess a valid sidewalk vending permit, is punishable by the following:

     1.     An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.

     2.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

     3.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

     4.     Rescission of a sidewalk vending permit for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations within one year of the first violation.

     B.     Violations of Section 5.15.020 by vending without a license or permit issued by the city is punishable by the following:

     1.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation.

     2.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

     3.     An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

     C.     Upon proof of a valid permit issued by the city, any administrative fines imposed under this subsection for vending without possessing a copy of the permit shall be reduced to the administrative fines set forth in Section 5.15.030(A) of this code.

     D.    All fines imposed pursuant to subsections (A) or (B) above shall be subject to an ability-to-pay determination as described in California Government Code Section 51039(f). Concurrently with issuing a citation for such fines to a person, the city shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination and shall make available instructions or other materials for requesting an ability-to-pay determination. (Ord. 474 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 5.17 PEDDLING NEAR SCHOOLS PROHIBITED
5.17.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Public right-of-way” means any place or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of vehicular traffic, including any berm or shoulder parkway, or median strip thereof and any area or way set aside or open to the general public for purposes of pedestrian traffic, whether or not it is paved.

     “Vehicle” means and includes every wagon, cart, push cart, coach, carriage, omnibus, automobile, cycle, car, motorcycle, truck, trailer, tractor engine, tractor or other conveyance or contrivance for moving persons, animals or things in whatever manner and by whatever force or power the same may be ridden, driven, propelled, drawn or moved, which is driven, propelled, drawn or moved on a public right-of-way. (Ord. 302 § 1, 2000)

 

5.17.020 Prohibition on peddling or selling products near schools.
     It is unlawful for any person to peddle or sell any goods, wares, or liquids or edibles for human consumption from vehicles in the public right-of-way within one thousand (1,000) feet from any public or private school property, during school hours or one hour before or one hour after school hours. (Ord. 302 § 1, 2000)

 

5.17.030 Exemption.
     Persons peddling or selling pursuant to a validly issued city parade/special event permit shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 302 § 1, 2000)

 

5.17.040 Penalty—Infraction.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine as follows:

     A.    Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;

     B.     One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation;

     C.     Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third or more violations occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation. (Ord. 302 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 5.18 PINBALL MACHINES
5.18.010 Pinball machine defined.
     As used in this chapter, “pinball machine” means any punchboard or any table game or device commonly known as a “pin game” or “marble game” or any claw, scoop or grab machine, or any “horse racing” machine or game, or any device similar thereto, the operation, use or play of which is controlled by placing therein any coin, plate, disk, plug, key or other device, or by the payment of any fee, or upon the payment or delivery of anything of value, or upon the making of any purchase. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 1, 1947)

 

5.18.020 Use prohibited where.
     Every person, firm, or corporation who keeps, maintains, possesses, or has under his or her control, either as owner, lessee, agent, employee, mortgagee, or otherwise, in any place except a building designed for and used exclusively for residence purposes or a part of a building where such part was designed for and is used exclusively for residence purposes, and any yards or courts used exclusively appurtenant thereto, any pinball machine, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 2, 1947)

 

5.18.030 Destruction of machines required when.
     The sheriff shall destroy any pinball machine which is used, kept, placed or maintained in violation of any statute, or of the ordinance codified in this chapter or of any other ordinance after any person, firm or corporation, owning, possessing or having control of such machine has pleaded guilty to, or has been convicted of such violation and such violation has become final. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 3, 1947)

 

5.18.040 Deposit of money from destroyed machines.
     The sheriff shall deposit in the county treasury to the credit of the general fund all money contained in any machine, which machine he or she destroys pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.18.030. he or she shall destroy all other contents of any such machine. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 4, 1947)

 

5.18.050 Order releasing machines from custody.
     The sheriff shall apply to the judge of any court which has custody of any machine subject to destruction under the terms of Section 5.18.030 for an order releasing such machines to him or her for the purpose of complying with this chapter. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 5, 1947)

 

5.18.060 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Any person, firm or corporation, or association of persons, violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the city jail for not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Each such person, firm or corporation, or association of persons, shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm or corporation, or association of persons, and is punishable therefor as provided by this chapter. (Ord. 140 § 2, 1986; LACC Ord. 4852 § 7, 1947)

Chapter 5.19 LOITERING AND LITTERING
5.19.010 Loitering and littering.
     For statutory provisions on littering, see Penal Code Section 374 et seq.; for provisions on loitering about schools, see Penal Code Section 653g. (Added during 1995 codification)

Chapter 5.20 VIOLATIONS OF THE PEACE, HEALTH OR SAFETY
5.20.020 Removing or defacing official notices prohibited—Exception.
     No persons shall intentionally deface, tear down, obliterate or destroy any copy, transcript or extract of or from any ordinance of the city which shall be posted in, on or along any highway or other public place, or any proclamation, advertisement or notice set up at any place by authority of any federal, state or local law or regulation before the expiration of the time in which such proclamation, advertisement or notice was to remain set up. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.030 Smoking at polling places and while canvassing votes prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to smoke any cigar, cigarette, pipe or any tobacco, in any form or by any means whatever, in any polling place at any time during an election or during the canvassing in any polling place of the votes cast at an election. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.050 Permitting certain substances to flow onto highways or into drainage channels prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to deposit, turn, drain or divert into or upon any public highway, drainage ditch, storm drain or flood control channel owned or controlled by any public agency within the city any mud, rotary mud, sand, water, oil or liquid of petroleum content, or in any manner permit by seepage, overflow or otherwise, any such mud, rotary mud, sand, water, oil or liquid of petroleum content to escape from any property owned, leased or controlled by such person, firm or corporation and to flow into or upon any such public highway, drainage ditch, storm drain or flood control channel within the city. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.060 Throwing objects on highways or at vehicles prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to throw upon, along or across any public highway in the city any snowball or missile capable of causing personal injury or damage to personal property, or to throw any such snowball or missile at or toward or in the vicinity of any vehicle standing or moving along, upon or across any such highway. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.070 Gates opening outward over highways—Construction and maintenance prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful to construct or maintain any gate in any fence in such manner that such gate may be opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic.

     B.     It is unlawful to cause or permit any gate in any fence to be or remain opened outward over any portion of any public highway open for either pedestrian or vehicular traffic. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.080 Sale of knives to minors prohibited—Exceptions.
     It is unlawful for any person to sell to any minor any dirk or dagger, or any knife with a blade three inches or more in length, or any snap-blade or spring-blade knife, regardless of the length of the blade, unless such minor is accompanied by an adult person and unless the person selling such dagger or knife keeps a full and complete record of the name and address of the purchaser. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.090 Drinking in public deemed misdemeanor—Exceptions.
     Every person who consumes any beer, wine or other intoxicating beverage on any public street, sidewalk, alley, highway or parking lot open to the public is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section shall not be deemed to proscribe any act which is positively permitted or prohibited by any law of the state of California. (Ord. 141 § 1, 1986)

 

5.20.110 Juvenile loitering.
     It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or aimlessly drive or ride about in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, between the hours of ten p.m. on any day and sunrise of the immediately following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when:

     A.    The minor is accompanied by his or her parent or parents, legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older;

     B.     The minor is upon an errand directed by his or her parent or parents or legal guardian or other adult person having the legal care or custody of the minor, or by his or her spouse eighteen (18) years of age or older;

     C.     The minor is returning directly home from a public meeting or a place of public entertainment such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity;

     D.    The presence of such minor in said place or places is connected with or required with respect to a business, trade, profession or occupation in which said minor is lawfully engaged. (Ord. 167 § 1, 1989)

 

5.20.120 Demonstration equipment prohibited.
     A.    No person shall carry or possess while participating in any demonstration, rally, picket line or other such public assembly, any length of lumber, wood, wood lath or other wood product, unless the other dimensions of such object do not exceed a thickness of one-fourth inch and a width of two inches, or if not generally rectangular in shape, such object shall not exceed three-quarters inch in its thickest dimension; and such object is blunt and unsharpened at its end and edge.

     B.     No person shall carry or possess while participating in any demonstration, rally, picket line or other such public assembly, any bar, shaft, rod, cable, wire, chain or other such length of hard metal, hard plastic or other hard synthetic material.

     C.     Violation of this section is a misdemeanor punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment in the County Jail for not to exceed six months, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 54 §§ 1, 2, 1979)

Chapter 5.22 DAYTIME RESTRICTIONS FOR MINORS
5.22.010 Prohibited act.
     A.    It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years, who is subject to compulsory education or to compulsory continuation education, to be “absent from school and found in a public place,” as defined in subsection B of this section, unless the minor has one of the valid excuses specified in Section 5.22.020.

     B.     For purposes of this chapter, a minor is “absent from school and found in a public place” if the minor is found idling, wandering, strolling, playing or aimlessly driving or riding about, in or upon any public street, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground or other public ground, public place or public building, place of amusement or eating place, vacant lot or unsupervised place, or any place open to the public during the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and one-thirty p.m. of the same day, on days when the minor’s school is in session. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1996)

 

5.22.020 Valid excuses.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply when a minor has one of the following valid excuses:

     A.    The minor has in his or her possession a written excuse from the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor, which excuse provides a reasonable explanation, as determined by the court, for the minor’s absence from school;

     B.     The minor is accompanied by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

     C.     The minor is upon an emergency errand directed by the minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor;

     D.    The minor is going to or returning directly from a medical appointment;

     E.     The minor has permission to leave campus and the minor has in his or her possession a valid, school-issued, off-campus permit;

     F.     The minor is going to or returning directly from a public meeting or place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play, sporting event, dance or school activity, provided such meeting, event or activity is a school-approved activity for the minor or is otherwise supervised by school personnel of the minor’s school; or

     G.    The presence of the minor in the place or places is connected with or required by a school-approved or school-related business, trade, profession or occupation in which the minor is lawfully engaged. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1996)

 

5.22.030 Infraction—Penalty.
     Violation of this chapter shall constitute an infraction punishable as provided in Chapter 1.04 of this code. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1996)

 

5.22.040 Hearing requirement—Parental obligation to attend.
     A minor guilty of an infraction under this chapter must attend a court hearing on the infraction and must be accompanied at the hearing by his or her parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor. If any such parental or custodial person(s) fails to attend the hearing with the minor, and unless the interests of justice would otherwise be served, the court shall continue the hearing and shall issue a citation to the parental or custodial person(s) directing the person(s) to appear at the continued hearing with the minor. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1996)

 

5.22.050 Penalty may be set aside for first infraction.
     Notwithstanding Section 5.22.030, the court may set aside the fine imposed by this chapter, or any portion thereof, if the fine is based on the minor’s first infraction under this chapter, and provided the minor produces proof satisfactory to the court that any of the following has occurred during the period between the initial hearing on the infraction and any subsequent hearing set by the court:

     A.    The minor has had no unexcused absences from school;

     B.     The minor has performed ten hours of court-approved community service during times other than the minor’s hours of school attendance; or

     C.     The minor’s parent(s), legal guardian(s) or other adult person(s) having the legal care or custody of the minor has or have attended a parenting class or a series of parenting classes approved by the court. (Ord. 268 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 5.24 USE OF PARK/DESIGNATED RECREATIONAL FACILITIES
5.24.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as set forth in this section:

     “Club” means a group or organization formed with the purpose of providing recreation, athletic, athletic competition and/or sports training opportunities for its membership where such membership is exclusive or qualifying as determined by the group/organization.

     “Commercial use” means any use of a park/designated recreational facility for or in connection with, any money making venture, whether or not such venture is profitable; provided, however, that fund-raising activities conducted by a nonprofit organization, recognized as such by the state of California, shall not be deemed to be commercial use.

     “Emergency use” means necessary use of a restricted field due to the unavailability of another field caused by unforeseen, unpredictable and/or unavoidable occurrences such as weather, maintenance, vandalism, natural disaster or medical emergency.

     “Inflatable jumper” means a structural apparatus, toy, device or other equipment, inflated with oxygen, helium or other gaseous compound and commonly used by children for jumping, rolling, playing and/or exercising within the interior and/or on or on top of the structural confines of the apparatus, toy, device or other equipment.

     “Joint use facility” means any facility that is identified as a joint use facility in the joint use agreement between the La Cañada unified school district and the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Nonresident” means any person, group, business or nonprofit organization as defined in this chapter, that is not a resident.

     “Organized team play” means persons gathered in a park/designated recreational facility engaging in one or more of the following activities:

     1.     A practice, drill or other activity, overseen by a supervisor or coach, for the purpose of facilitating the development of skills in a recreational, club or sport activity; or

     2.     A game or contest consisting of two or more teams, with a total of eleven (11) or more participants.

     “Park/designated recreational facility” includes each and every facility located in the city, including joint use facilities as defined in this chapter, which is operated by the city for active community use, whether or not such facility is owned by the city.

     “Permittee” means any person who has been issued a valid permit pursuant to this chapter.

     “Person” means an individual, club, corporation, partnership, joint venture, firm, social club, athletic organization, fraternal organization or any other group or combination of individuals acting as a unit.

     “Recreational” means an activity that meets both of the following:

     1.     Open to all persons, regardless of athletic ability; and

     2.     All persons who wish to actively participate are afforded an opportunity to do so, including activities which consist of “all-stars” selected from the group of recreational users, provided however that such “all-stars” shall be limited to a period of not more than two months, which period may be extended upon application to the parks and recreation commission.

     “Resident” means:

     1.     In the case of an individual, a person whose principal place of residence is in the city;

     2.     In the case of a group, an organization or collective of people, one which at-least half of its members, or not less than three hundred fifty (350) members, whichever is less, have their principal place of residence in the city.

     3.     In the case of a business or nonprofit organization, one which has a bona fide place of business in the city. (Ord. 353 § 1, 2005; Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.020 Commercial use prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to use any park/designated recreational facility for a commercial use, except as permitted in Chapter 5.15. (Ord. 474 § 3, 2019; Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.022 Tennis ball restriction.
     No person shall bring on, cause to be brought on, allow to remain, or maintain in their possession and/or control more than six tennis balls on a tennis court at any time, except by permit. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.025 Golf prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to use any park/designated recreational facility for playing, practicing or instructing golf. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.026 Inflatable jumpers at Mayors’ Discovery Park prohibited.
     No person(s) shall locate, install, inflate or otherwise use an inflatable jumper at Mayors’ Discovery Park. (Ord. 353 § 2, 2005)

 

5.24.027 Hitting of baseballs at Cornishon Play Field restricted.
     A.    No person over the age of twelve (12) years of age shall hit, bat, or propel by use of any device or apparatus, or cause to be hit, batted, or propelled by use of any device or apparatus, any baseball, hardball, softball or other similar play equipment, at the Cornishon Play Field, except for coaches participating in organized team play with a valid city permit issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.030 Reservation procedure.
     A.    Any resident wishing to obtain exclusive use of any park/designated recreational facility, or any portion thereof, for a specific date(s) and time(s) shall apply to the city manager or designee for a reservation of such facility not less than thirty-one (31) days in advance of the requested date of use. Nonresidents wishing to obtain exclusive use of any park/designated recreational facility, or any portion thereof, for a specific date(s) and time(s) shall apply to the parks and recreation commission for a reservation of such facility not less than (60) days in advance of the requested date of use. All applications for reservations must be on official forms provided by the city. In making a determination on an application for reservation, the approving body may consider factors such as whether the applicant is a resident or non-resident, recreational or club, youth league or adult league, or a long-time established user or a new user. When requests for reservations conflict, the approving body may consider the different factors set forth above, and may make its decision based upon preference for one or more of the factors or any other factor.

     B.     The city manager or designee may require an applicant to provide such information as necessary to ensure that the applicant is a resident, and that all provisions of this chapter and all other rules and regulations pertaining to park/designated recreational facility use will be complied with.

     C.     Issuance of an approved permit may be made contingent upon such conditions as the city manager or designee or parks and recreation commission, whichever is applicable, determines are necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter and all other rules and regulations pertaining to park/designated recreational facility use. The city manager or designee may require a permittee to provide general liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence. The city, and its officers, agents and employees, shall be named as an additional insured on such policy.

     D.    A chaperon, eighteen (18) years of age or older, will be required for every fifteen (15) participants at children or teen events.

     E.     The transfer or assignment of any permit or reservation is prohibited, without the prior written consent of the city manager or designee.

     F.     La Cañada Memorial Park, Glenhaven Park and Glenola Park shall only be reserved with the prior approval of the city pursuant to this chapter. At all other times, these park/designated recreational facilities shall be available on a first-come, first-serve basis.

     G.    No organized team play is permitted at the FIS lower and Cornishon fields on Sunday, except Sunday permits may be issued for FIS lower and Cornishon fields for emergency use or as may be authorized by resolution of the city council.

     H.    Organized team play at the FIS upper field is permitted on Sunday, only with a permit.

     I.      Organized team play at Memorial Park, Glenhaven Park and Glenola Park is permitted only with a permit.

     J.      Use of portable lights on all joint use facilities during joint use hours shall be prohibited unless such use is provided for in the permit issued by the city, except that all public utility, public safety, city and school district personnel or their contractors or vendors shall be exempt from this provision. (Ord. 399 § 1, 2011; Ord. 398-U § 1, 2011; Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.035 Fees and fee waiver.
     Each application for a reservation shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. A resident applicant may make an application for a fee waiver to the city manager or designee. Fee waivers may be granted to residents at the city’s discretion, when two or more of the following conditions have been met:

     A.    The resident applicant is a non-profit or not-for-profit organization recognized as such by the state of California.

     B.     The resident applicant agrees to provide in-kind services or perform community service.

     C.     The activity/event for which the permit has been requested is open to the public, free of charge.

     D.    The city council is a partner, co-sponsor, or has formally endorsed the event for which the permit is being requested.

     Any determination by the city manager or designee shall be final and effective unless appealed to the parks and recreation commission by the resident applicant within ten calendar days following issuance of the denial. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city manager and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal. The parks and recreation commission shall conduct a hearing on the appeal, and following such hearing, shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse, or modify the determination of the city manager or designee. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.040 Reservation exclusive.
     Every person must immediately vacate a park/designated recreational facility, or any portion thereof, which has been reserved for use by another person, upon being presented a permit obtained pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.050 User responsibility.
     A.    Every person who uses a park/designated recreational facility shall be liable for, and shall indemnify and defend the city against, any damages caused by or resulting from that person’s use.

     B.     Every person who uses a park/designated recreational facility shall be responsible for picking up and removing all litter and debris generated directly or indirectly by that person’s use.

     C.     Every person who uses a park/designated recreational facility may bring and maintain a dog or cat if such dog or cat is kept on a leash or chain not longer than six feet in length and is kept under full control of its owner or custodian. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

 

5.24.055 Closures.
     A.    The city manager and/or designee shall have the authority to close any park/designated recreational facility or portion thereof, require the exit of all persons therein, and prohibit further public use when the park/designated recreational facility is closed for maintenance, repair, or when the city manager and/or designee determines that conditions exist in said park/designated recreational facility or portion thereof which present a hazard to the park/designated recreational facility or to public safety. This section does not apply to any person who has express written consent from the city manager and/or designee to use a park/designated recreational facility when it is closed.

     B.     Any person who, without express written consent from the city manager and/or designee, enters into, or upon, any park/designated recreational facility or portion thereof that has been closed as provided in subsection A above shall be in violation of this section. Notwithstanding Sections 1.04.010 and 5.24.060, the penalties for violation of this section shall be as follows:

     1.     The first violation shall be deemed an infraction with a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00);

     2.     The second violation shall be deemed an infraction with a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00);

     3.     The third violation shall be deemed an infraction with a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00); and

     4.     For the fourth violation, and any thereafter, a violation shall be treated as a misdemeanor in accordance with Section 1.04.010(A). (Ord. 486 § 1, 2019)

 

 

5.24.060 Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions or who fails to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction. The city manager or designee and/or the parks and recreation commission may suspend or revoke existing permits and/or deny future permits to any person, for a period of up to three years, who has been determined by the city manager or designee and/or the parks and recreation commission to have violated any of the provisions or who fails to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. The city manager or designee may deny future fee waivers to any person, for a period of up to three years, who falls to provide proof of the performance of any in-kind or community service projects if required as a condition of a fee waiver granted by the city. The city manager or designee may deny future fee waivers to any person, for a period of up to three years, who fails to comply with the condition that the activity/event for which the permit has been requested is open to the public, free of charge, if required as a condition of a fee waiver granted to them by the city. (Ord. 328 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 5.26 MATERIAL HARMFUL TO MINORS
5.26.010 Purpose.
     The council finds that the display and dissemination of material harmful to minors, as defined herein, presents a difficult and sensitive problem involving a delicate balancing of the rights of adults to view and to use such matter against the need to protect minors form exposure thereto.

     The harm to minors from exposure to such material derives at least as much from the context in which such material is presented as from the content of the material per se, as the context can represent community and parental attitudes which minors may tend to adopt and integrate into that individual’s own sense of identity. The context of the display of material harmful to minors may consequently be instrumental in the minor’s education and acculturation into the community. The regulation of the display of such material is therefor a matter of urgent concern to the community.

     The council finds that by restricting the display of material harmful to minors in public places, the community can promote in its citizens responsible, honest and understanding attitudes toward adult sexuality. Such attitudes are best promoted by leaving open channels of exhibition and dissemination through responsible individuals and organizations involved in the education of youth, or through individuals in a parental relationship with the minor, to the extent otherwise allowed by California State law. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

 

5.26.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings set forth herein.

     “Display” means to show.

     “Knowingly” means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection of inquiry of, the character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible to examination.

     “Material which is harmful to minors” shall have the same meaning as “harmful matter” as set forth in Chapter 7.6 of Title 9 of the California Penal Code, or any successor thereto.

     “Minor” shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 313 of the California Penal Code, or any successor thereto.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity having custody or control over material subject to this chapter.

     “Public place” means any public right-of-way, including every street, parkway and sidewalk; any lot, parcel, building or structure owned or leased by any public entity; and any private property to which the public in general is invited or permitted to enter upon, whether for a fee or otherwise, during such time as the public may enter upon such property. “Public place” does not include any place which would otherwise qualify pursuant to this subsection if minors are excluded from such place and if all material harmful to minors located in such place is so located as not to be visible from any public place outside of the place from which minors are excluded.

     “Recognized and established” means an organization or agency having (1) a full-time faculty and diversified curriculum in the case of a school; (2) on staff one or more licensed physicians, nurses, psychiatrists, psychologists or other health care professionals in the case of a medical clinic or hospital; or (3) affiliation with a national or regional denomination in the case of a religious institution. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

 

5.26.030 Display restricted.
     No person shall knowingly display material which is harmful to minors in any public place, or in any way where such material is visible from a public place, unless the display of such material is restricted by the placement of devices commonly known as blinder racks in front of the material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

 

5.26.040 Exemption—Adults-only areas.
     A person may comply with the requirements of this chapter by physically segregating material which is harmful to minors from other items in a manner so as to physically prohibit the view of the material by minors, and by prominently posting at the entrance(s) to such restricted area “Adults Only -you must be 18 to enter,” or other words to that effect, and by enforcing such restrictions. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

 

5.26.050 Exemptions.
     The following are exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

     A.    Recognized and established schools, religious institutions and medical clinics and hospitals;

     B.     Health care professionals licensed by the state of California;

     C.     Public libraries;

     D.    Governmental agencies or government sponsored organizations;

     E.     Individuals in a parental relationship with the minor;

     F.     All persons acting in their capacity as employees or agents of organizations or persons listed in this section. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

 

5.26.060 Violations.
     A.    No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not exceeding six months or both such fine and imprisonment. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of any such provision is committed, continued or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly.

     B.     In addition to the penalties provided in subsection A of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by this city, and every day such condition continues shall be regarded as a new and separate offense. (Ord. 158 § 1, 1988)

Chapter 5.28 CHARGE FOR EXCESS SHERIFF’S SERVICES
5.28.010 Determination of services.
     When any party or gathering occurs at a premises and a sheriff’s deputy arriving at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person responsible for the event, or if either of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor, will be held jointly and severally liable for the cost of providing sheriff’s personnel on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided by the sheriff’s department. Sheriff’s personnel utilized in a second response, after an initial response and first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the services normally provided. The accounting and billing procedures as set forth in Section 5.28.020 below shall apply. (Ord. 168 § 1, 1989)

 

5.28.020 Determination of costs.
     A.    The costs of special security assignments shall include costs for total number of deputies involved and total minutes expended after the officers arrive on the scene. In addition, such costs shall include equipment usage as well as damages to city/county property and/or injuries to city/county personnel. Actual costs will be determined on a per occurrence basis by the sheriff’s department based on the level and scope of service provided.

     B.     All fees and charges levied for sheriff’s services described in Section 5.28.010 shall be due and payable upon presentation, and shall constitute a valid and subsisting debt in favor of the city and/or county and against the owner of the premises, the person in charge of the premises and/or the person responsible for the party, gathering or assemblage, or if any of the aforementioned individuals is a minor, then the parents and guardians of that minor. Fees and charges in an amount established by resolution of the city council shall be levied to recover the city’s actual costs for notification and collection of delinquent accounts. Such fees and charges are a part of the fees and charges established for the service rendered and shall be collected as such. (Ord. 168 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 5.40 SCAVENGING OF RECYCLABLES
5.40.010 Definitions.
     The following words, terms and/or phrases shall be defined as follows:

     “Authorized recycling agent” means a municipal collection service, private refuse hauler, private recycling enterprise, private commercial entity or private nonprofit corporation or association authorized or contacted with by the city of La Cañada Flintridge to collect recyclable waste material.

     “Designated collection location” means the place where an authorized recycling agent has contracted with the city or private entity to pick up recyclable materials. This location will customarily be, but not be limited to, the curbside of a residential property or the service alley of a commercial enterprise.

     “Recyclables” means materials having an economic value in the secondary materials market. The following materials have such economic value: aluminum cans and articles, bi-metal cans, glass containers, polyethylene (PET) plastic beverage containers, newspaper, and any other materials as identified and included specifically within this chapter.

     “Scavenging” means the unauthorized collection, removal or, or possession of recyclable materials intended for collection by the city’s authorized recycling agent.

     “Segregated from other waste material” shall be defined as any of the following:

     1.     The placement of recyclable materials in designated recycling containers or any other container visibly marked with the word “Recycle” or any other such word, words or wording which reasonably conveys the intent that the container is being used for the specific purpose of holding recyclable materials;

     2.     The binding of recyclable materials separately from the other waste materials;

     3.     The physical separation of recyclable materials from other waste materials. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1990)

 

5.40.020 Ownership of recyclable materials.
     All ownership and title rights to recyclable materials shall be vested in the city of La Cañada Flintridge once such recyclable materials have been placed at the designated collection location by the resident or commercial enterprise. The city of La Cañada Flintridge reserves the right to transfer all or a portion of its ownership and title rights to its authorized recycling agent. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1990)

 

5.40.030 Unauthorized collection of recyclable materials.
     No person, other than the authorized recycling agent, shall remove recyclable materials which have been segregated from other waste materials and placed at the designated collection location for the purposes of collection and recycling. Unless otherwise authorized by the city in writing, recyclable materials may not be removed by anyone other than the authorized recycling agent of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1990)

 

5.40.040 Individual donation or sale of recyclables.
     Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of the individual person, persons, group or organizations to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of his or her own recyclable materials. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1990)

 

5.40.050 Punishment for violation.
     A.    Any persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter not more than once in any twelve (12) month period shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).

     B.     Any person having been found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter who, within a period of twelve (12) months, commits a second violation of the same provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).

     C.     Any person having been found guilty of violating the provisions of this chapter who, within a period of twelve (12) months, commits a third or more violation(s) of the same provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such occurrence. (Ord. 177 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 5.50 LOITERING BY CRIMINAL STREET GANGS
5.50.010 Definitions.
     “Criminal street gang” means a criminal street gang as that term is defined in California Penal Code section 186.22(f).

     “Public place” means the public way and any other location open to the public, whether publicly or privately owned, including, but not limited to any street, sidewalk, avenue, highway, road, curb area, alley, park, playground, or other public ground or public building, any common area of a school, hospital, apartment house, office building, transport facility, shop, privately owned place of business, to which the public is invited, including any place of amusement, entertainment, or eating place. Any “public place” also includes the front yard area, driveway and walkway of any private residence, business, or apartment house. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)

 

5.50.020 Prohibited acts.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person who is a member of a “criminal street gang” or who is in the company of or acting in concert with a member of a “criminal street gang,” to loiter or idle in a “public place,” under any of the following circumstances:

     1.     With the intent to publicize a criminal street gang’s dominance over certain territory in order to intimidate non-members of the gang from entering, remaining in or using the public place adjacent area;

     2.     With the intent to conceal ongoing commerce in illegal drugs or other unlawful activity. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)

 

5.50.030 Powers of law enforcement officers not limited.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the power or right of a law enforcement officer to make any investigation, detention or arrest as such law enforcement officer would be permitted to make in absence of this chapter. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)

 

5.50.040 Parental control.
     Any parent(s), legal guardian(s), or other adult person(s) authorized by the parent(s) or guardian(s) to have the care and custody of a minor, who knowingly permits or by insufficient control allows a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)

 

5.50.050 Penalty.
     Violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment not to exceed six months, or both. (Ord. 345 § 1, 2003)

Title 6 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 6.04 REGULATION OF FILMING, TELECASTING AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
Chapter 6.05 REGULATION OF FOOD FACILITIES
Chapter 6.06 SOLICITATIONS
Chapter 6.07 TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSING
Chapter 6.08 BUSINESS CODE—TITLE AND PURPOSE
Chapter 6.12 BUSINESS CODE—DEFINITIONS
Chapter 6.16 BUSINESS CODE—LICENSE REGULATIONS
Chapter 6.20 BUSINESS CODE—FEES FOR BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.24 BUSINESS CODE—ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.28 BUSINESS CODE—ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
Chapter 6.29 REGULATION OF ADULT BUSINESSES
Chapter 6.30 REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS, NEWSSTANDS AND/OR SIMILAR DEVICES
Chapter 6.40 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
Chapter 6.50 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE

Chapter 6.04 REGULATION OF FILMING, TELECASTING AND STILL PHOTOGRAPHY
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 245.

 

6.04.010 Purpose.
     The city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge finds and declares that commercial filming, telecasting, and still photography activity in the city provides unique and significant contributions to the community. The purpose of this chapter is to create an environment conducive to commercial filming, telecasting, and still photography activity while also ensuring the health, safety, peace and welfare of the community through the appropriate regulation. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.020 Definitions.
     The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     “Adjacent properties” means real property abutting any side of the site location and real property directly across the street from the site location within the property lines of the site location.

     “Affected area” means all properties within a radius of three hundred (300) feet from the site location. In no case shall this result in fewer than the three most immediate properties on each side of the site location and the properties to the front and rear of the site location property lines, plus immediately abutting properties, being designated an affected area.

     “Applicant” means any person who completes and submits an application for permit and/or the person on whose behalf an application is submitted.

     “Cast and crew” means any and all actors, persons employed as on-site production staff or technicians, and persons providing physical products, services, and food to the production.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city, or designee.

     “Commercial filming” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting motion pictures, television shows or programs for a commercial purpose that is not a student academic project, charitable work, or public service announcement for general consumption.

     “Commercial purpose” means and includes to make or produce with the intent to promote, advertise, or solicit consumer consumption in order to derive a profit or monetary advantages. Charitable purposes, academic uses, or general public service announcements are not included.

     “Commercial still photography” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting still photographs to be used for a commercial purpose. Commercial still photography does not include the staging or shooting of still photographs for the sole benefit of private use.

     “Commercial telecasting” means and includes all activity attendant to staging or shooting live radio broadcasts or television telecasts for a commercial purpose that are not exempt pursuant to Section 6.04.030(B).

     “Director” means the city’s director of administrative services, or designee.

     “Fire department” means the county of Los Angeles fire department.

     “Level 1 production” means a production that:

     A.    Has thirty (30) or fewer cast and crew at all times during production; and

     B.     Does not require use of the public right-of-way; and

     C.     Does not involve special effects; and

     D.    Involves production activity that occurs only between the hours of seven a.m. to nine p.m.

     “Level 2 production” means a production that:

     A.    Has more than thirty (30) cast and crew; and/or

     B.     Requires use of the public right-of-way; and/or

     C.     Involves special effects; and/or

     D.    Involves production activity between the hours of six a.m. and seven a.m. and/or nine p.m. to twelve a.m.

     “Level 3 production” means any production that takes place at a site location where there has been twelve (12) or more cumulative days of Level 1 productions, Level 2 productions, and Level 3 productions in the then-current calendar year.

     “Permit” means a written authorization by the director to conduct a production.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, syndicate, the United States, the state of California, any county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group combination acting as a unit.

     “Production” means any commercial filming, commercial telecasting, and/or commercial still photography and any activity related thereto, including, but not limited to, parking and/or storage for said activity.

     “Property owner” means a person who is the record owner, as shown on the Los Angeles County assessor’s latest secured real property assessment roll or then current grant deed of record as shown in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office.

     “Sheriff’s department” means the county of Los Angeles sheriff’s department.

     “Site location” means the specific site or address where any production occurs, and includes the entire lot or parcel on which such activity takes place, unless otherwise determined by the director.

     “Special effects” means any artificial visual and/or sound effects beyond the range of standard photography, filming or recording, including, but not limited to, audible gunfire, pyrotechnic explosions (e.g., mortars, primacord, black powder, gasoline explosions), and the use of gas-powered ritter fans to generate wind on the set, any of which can be heard at the nearest adjacent property line. Non-audible activities, such as the use of non-noisemaking prop guns or other devices, flame bars, and rain bars are not included in this definition. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.030 Prohibitions.
     A.    No person shall engage in any production, or any other filming, live telecasting, or still photography activity which would, in the reasonable judgment of the city manager, constitute a hazard to the health, safety, peace or welfare of the community.

     B.     No person shall use any public or private property, facility or residence within the city for the purposes of production without first obtaining a permit from the director as set forth in Sections 6.04.040 through 6.04.060, as applicable, except as follows:

     1.     Current News. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to or affect reporters, photographers or camera operators in the employ of a newspaper, internet uses, news service, radio or television broadcasting station, or similar entity engaged in on-the-spot broadcasting of news events concerning those persons, scenes or occurrences which are in the current news and of general public interest.

     2.     Academic Purpose. No application fees or permit fees shall be required for any motion picture, radio, television production and/or still photography activity which is found by the director to be conducted or carried on wholly for an academic purpose. However, submittal of an application for permit and a permit shall be required.

     3.     Charitable Purpose. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any production intended for the advancement of athletic, educational, literary, public comfort, health, and safety, poverty reduction, religion, scientific knowledge, and other such objectives without seeking private benefit or profit. Submittal of an application for permit and a permit shall be required.

     4.     Public Agency Production. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any public agency production including, but not limited to, public service announcements.

     C.     No person shall engage in any production between the hours of twelve a.m. and six a.m. on any day. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.040 Application for permit.
     A.    Application.

     1.     An applicant shall submit a completed application to the director. The application shall be on a form approved by the director and may require the following information:

     a.     The names, addresses, telephone numbers, and signatures of the applicant(s) or, if the applicant is an organization, of its responsible officer(s);

     b.     The site location;

     c.     The number of cast and crew to be involved in the site location;

     d.     The inclusive hours and dates that the proposed production will take place;

     e.     The name and telephone number of the responsible person for the site location;

     f.      Proof that the responsible person for the site location has approved the proposed production on his or her property if he or she is not the applicant;

     g.     The telephone numbers of the site location and main office of the applicant;

     h.     A statement of the character or nature of the proposed activity specific enough so that the director can determine the potential effect and/or impact on the properties within the affected area;

     i.      The name, address and telephone number of the person who will be in charge of the activity and be responsible for the activity;

     j.      A statement as to whether special effects and/or artificial lighting will be used;

     k.     A statement as to whether the public right-of-way will be used, in what manner, frequency, and over what period of time;

     l.      The food servicing arrangements;

     m.    The amount and type of equipment, including type(s) of vehicles, to be involved;

     n.     An activity impact mitigation plan (AIMP) which shall identify efforts which will be undertaken to mitigate potentially negative impacts to the affected area as a result of the proposed activity; and

     o.     A certificate of insurance from a carrier approved by the director and in the types and amounts set forth in Section 6.04.070(A)(3).

     2.     Where a production will involve the use of more than one property, the applicant shall process separate applications to obtain a permit for each property.

     3.     The city manager may require additional information in the standard application in accordance with a promulgated rule or regulation as provided in Section 6.04.080.

     4.     The city’s mere receipt of an application shall not deem the application as complete. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.050 Level 1 productions.
     A.    Time Period for Submittal of Application.

     1.     An applicant shall submit a completed application for a Level 1 production to the director not later than twelve p.m. on the fifth business day prior to the date upon which the production is set to begin.

     B.     Neighborhood Notification of Application Submittal.

     1.     Not later than the fourth business day prior to the date upon which the production is set to begin, the city, or its designee, shall mail written notice of the application submittal to properties in the affected area. The cost of generating the mailing list and actual mailing by the city, or its designee, shall be paid by the applicant and shall be included in the application fee, as set forth in Section 6.04.040(A)(4).

     2.     Mailing shall be by first-class mail.

     3.     The written notice of application submittal shall include the following information:

     a.     The site location;

     b.     The proposed dates of the production;

     c.     The proposed hours of the production;

     d.     The estimated number of cast and crew to be involved in the production;

     e.     Proposed use of the public right-of-way; and

     f.      Proposed special effects.

     C.     Approval or Denial of Application for Permit.

     1.     The director shall approve the application and cause a permit to be issued at any time after twelve p.m. on the day prior to the date upon which the production is set to begin if the following criteria are satisfied:

     a.     The director can make each of the following findings:

     i.      The applicant has complied with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable rules and regulations provided in Section 6.04.080; and

     ii.     The proposed activity or use of property will not unreasonably interfere with traffic circulation in the area; and

     iii.    The proposed activity and use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, peace or welfare of the community; and

     iv.    The proposed activity or use will not entail extraordinary or burdensome expense to the emergency services of the city.

     b.     The director has received insufficient protests as follows:

     i.      The director has received written and/or verbal protests from less than fifty-one (51) percent of properties in the affected area by twelve p.m. on the day prior to the date upon which the production is set to begin.

     ii.     For purposes of this subsection (C)(1)(b), no more than one signature per property shall be accepted. The signature of an adult occupant shall be acceptable.

     iii.    In lieu of submitting a protest, an adult occupant may indicate consent or objection to all productions within three hundred (300) feet of his or her property anticipated within a calendar year by executing and submitting a protest form which shall be prepared and maintained by the director and shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website. An executed protest form shall constitute a protest for each production in that calendar year for purposes of subsection (C)(1)(b)(i).

     c.     The applicant has submitted any and all documentation necessary for issuance of a permit.

     2.     The permit shall be subject to the requirements of Section 6.04.070(A).

     3.     The director may impose reasonable conditions of approval on the issuance of a permit, as set forth in Section 6.04.070(B).

     4.     The director shall deny the application if the criteria in subsection (C)(1) is not satisfied.

     D.    Obtaining the Permit and Notice of Permit Issuance.

     1.     Upon notification that the director can issue the permit in accordance with subsection (C)(1), the applicant shall:

     a.     Pay the application fee and a permit fee to off-set city costs with respect to ensuring compliance with the permit’s conditions of approval. Said fees shall be established by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time; and

     b.     Obtain the permit prior to conducting the production.

     2.     An appeal may be filed by any interested person in accordance with Section 6.04.120.

     E.     Any applicant who is issued a permit for a Level 1 production, but is found to have engaged in a Level 2 production or a Level 3 production, shall be in violation of this code as set forth in Section 6.04.130(A)(7). (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.060 Level 2 and Level 3 productions.
     A.    Neighborhood Notification of Application Submittal.

     1.     The following requirements shall apply to both Level 2 productions and Level 3 productions.

     2.     Following submittal of the application, the director shall mail written notice of the application submittal to properties in the affected area based on the following requirements. The notice shall be mailed by first-class mail and shall contain the information set forth in Section 6.04.050(B)(3).

     B.     Signatures Requirements.

     1.     The applicant shall obtain signatures to consent to the production as follows:

     a.     For Level 2 productions, the applicant shall obtain signatures of approval from fifty-one (51) percent of the properties in the affected area.

     b.     For Level 3 productions, the applicant shall obtain signatures of approval from sixty-seven (67) percent of the properties in the affected area and seventy-five (75) percent of adjacent properties.

     2.     For purposes of subsection (B)(1):

     a.     No more than one signature per property shall be accepted. The signature of an adult occupant shall be acceptable.

     b.     Where a flag lot is any one of the adjacent properties, signatures shall also be obtained from any properties within a seventy-five (75) foot radius of the boundary lines of the site location.

     3.     In lieu of providing signatures as required in subsection (B)(1), an adult occupant may indicate consent or objection to all productions within three hundred (300) feet of his or her property anticipated within a calendar year by executing and submitting an approval/disapproval form which shall be prepared and maintained by the director and shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website. An executed approval/disapproval form shall constitute a signature of approval or disapproval for the production for purposes of subsection (B)(1).

     C.     Approval or Denial of Application for Permit.

     1.     The director shall approve the application and cause a permit to be issued if the following criteria are satisfied:

     a.     The director can make the findings set forth in Section 6.04.050(C)(1)(a); and

     b.     There has been no production activity at the site location for a minimum of fifteen (15) days prior to the first day of production activity for which the permit will be issued; however, this criterion shall not be required if the site location is solely used for parking in conjunction with an approved production; and

     c.     The applicant has submitted any and all documentation necessary for issuance of a permit; and

     d.     The applicant has submitted the necessary signatures as set forth in subsection (B)(1), which have been verified by the director.

     2.     A permit for a Level 2 production or Level 3 production shall be limited to six days. Production under a permit must be completed within fourteen (14) days, excluding Sundays, after production begins.

     3.     The permit shall be subject to the requirements of Section 6.04.070(A).

     4.     The director may impose reasonable conditions of approval on the issuance of a permit, as set forth in Section 6.04.070(B).

     5.     The director shall deny the application if the criteria in subsection (C)(1) is not satisfied.

     D.    Obtaining the Permit and Notice of Permit Issuance.

     1.     Upon notification that the director can issue the permit in accordance with subsection (C)(1), the applicant shall:

     a.     Pay the application fee, a permit fee to off-set city costs with respect to ensuring compliance with the permit’s conditions of approval, and a public right-of-way fee, if applicable. Said fee shall be adopted by resolution of the city council and may be amended from time to time; and

     b.     Obtain the permit prior to conducting the production.

     2.     An appeal may be filed by any interested person in accordance with Section 6.04.120. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.070 Permit requirements and conditions of approval.
     A.    Each permit issued by the director shall be subject to the following limitations and/or requirements:

     1.     Production shall not be permitted on Sundays or major holidays.

     2.     Level 1 productions shall only be permitted during the hours of seven a.m. to nine p.m. Level 2 productions and Level 3 productions may also take place during the hours of six a.m. to seven a.m. and/or nine p.m. to twelve a.m.

     3.     An applicant shall be required to maintain insurance during the permitted production as follows:

     a.     Applicant is to maintain in full force and effect general liability and automobile liability insurance each in the amounts not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage, with a combined aggregate of two million dollars ($2,000,000.00). During any activity which includes chase scenes, special effects, stunts or activities involving aircraft, not less than two million dollars ($2,000,000.00) per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage insurance shall be required.

 

     b.     Applicant shall maintain workers’ compensation insurance as required by the California Labor Code.

     c.     All insurance policies will name, by endorsement, the city as an additional insured to the extent of the liability assumed by applicant, and protect the city against any legal costs in defending claims.

     d.     Each insurance policy required by this clause shall be endorsed to state that coverage shall not be suspended, voided or canceled except after thirty (30) days’ written notice by certified mail has been given to the city.

     e.     Original endorsements and certificates of insurance in a form acceptable to the city, effecting coverage required by this chapter, shall be kept on file with the city during the entire term of the permit.

     4.     As an alternative, or in addition, to the requirement of subsection (A)(3), the director may require, as a condition of issuing such a permit, that the applicant furnish a bond, security deposit, irrevocable letter of credit, or other performance guarantee acceptable to the city to protect the city against claims of third persons for personal injury, wrongful death and property damage.

     5.     If generator use is required, only shielded type generators shall be used at all times and shall not emit more than sixty-five (65) db as measured from the nearest property line.

     6.     Noise generated as a result of the permitted production, excluding special effects, shall not exceed sixty-five (65) db as measured at the nearest property line from the site of the activity. Under no circumstances shall the use of bullhorns be permitted.

     7.     Street closures shall be permitted up to three minutes per closure with a maximum of ten closures per hour, unless otherwise permitted by the director as an allowance under the permit.

     8.     Upon the request of the applicant, the director shall have the authority, upon showing of good cause, to change the date for which a permit has been issued. In such case, the director may impose additional conditions of approval, including, but not limited to, requiring the city, or its designee, to provide new neighborhood notification at the cost of the applicant.

     B.     In accordance with Sections 6.04.050(C)(3) and 6.04.060(C)(4), as applicable, the director may impose conditions of approval upon any permit as he or she deems reasonable in order to mitigate disruption to the health, safety, peace or welfare of the community and, specifically, occupants of surrounding properties. Said conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     Requirement to obtain a permit from the fire department or sheriff’s department.

     2.     Hours and date restrictions of the approved production.

     3.     The applicant shall defend, indemnify, release and hold harmless the city, its city council, boards, commissions, officers, and employees from and against any and all claims, demands, obligations, damages, actions, causes of action, suits, losses, judgments, fines, penalties, liabilities, and costs and expenses (including without limitation, attorneys’ fees, disbursements and court costs) of every kind and nature whatsoever which may arise from or in any manner relate (directly or indirectly) to the permitted activities. This indemnification shall include, but not be limited to, damages awarded against the city, if any, costs of suit, attorneys’ fees, and other expenses incurred in connection with such claim, action or proceeding whether incurred by the applicant, city and/or the parties initiating or bringing such proceeding.

     4.     In order to mitigate any traffic, circulation, and/or parking impacts caused by the production, the director may establish parking restrictions in the affected public right-of-way including, but not limited to, limiting parking in public right-of-way up to six hundred (600) lineal feet from the site location, if practicable, requiring parking on one side of the street, and requiring that all individuals involved in the production park off-site.

 

     5.     Applicant shall pay a fee for use of the public right-of-way or use of city property if either will be used for the production. Said fees shall be adopted by resolution of the city council as may be amended from time to time.

     6.     When any traffic or crowd control services are required as a result of activities conducted pursuant to a permit, such services shall be performed by the sheriff’s department and paid for by the applicant. Such services shall include, but not be limited to, a flagger who directs street traffic during production activity. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.080 Additional rules and regulations.
     The city manager is authorized and directed to promulgate rules and regulations governing activity subject to this chapter. The rules and regulations shall be consistent with this chapter and shall be based upon the following criteria:

     A.    The health, safety, peace and welfare of the community;

     B.     Avoidance of disruption of normal activities of all persons within the affected area;

     C.     Mitigation of traffic, parking and environmental impacts; and

     D.    Implementation of proper and appropriate notification. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.090 Exemption for properties greater than one hundred acres in size.
     A.    The following restrictions shall not apply where the director determines that the subject property, or the combination of contiguous parcels owned by the same property owner, exceeds, in total, one hundred (100) acres in size, and the site location of the activity, excluding parking, is at least three hundred (300) feet removed from the closest adjoining residence:

     1.     The restrictions on production during Sundays and holidays, as set forth in Section 6.04.070(A)(1);

     2.     The hours restrictions for a production set forth in Section 6.04.070(A)(2);

     3.     The signature requirements for Level 2 productions and Level 3 productions, as set forth in Section 6.04.060(B);

     4.     The hours prohibition of Section 6.04.030(C).

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A, the director may impose any special conditions on a permit as he or she deems necessary in order to preclude the disruption to the health, safety, peace or welfare of the community, and, specifically, occupants of surrounding properties. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.100 Fees.
     A.    Any fees referenced in this chapter, including, but not limited to, the application fee, permit fee, use of the public right-of-way fee, and appeal fee, shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, as may be amended from time to time.

     B.     Refund of Fees. An applicant shall be entitled to a refund of sixty-six (66) percent of the public right-of-way fee provided the applicant notifies the city of a canceled production by three p.m. of the last working day prior to the day of the production. One hundred (100) percent of permit fees are eligible for refund provided the applicant notifies the city of a canceled production by three p.m. of the last working day prior to the day of the production. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.110 Relationship to business license requirements.
     Applicants for a permit shall be exempted from obtaining a business license. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.120 Appeal process.
     A.    Decision of Director. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the director, be it in the imposition of conditions, rules or regulations, the issuance or denial of a permit, or the suspension or revocation of the same, may appeal that decision to the city manager by submitting a written request with the city manager within three working days of the decision along with any appeal fees. Following a review and consideration de novo, and without any public hearing, the city manager may affirm, reverse or modify the decision by the director. The city manager shall render a decision within three working days following receipt of the appeal.

     B.     Decision of City Manager. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

     C.     The city manager shall have the authority to waive any or all provisions of this chapter and any rules or regulations promulgated by the director where it is found that the interests of the health, safety, peace and welfare of the community would be so benefited. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

 

6.04.130 Violations and enforcement.
     A.    The following actions are prohibited and are violations of this code:

     1.     Conducting any production without a permit.

     2.     Failing to comply with any conditions of a permit.

     3.     Failing to comply with any rules and regulations promulgated by the director.

     4.     Falsification of any information in an application for permit.

     5.     Conducting any production during prohibited hours and/or on prohibited days.

     6.     Engaging in any production, or any other filming, live telecasting, or still photography activity which would, in the judgment of the city, constitute a hazard to the health, safety, peace and welfare of the community.

     7.     Conducting a Level 2 production or Level 3 production when a permit for a Level 1 production was issued for that production.

     8.     Conducting a Level 3 production when a permit for a Level 2 production was issued for that production.

     B.     Any violation of subsection A shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code.

     C.     In addition to the penalties imposed in subsection B, any person who conducts any production without a permit shall be levied a penalty fee of three hundred (300) percent of all fees which would have otherwise been required.

     D.    In addition to the penalties imposed in subsections B and C, the director may also suspend or revoke the permit. Said suspension or revocation shall be subject to notice and hearing before the city manager. Notice of the hearing shall be provided not later than seven business days before the hearing date, unless otherwise agreed to in writing by the city manager and the holder of the permit. The decision of the city manager shall be final.

     E.     In addition to the penalties imposed in subsections B, C and D, the property owner and/or applicant shall not be permitted to obtain a permit for up to one year following the violation.

     F.     In addition to the penalties imposed in subsections B, C, D, and E, and for violations of subsection (A)(7), any subsequent Level 1 productions and Level 2 productions on the site location shall be treated as a Level 3 production for a one-year period following the violation. (Ord. 430 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 6.05 REGULATION OF FOOD FACILITIES
6.05.010 Definitions.
     “Certified food handler” means an owner, operator, or employee, at least eighteen (18) years of age, who has successfully passed an approved and accredited food safety certification examination and who supervises all or part of the food service operations within a food facility and is responsible for training the operation’s employees in the areas set forth in Section 11.11.190 of the Los Angeles County Code as it currently exists or hereafter may be amended.

     “Clearly visible to the general public and to patrons” means: (1) posted in the front window of the food facility within five feet of the front door; or (2) posted in a display case mounted on the outside front wall of the facility within five feet of the front door; (3) posted adjacent to the pass out window on a mobile food facility, or on the customer service side of an unenclosed mobile food facility; or (4) posted in a location as directed and determined in the discretion of the health officer to ensure proper notice to the general public and to patrons. In the event that a food facility is operated in the same building or space as a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event that a food facility shares a common patron entrance with a separately licensed or permitted business, or in the event of both, “clearly visible to the general public and to patrons” means the initial patron contact area or a location as determined in the discretion of the health officer.

     “Department” means the county of Los Angeles department of health services.

     “Director” means the director of the county of Los Angeles department of health services or duly authorized designee.

     “Food facility” means any food service business which prepares food or any potentially hazardous food, on the premises for sale or gift to the public and includes, but is not limited to, all restaurants, markets, bakeries, caterers, mobile food preparation units, mobile food facilities, mobile support units, commissaries, and food processing facilities or businesses operating in conjunction with food processing facilities.

     “Food handler” means and includes all persons employed by, or working in a voluntary or nonpaid capacity, for a food facility wherein the person handles, touches, cleans, stores, packages, prepares, or otherwise processes food or potentially hazardous food.

     “Food handler’s training certificate” means a certificate issued by the department, certifying that a food handler has satisfactorily demonstrated competency in food protection and practices by passing a written examination administered by the department or by completing a food handler’s training course approved by the director.

     “Food official inspection report” means the written notice prepared and issued by the health officer after conducting an inspection of a food facility to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health.

     “Grade” or “grading” means the letter grade issued by the health officer at the conclusion of a routine inspection or owner-initiated inspection of a food facility. The grade shall be based upon the scoring method set forth in this chapter resulting from the food official inspection report and shall reflect the food facility’s degree of compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health.

     “Health officer” or “health inspector” means an employee of the county of Los Angeles department of health services appointed to a position responsible for conducting health inspections of food facilities in the city.

     “Inspection score card” means a card that must be posted at a food facility, upon completion of a routine or owner-initiated inspection, that indicates the total numerical percentage score for the food facility as determined by the health officer and as set forth in the food official inspection report.

     “Letter grade card” means a card that must be posted at a food facility upon completion of a routine or owner-initiated inspection that indicates the letter grade of the food facility as determined by the health officer using the scoring method set forth in this chapter.

     “Mobile food facility” means any vehicle used in conjunction with a commissary or other permanent food facility upon which food is sold or distributed at retail. “Mobile food facility” does not include a “transporter” used to transport packaged food from a food facility, or other approved source to the consumer.

     “Mobile food preparation unit” means any vehicle upon which ready-to-eat food is prepared, cooked, wrapped, packaged, or portioned for service, sale or distribution.

     “Mobile support unit” means a vehicle used in conjunction with a commissary or other permanent food facility that travels to and services mobile food facilities as needed to replenish supplies, including food and potable water, clean the interior of the unit, or dispose of liquid or solid wastes.

     “Notice of closure” means a public notice that may be posted by the health officer at a food facility upon suspension or revocation of the facility’s public health permit and that results in the immediate closure of the facility and the discontinuance of all operations of the food facility, by order of the health officer, because of violations of applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directives relating to the public health.

     “Owner-initiated inspection” means a re-inspection conducted by the health officer pursuant to a request from the food facility, following a routine inspection, to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directions relating to public health.

     “Potentially hazardous food” means those foods set forth in California Health and Safety Code Section 113845 as it currently exists or hereafter may be amended.

     “Routine inspection” means a periodic, unannounced inspection of any food facility to determine compliance with all applicable federal, state and local statutes, orders, ordinances, quarantines, rules, regulations, or directions relating to public health. A routine inspection shall not mean an inspection conducted by the health officer to determine compliance with a previously issued food official inspection report or any interim or owner-initiated inspection conducted to determine compliance with specific regulations or legal requirements.

     “Scoring method” means a procedure used by the county health officer where a score is calculated by adding values predefined on the food official inspection report for violations that are observed during an inspection, and subtracting that total from one hundred (100). The resulting numerical sum, stated as a percentage, constitutes the score for the inspection. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.020 Inspection and grading.
     Upon completion of a routine inspection, or owner-initiated inspection, of a food facility, the health officer shall complete a food official inspection report and shall assign a grade to the food facility based upon the final numerical percentage score set forth in the food official inspection report, as follows:

     A.    A grade of “A” shall indicate a final score of ninety (90) percent or higher as determined by the health officer;

     B.     A grade of “B” shall indicate a final score of less than ninety (90) percent but not less than eighty (80) percent as determined by the health officer;

     C.     A grade of “C” shall indicate a final score less than eighty (80) percent but not less than seventy (70) percent as determined by the health officer. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.030 Posting requirement.
     A.    Upon issuance by the health officer, the health officer shall post at every food facility, the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the health officer, so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the facility. For food facilities earning a final score of less than seventy (70) percent, the inspection score card only shall be posted.

     B.     Every food facility shall post a legibly lettered sign which displays the following information so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the facility:

 

        Any public health concerns regarding this facility should be directed to the County of Los Angeles, Environmental Health Office, located at: [local office address and telephone number to be provided by the Health Officer].

(Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.040 Hiding, removal or defacement of grade card or score card prohibited.
     The posted letter grade card, inspection score card, or both, shall not be defaced, marred, camouflaged, hidden, removed, reproduced, or copied. It is unlawful to operate a food facility unless the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, as determined by the health officer, is or are in place in a location clearly visible to the general public and to patrons entering the facility. Removal of the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 6.05.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.050 Inspection report available for public review.
     The food official inspection report, upon which the letter grade card, the inspection score card, or both, are based, and all subsequent reports issued by the health officer, shall be maintained at the food facility and shall be available to the general public and to patrons for review upon request during regular business hours. The food facility shall keep the food official inspection report and all subsequent reports until such time as the health officer completes the next routine or owner-initiated inspection of the facility and issues a new food official inspection report. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.060 Period of validity.
     A letter grade card or an inspection score card shall remain valid until the health officer completes the next routine inspection of the food facility or until an owner-initiated inspection is conducted for the purpose of reviewing corrections made as a result of the prior routine inspection, so long as the owner-initiated inspection is conducted pursuant to procedural and administrative guidelines established by the department for issuance of new grades prior to the next routine inspection. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.070 Grade sufficient to close.
     The health officer, in his or her discretion, may immediately close any food facility which, upon completion of the routine or owner-initiated inspection, does not achieve at least a “C” grade or higher as defined herein. Nothing in this provision shall prohibit the health officer from immediately closing any food facility if, in his or her discretion, immediate closure is necessary to protect the public health. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.080 Public health permit suspension or revocation—Notice of closure.
     A.    Upon issuance of a written notice of suspension or revocation of a public health permit by the health officer, the health officer shall post a notice of closure at the food facility so as to be clearly visible to the general public and to patrons.

     B.     Upon issuance of the written notice of suspension or revocation of the public health permit by the health officer, the food facility shall immediately close to the general public and to patrons and shall discontinue all operations until the public health permit has been reissued or reinstated by order of the health officer or until the facility no longer operates as a food facility.

     C.     The notice of closure shall remain posted until removed by the health officer. Removal of the notice of closure by any person other than the health officer or the refusal of a food facility to close upon issuance of the written notice of suspension of the public health permit is a violation of this chapter and may result in the suspension or revocation of the food facility’s public health permit and shall be punishable as specified in Section 6.05.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.090 Certified food handler requirement.
     Effective January 1, 2000, each food facility shall have at least one “certified food handler.” For purposes of this section, multiple contiguous food facilities permitted within the same site and under the same management, ownership or control shall be deemed to be one food facility, notwithstanding the fact that the food facilities may operate under separate permits. Failure to have a certified food handler shall be grounds for the suspension or revocation of the food operation’s public health permit and shall be punishable as set forth in Section 6.05.220 of this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.100 Procedure for obtaining a food handler’s training certificate.
     A.    Every person desiring certification as a certified food handler shall file with the department an application for certification, accompanied by an application fee as set forth by the department. Upon application, each person desiring certification shall provide:

     1.     Proof of successful completion of a food handler’s training course approved by the department;

     2.     A food handler’s training certificate which indicates passage of an examination developed and administered by The Center for Occupational and Professional Assessment of the Educational Testing Service; or

     3.     Any other food handler’s training certificate which, in the discretion of the director, is equivalent to either subsection (A)(1) or (2) of this section.

     B.     Alternatively to subsection A of this section, any person desiring certification as a certified food handler, upon payment of an examination fee, may take an examination administered by the department. The department shall certify only those persons who receive a score of seventy-five (75) percent or higher on its examinations. The payment of any examination fee shall be in addition to the application fee set forth by department. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.110 Food handler’s training course.
     Any food handler’s training course taken by a person desiring certification as a certified food handler shall be a minimum of four hours in duration. The course of instruction shall include, but not be limited to, the following subject matter: microorganisms, sources of foodborne illness microorganisms, foodborne illness, the means by which food is contaminated by microorganisms and toxic substance, the methods for protection of food to prevent foodborne illnesses, personal hygiene for food handlers, proper utensils and equipment washing and sanitizing, and proper receiving and storage of food. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.115 Public health license and permit—Annual certification inspection.
     The owner/operator of a mobile food facility, mobile support unit, or mobile food preparation unit shall obtain an annual certification inspection from the county health officer. The enforcement agency shall initially approve all mobile food facilities and mobile support units as complying with California Health and Safety Code Chapters 1 through 8, inclusive, 10 and 13. The county health officer shall then issue a certification sticker which shall be affixed to the mobile food facility or mobile support unit. The sticker will be valid during the fiscal year corresponding to the mobile food facility’s or mobile support unit’s current public health operating permit. Failure to secure an annual certification sticker shall result in a suspension or revocation of the public health license or permit. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011)

 

6.05.120 Multiple food facilities.
     Persons who operate more than one food facility shall be required to have a certified food handler at each operation, unless otherwise exempted under Section 6.05.090 of this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.125 Route location.
     The owner/operator of a mobile food facility, mobile support unit, or mobile food preparation unit shall complete a Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet, obtained from the county health officer, listing the complete address, telephone number and arrival/departure times of each location where the retail food business is being conducted. The Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet shall be maintained on file at the Vehicle Inspection Program. The owner/operator of a mobile food facility or mobile support unit shall notify the county health officer of any significant changes to the Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet. Failure to provide an accurate and current Mobile Food Facility Route Sheet may result in suspension or revocation of the public health license or permit. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011)

 

6.05.130 Exemptions.
     Food facilities that deal exclusively in nonpotentially hazardous prepackaged food and beverages or food facilities required by the department to have only temporary operating permits shall be exempt from the certified food handler requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.140 Display of food handler’s training certificate.
     The food handler’s training certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place within the food facility, or in a location designated and approved by the director. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.150 Change of certified food handler.
     A certified food handler who changes his or her place of employment after obtaining a food handler’s training certificate may display the certificate in any other food facility in which he or she is subsequently employed. A food facility that loses its certified food handler must obtain another certified food handler within thirty (30) days. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.160 List of certified food handlers.
     The department shall maintain a current list of all certified food handlers within the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.170 Expiration.
     The food handler’s training certificate shall be valid for the time period set forth by the department. Upon the expiration of the food handler’s training certificate, all persons must re-apply for a new certificate in accordance with the procedures for obtaining a new certificate as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.180 Duplicate food handler’s training certificate.
     The director, upon a showing of good cause, may issue a duplicate food handler’s training certificate upon payment of a duplicate certificate fee. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.190 Revocation of food handler’s training certificate.
     A.    The director may immediately revoke any food handler’s training certificate when any of the following is found to exist within a food facility which is operated by or under the supervision of a certified food handler:

     1.     Evidence indicating repeated or continuing violations of required procedures and practices in the preparation, service, storage, distribution or sale of food or beverage offered for public consumption;

     2.     Any condition detrimental to the public health, which shall include but not be limited to any condition that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission or any hazardous condition including, but not limited to, unsafe food temperature; or

     3.     Evidence indicating falsification of information required by the department for issuance of the food handler’s training certificate.

     B.     The director shall issue a notice to the certified food handler setting forth the acts or omissions with which he or she is charged and informing him or her of the right to a hearing, if requested, to show cause why the certificate should be reinstated. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.200 Right to appeal following revocation.
     A.    Any certified food handler whose certificate has been revoked may make a written request with the department for hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice specified in Section 6.05.190 of this chapter to show cause why the certificate should be reinstated. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the director may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen (15) day period to expedite the certification revocation process.

     B.     The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of the request for hearing. Upon written request of the certified food handler, the director may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

     C.     An environmental health services manager for the department shall preside over any hearing requested under this section. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.210 Notice of decision.
     The director shall issue a written notice of decision to the certified food handler within five working days of the hearing. The notice of decision shall specify the acts or omissions with which the certified food handler is charged and shall specify either that the certificate remains revoked or that it has been reinstated. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

 

6.05.220 Violation.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor and is punishable as set forth by this code. (Ord. 397 § 1, 2011; Ord. 294 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 6.06 SOLICITATIONS
6.06.010 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     “City clerk” shall mean the city of La Cañada Flintridge city clerk and/or his or her designee.

     “Solicit” or “solicitation” means the request, directly or indirectly, for a contribution of money, credit, property, financial assistance or other things of value, for any purpose in any face to face manner, including requests made door to door. These words also mean and include the following methods of obtaining such money, credit, property, financial assistance or other thing of value:

     1.     Any verbal or written request;

     2.     The local distribution, circulation, posting or publishing of any handbill, written advertisement or other publication unless such handbill or written advertisement has been placed within a business open to the public generally and with the express permission of the owner or lessee of such business; or

     3.     The sale of, or taking order for, any goods, services, merchandise, wares or other tangible items.

     A solicitation as defined in this subsection, shall be deemed completed when the request is made, whether or not the solicitor receives any contribution or makes any sale referred to in this subsection. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.020 Permit and business license requirements.
     No person shall solicit for any purpose within the city of La Cañada Flintridge without having first obtained:

     A.    A permit from the city, except that where a solicitation permit has been issued to any applicant, the individual agents and solicitors for such applicant shall not be required to obtain individual permits.

     B.     A valid business license in accordance with Title 6 of this municipal code. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.030 Exemptions.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to solicitations made upon premises owned or occupied by the organization or person on whose behalf such solicitation is made.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     Payments required by law to be collected or paid; or

     2.     Payments to or from governmental agencies; or

     3.     Solicitations made by an association or its authorized agents and employees to its own members and employees. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.040 Application procedure.
     A.    Filing of an Application. An application for a solicitation permit shall be filed with the city at least ten calendar days prior to engaging in solicitation. The city clerk shall, in conformance with the standards set forth in this chapter, either grant, approve or deny the requested permit to conduct solicitation within ten calendar days of the date the application is made.

     B.     Contents of Application. An application for a solicitation permit shall include the following information, as applicable:

     1.     If the applicant is not an individual, the applicant’s correct legal name, address of its principal office, and the names and addresses and telephone numbers of the applicant’s principal officers and executives;

     2.     The name, address, telephone number of the person or persons who will be in direct charge of conducting the solicitation, and the names of all solicitors connected with, or to be connected with, the proposed solicitation and the photo identification of all such persons. Such photo identification shall be two inches by two inches showing the head and shoulders in a clear and distinguishable manner; or a copy of a photo ID such as a passport or driver’s license, for each such person;

     3.     A description of the method or methods to be used in conducting the solicitation;

     4.     The time when such solicitation will be made giving the intended dates for the commencement and termination of the solicitation;

     5.     A statement to the effect that, if a permit is granted, it will not be used or represented in any manner as an endorsement by the city or by any department or officer thereof;

     6.     An explanation of the reasons why any information required herein is not available if the applicant is unable to provide any of the required information;

     7.     The application shall be signed by the applicant if the applicant is an individual over the age of eighteen (18); by a parent or legal guardian of the applicant if the applicant is an individual under the age of eighteen (18); by the managing or general partner if the applicant is a partnership; by an officer, if the applicant is a corporation or an association. Such application shall be signed under the penalty of perjury pursuant to the laws of the State of California;

     8.     If, while any application is pending, or during the term of any permit granted thereon, there is any change in fact, policy or method that would alter the information set forth in the application, the applicant shall notify the city in writing thereof within twenty-four (24) hours after such change. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.050 Permitting procedure.
     A.    Issuance of Permit. Upon receipt of an application pursuant to this chapter, the city shall issue a permit for solicitation unless any of the following have been demonstrated:

     1.     That the applicant has failed to provide the information requested in this section;

     2.     That any statement made in the application is false;

     3.     That the applicant has not paid the requisite business license, if any, imposed pursuant to Title 6 of this municipal code.

     B.     Nothing in this section shall be construed as granting to any city official or employee the authority to grant, deny, revoke, renew or suspend any permit by reason of either approval or disapproval of the philosophy, opinions or beliefs of the applicant, the permittee, or the persons such applicant or permittee represents, or for any other reasons not specifically set forth in this section.

     C.     Form of Permit. Permits issued under this section shall bear the name and address of the person to whom the permit is issued, the number of the permit, the date issued, the dates within which the permittee may solicit, a statement that the permit does not constitute an endorsement by the city or any of its departments, officers or employees of the purpose of, or of the person conducting, the solicitation.

     D.    Term of Permits. All permits issued under this section shall be valid for a period of three months unless revoked, suspended or renewed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     E.     Permit Nontransferable. Any permit issued under this chapter shall not be transferable or assignable. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.060 Identification cards and registration list.
     A.    All persons conducting solicitations shall obtain an identification card from the city which shall include the permit number, the name and address of the permittee. If applicable, the identification card shall also include a statement describing the permittee’s purpose and activity, the signature of the permittee’s chief executive officer. The identification card shall also have the name and signature of the solicitor to whom the card is issued, the specific period of time during which the solicitation is authorized, and a statement printed prominently on the card which shall substantially be in the following form: “This identification card is not to be construed as an endorsement of the solicitation by the city of La Cañada Flintridge or any of its departments, officers or employees.”

     B.     Card to be Carried and Displayed. No person shall solicit unless an identification card approved by the city is exhibited or presented for perusal by the person solicited.

     C.     Repeal or Revocation of Identification Card. If a permit issued pursuant to this section is denied or revoked, all identification cards issued to persons conducting solicitations shall be canceled and such cards shall be returned to the city within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of receipt of such notification.

     D.    Identification cards shall be returned to the city upon expiration of the permit, unless renewed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.070 Denial of permit.
     In the event that the city denies the permit, the city clerk within five business days shall notify the applicant by certified mail, stating with specificity the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.080 Suspension or revocation of permit.
     A.    Grounds for Revocation. A permit shall be revoked if the permit holder or any person soliciting on behalf of the permit holder violates any of the provisions of this code or misrepresents the purpose of the solicitation.

     B.     Notice—Suspension. Whenever it shall be shown that grounds for revocation exist, the city clerk shall suspend the permit by notifying the permittee of the suspension stating with specificity the reasons for the suspension within two business days by registered or certified mail or by personal service of the notice upon the permittee. Such notification shall become effective on the third calendar day after service by mail of the notice, or immediately upon personal service of the notice.

     C.     Notice—Revocation Hearing. The suspension notice shall set the matter for hearing before the city clerk within three business days of the effective date of suspension.

     D.    Revocation. The city clerk shall, based upon the evidence, render a decision within one business day either revoking the permit or ending the suspension and reinstating the permit. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

6.06.090 Appeal.
     If an applicant or permittee is aggrieved by any action to deny or revoke a permit by the city clerk, such applicant or permittee shall have the right to appeal such decision to the city manager. The notice of appeal shall specifically set forth the grounds for the appeal and shall be filed within five calendar days after mailing or personal delivery of a notice of denial or revocation. The city manager shall hear the applicant/permittee or a designated representative, receive relevant information and documents, and act on the appeal within five days of receiving the appeal. The city manager’s decision shall be final. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.100 Renewal of permit.
     Upon the expiration of any solicitation permit, said permit may be renewed within ten calendar days of a written request for renewal if the factual information upon which the original application was granted remains unchanged and no violation of this code has been committed. The city may require a new application subject to the provisions of this code. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

 

6.06.110 Solicitation procedures.
     A.    General Requirements.

     1.     No person shall solicit without a permit and identification card issued pursuant to this chapter.

     2.     No person shall solicit within the city of La Cañada Flintridge after the permit issued by the city has expired, unless such permit has been renewed.

     3.     No person shall solicit at any location where there is a sign indicating “No Solicitations,” “Do Not Disturb,” “No Trespassing” or otherwise indicating that the occupants or owners do not wish to be solicited or have their privacy disturbed.

     4.     No person shall touch, come into physical contact with, or affix any object to another person without first receiving express permission therefor from such person.

     5.     No person shall intentionally and deliberately obstruct the free movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other place, or in any place generally open to the public.

     6.     No person shall solicit from a captive audience. “Captive audience” shall be defined as purposefully stationary persons, such as persons in line or seated in public areas.

     7.     No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any person who declines to be solicited.

     8.     No person shall alter an identification card issued by the city.

     9.     No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit from any person by making or causing to be made any misstatement of fact or fraudulent misrepresentation in connection with any solicitation in the city, or in any application or report filed under this section.

     10.   No person shall solicit in the city for any purpose other than the purpose(s) specified in the application upon which the permit was issued.

     B.     Hours of Solicitation. It is unlawful for any person to solicit within residential zones and residential usage after six p.m. or earlier than nine a.m., unless such person has been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said premises. For nonresidential zones (including mixed-use and nonresidential usage), as that term is utilized in Title 11 of this municipal code, it is unlawful for any person to solicit after eight p.m., or earlier than nine a.m., unless such person has been requested or invited to do so by the owner or occupant of said premises. This section shall not be interpreted to grant any person permission to enter upon private property. (Ord. 475 § 2, 2019)

Chapter 6.07 TOBACCO RETAIL LICENSING
6.07.010 Definitions.
     Whenever used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings defined herein unless the context clearly requires otherwise:

     “Arm’s length transaction” means a sale, in good faith and for valuable consideration, which reflects the fair market value, in the open market, between two informed and willing parties neither of which is under any compulsion to participate in the transaction. A sale between relatives, related companies or partners, or a sale for which a significant purpose is avoiding the effect of the violations of this chapter is not an arm’s length transaction.

     “Department” means the city manager and/or any agency or person designated by the city manager to enforce or administer the provisions of this chapter.

     “Electronic cigarette” means any electronic or battery operated device, which can be used to inhale liquid nicotine, e-liquid, or a similar substance and may resemble smoking.

     “Electronic cigarette paraphernalia” means cartridges, cartomizers, e-liquid, smoke juice, tips, atomizers, electronic cigarette batteries, electronic cigarette chargers and any other item designed for the preparation, storing, charging, or use of electronic cigarettes.

     “Electronic cigarette retailer” or “e-cigarette retailing” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, electronic cigarettes (or “e-cigarettes”), electronic cigarette products or electronic cigarette paraphernalia. “Electronic cigarette retailing” means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of electronic cigarettes, electronic cigarette products or electronic cigarette paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged or offered for exchange.

     “Person” means any natural person, partnership, cooperative association, corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee, or any other legal entity.

     “Proprietor” means a person with an ownership or managerial interest in a business. An ownership interest shall be deemed to exist when a person has a ten percent or greater interest in the stock, assets or income of a business other than the sole interest of security for debt. A managerial interest shall be deemed to exist when a person can or does have or share ultimate control over the day-to-day operations of a business.

     “Self-service display” means the open display or storage of tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, electronic cigarettes and electronic cigarette paraphernalia in a manner that is physically accessible in any way to the general public without the assistance of the retailer or employee of the retailer and a direct person-to-person transfer between the purchaser and the retailer or employee of the retailer. A vending machine is a form of self-service display.

     “Smoking” means possessing a lighted tobacco product, lighted tobacco paraphernalia, or any other lighted plant or weed (including a lighted pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind) and means the lighting, by means of flame or other form of combustion, of a tobacco product, tobacco paraphernalia, or any other plant or weed (including a pipe, cigar, hookah pipe, or cigarette of any kind).

     “Tobacco paraphernalia” means cigarette papers or wrappers, pipes, holders of smoking materials of all types, cigarette rolling machines, and any other item designed for the smoking, preparation, storing, or consumption of tobacco products.

     “Tobacco product” means any substance containing tobacco leaf, including but not limited to cigarettes, cigars, pipe tobacco, hookah tobacco, snuff, chewing tobacco, dipping tobacco, or any other preparation of tobacco designed for smoking or ingestion.

     “Tobacco retailer” or “tobacco retailing” means any person who sells, offers for sale, or does or offers to exchange for any form of consideration, tobacco, tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia. “Tobacco retailing” means the doing of any of these things. This definition is without regard to the quantity of tobacco, tobacco products, or tobacco paraphernalia sold, offered for sale, exchanged, or offered for exchange.

     “Vaping” or “vapor” means the use of any electronic cigarette device by inhaling and exhaling electronic cigarette device substances (including, but not limited to, liquid nicotine or e-liquid). (Ord. 444 § 8, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.020 Requirements and prohibitions.
     A.    Tobacco Retailer License Required. It is unlawful for any person to act as a tobacco retailer in the city without first obtaining and maintaining a valid tobacco retailer’s license pursuant to this chapter for each location at which such activity is to occur. Tobacco retailing without a valid tobacco retailer’s license shall constitute a nuisance as a matter of law.

     B.     Lawful Business Operation. In the course of tobacco retailing or in the operation of the business or maintenance of the location for which a license is issued, it shall be a violation of this chapter for a licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, to violate any local, state, or federal law applicable to tobacco products, tobacco paraphernalia, or tobacco retailing.

     C.     Display of License. Each tobacco retailer licensee shall be required to prominently display a validly issued tobacco retail license in a publicly visible location at the licensed location.

     D.    Positive Identification Required. No person engaged in tobacco retailing shall sell or transfer a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia to another person who reasonably appears to be under the age of twenty-seven (27) years without first examining the identification of the recipient to confirm that the recipient is at least the minimum age as required under state law to purchase and possess the tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia.

     E.     Minimum Age for Persons Selling Tobacco. No person who is younger than the minimum age established by state law for the purchase or possession of tobacco products shall engage in tobacco retailing.

     F.     Self-Service Displays Prohibited. Tobacco retailing by means of a self-service display is prohibited.

 

     G.    False and Misleading Advertising Prohibited. A tobacco retailer or proprietor without a valid tobacco retailer license, including, for example, a person whose license has been revoked:

     1.     Shall keep all tobacco products and tobacco paraphernalia out of public view. The public display of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia in violation of this provision shall constitute tobacco retailing without a license as provided under Section 6.07.120;

     2.     Shall not display any advertisement relating to tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia that promotes the sale or distribution of such products from the tobacco retailer’s location or that could lead a reasonable consumer to believe that such products can be purchased or obtained at that location. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.030 Limits on eligibility for a tobacco retailer license.
     No tobacco retailing license shall be issued that authorizes tobacco retailing at other than a fixed location. For example: tobacco retailing by persons on foot or from vehicles is prohibited. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.040 Application procedure.
     A.    Application for a tobacco retailer’s license shall be submitted in the name of each proprietor proposing to conduct tobacco retailing sales and shall be signed by each proprietor or an authorized agent thereof.

     It is the responsibility of each proprietor to be informed regarding all laws applicable to tobacco retailing, including those laws affecting the issuance of a tobacco retailer’s license. No proprietor may rely on the issuance of a license as a determination by the city that the proprietor has complied with all laws applicable to tobacco retailing. A license issued contrary to this chapter, contrary to any other law, or on the basis of false or misleading information supplied by a proprietor, shall be revoked pursuant to Section 6.07.110(D) of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to vest in any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right to act as a tobacco retailer in contravention of any provision of law.

     All applications shall be submitted on a form supplied by the department and shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name, address, and telephone number of each proprietor of the business seeking a tobacco retail license.

     2.     The business name, address, and telephone number of the single fixed location for which a tobacco retail license is sought.

     3.     A single name and mailing address authorized by each proprietor to receive all communications and notices (the “authorized address”) required by, authorized by, or convenient to the enforcement of this chapter. If an authorized address is not supplied, each proprietor shall be understood to consent to the provision of notice at the business address specified in subsection (A)(2) of this section.

     4.     Proof that the location for which a tobacco retailer’s license is sought has been issued a valid state tobacco retailer’s license by the California Board of Equalization.

     5.     Whether the proprietor, or any agent of the proprietor, has violated or has been found by the department, any administrative agency or any court of competent jurisdiction to have violated, any of the provisions of this chapter and, if so, the dates and locations of all such violations within the previous five years.

     6.     Such other information as the department deems necessary for the administration or enforcement of this chapter as specified on the application form required by this section.

     B.     A licensed tobacco retailer shall inform the department in writing of any change in the information submitted on an application for a tobacco retailer’s license within ten business days of a change.

     C.     All information specified in an application pursuant to this section shall be subject to disclosure under the California Public Records Act (California Government Code Section 6250 et seq.) or any other applicable law, subject to the laws’ exemptions. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.050 Issuance of license.
     Upon receipt of a complete application for a tobacco retailer’s license and the license fee required as by this chapter, the department shall issue a license unless substantial evidence demonstrates that one or more of the following bases for denial exists:

     A.    The information presented in the application is inaccurate or false. Intentionally supplying inaccurate or false information shall be a violation of this chapter.

     B.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing at a location for which this chapter prohibits issuance of tobacco retailer licenses. However, this subparagraph shall not constitute a basis for denial of a license if the applicant provides the city with documentation demonstrating, by clear and convincing evidence, that the applicant is in the process of acquiring the location or business in an arm’s length transaction.

     C.     The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing for a proprietor to whom this chapter prohibits a license to be issued.

     D.    The application seeks authorization for tobacco retailing that is prohibited pursuant to this chapter (e.g., mobile vending), that is unlawful pursuant to this code including, without limitation, the La Cañada Flintridge zoning code, building code, and business license provisions, or that is unlawful pursuant to any other law. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.060 License renewal and expiration.
     A.    Renewal of License. A tobacco retailer’s license is invalid if the appropriate fee has not been timely paid in full or if the term of the license has expired. The term of a tobacco retailer license is one year. Each tobacco retailer shall apply for the renewal of his or her tobacco retailer’s license and submit the license fee no later than thirty (30) days prior to expiration of the term.

     B.     Expiration of License. A tobacco retailer’s license that is not timely renewed shall expire at the end of its term. To renew a license not timely renewed pursuant to subsection A, the proprietor must:

     1.     Submit the license fee and application renewal form; and

     2.     Submit a signed affidavit affirming that the proprietor:

     a.     Has not sold, and will not sell, any tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia after the license expiration date and before the license is renewed; or

     b.     Has waited the appropriate ineligibility period established for tobacco retailing without a license, as set forth in Section 6.07.120(A) of this chapter, before seeking renewal of the license. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.070 Licenses nontransferable.
     A.    A tobacco retailer’s license may not be transferred from one person to another or from one location to another. A new tobacco retailer’s license is required whenever a tobacco retailing location has a change its proprietor(s).

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, prior violations at a location shall continue to be counted against a location and license ineligibility periods shall continue to apply to a location unless:

     1.     The location has been fully transferred to a new proprietor(s); and

     2.     The new proprietor(s) provide the city with clear and convincing evidence that the new proprietor(s) have acquired, or are in the process of acquiring, the location in an arm’s length transaction. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

6.07.080 License conveys a limited, conditional privilege.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to grant any person obtaining and maintaining a tobacco retailer’s license any status or right other than the limited conditional privilege to act as a tobacco retailer at the location in the city identified on the face of the license. For example, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to render inapplicable, supersede, or apply in lieu of, any other provision of applicable law, including but not limited to, any provision of this code including without limitation, the zoning code, building codes, and business license provisions of the city, or any condition or limitation on smoking in an enclosed place of employment pursuant to California Labor Code Section 6404.5 or this code. For example, obtaining a tobacco retailer license does not make the retailer a “retail or wholesale tobacco shop” for the purposes of California Labor Code Section 6404.5. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.090 Fee for license.
     The fee to issue or to renew a tobacco retailer’s license shall be established from time-to-time by resolution of the city council. Fees are nonrefundable except as may be required by law. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.100 Compliance monitoring.
     A.    Compliance with this chapter shall be monitored by the department. In addition, any peace officer may enforce the penal provisions of this chapter. The city may designate any number of additional persons to monitor compliance with this chapter.

     B.     The department or other person designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter shall check the compliance of each tobacco retailer in a manner and frequency as determined by the city manager. Nothing in this subsection shall create a right of action in any licensee or other person against the city or its agents.

     C.     At the discretion of the department, compliance checks shall be conducted so as to allow the department to determine, at a minimum, if the tobacco retailer is conducting business in a manner that complies with laws regulating youth access to tobacco. When the department deems appropriate, the compliance checks shall determine compliance with other laws applicable to tobacco retailing.

     D.    The city shall not enforce any law establishing a minimum age for tobacco purchases or possession against a person who otherwise might be in violation of such law because of the person’s age (hereinafter “youth decoy”) if the potential violation occurs when:

     1.     The youth decoy is participating in a compliance check supervised by a peace officer or a code enforcement official of the department or city;

     2.     The youth decoy is acting as an agent of a person designated by the city to monitor compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.110 Revocation of license.
     A.    Revocation of License for Violation. In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, a tobacco retailer’s license shall be revoked if any court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds based on a preponderance of the evidence after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that the licensee, or any of the licensee’s agents or employees, has violated any of the requirements, conditions, or prohibitions of this chapter or has pleaded guilty, “no contest” or its equivalent, or admitted to a violation of any law designated in Section 6.07.020 of this chapter.

     B.     New License After Revocation.

     1.     After revocation for a first violation of this chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, no new license may issue for the location until ten days have passed from the date of revocation.

     2.     After revocation for a second violation of this chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, no new license may issue for the location until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of revocation.

     3.     After revocation for a third violation of this chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, no new license may issue for the location until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of revocation.

     4.     After revocation for a fourth violation of this chapter at a location within any thirty-six (36) month period, no new license may issue for the location until twelve (12) months have passed from the date of revocation.

     C.     Appeal of Revocation. A decision by the department to revoke a license or impose other penalties may be appealed to the city’s public safety commission for consideration. Such appeal must be filed with the city clerk within ten days of the mailing of the department’s action. If such an appeal is made, it shall stay enforcement of the appealed upon action. An appeal to the city’s public safety Commission is not available for a revocation made pursuant to subsection D of this section.

     D.    Revocation of License Wrongly Issued. A tobacco retailer’s license shall be revoked if the department finds, after the licensee is afforded notice and an opportunity to be heard, that one or more of the bases for denial of a license under Section 6.07.050 existed at the time application was made or at any time before the license issued. The decision by the department shall be the final decision of the city. Such a revocation shall be without prejudice to the filing of a new license application. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.120 Tobacco retailing without a license.
     A.    In addition to any other penalty authorized by law, if a court of competent jurisdiction determines, or the department finds, based on a preponderance of evidence after notice and an opportunity to be heard, that any person has engaged in tobacco retailing at a location without a valid tobacco retailer’s license, either directly or through the person’s agents or employees, the person shall be ineligible to apply for, or to be issued, a tobacco retailing license as follows:

     1.     After a first violation of this section at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until thirty (30) days have passed from the date of the violation.

     2.     After a second violation of this section at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until ninety (90) days have passed from the date of the violation.

     3.     After a third or subsequent violation of this section at a location within any sixty (60) month period, no new license may issue for the person or the location (unless ownership of the business at the location has been transferred in an arm’s length transaction), until five years have passed from the date of the violation.

     B.     For the purposes of the remedies provided in this chapter:

     1.     Each day upon which a tobacco product or tobacco paraphernalia is offered for sale in violation of this chapter; or

     2.     Each individual retail tobacco product and each individual retail item of tobacco paraphernalia that is distributed, sold, or offered for sale in violation of this chapter;

     shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

 

6.07.130 Retailing electronic cigarettes and electronic cigarette paraphernalia.
     All of the requirements and prohibitions in this chapter shall apply the same to the retailing of electronic cigarettes and electronic cigarette paraphernalia. (Ord. 444 § 9, 2015)

6.07.140 Enforcement.
     A.    The remedies provided by this chapter are cumulative and in addition to any other remedies available at law or in equity.

     B.     Whenever evidence of a violation of this chapter is obtained in any part through the participation of a person under the age of eighteen (18) years, such a person shall not be required to appear or give testimony in any civil or administrative process brought to enforce this chapter and the alleged violation shall be adjudicated based upon the sufficiency and persuasiveness of the evidence presented.

     C.     Violations of this chapter are subject to administrative citations as set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code.

     D.    Violations of this chapter may be prosecuted as infractions or misdemeanors when the interests of justice so require.

     E.     Causing, permitting, aiding, abetting, or concealing a violation of any provision of this chapter shall also constitute a violation of this chapter.

     F.     Violations of this chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances.

     G.    In addition to other remedies provided by this chapter or by other law, any violation of this chapter may be remedied by a civil action, including, for example, administrative or judicial nuisance abatement proceedings, civil enforcement proceedings, and suits for injunctive relief. (Ord. 444 § 10, 2015; Ord. 376 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 6.08 BUSINESS CODE—TITLE AND PURPOSE
6.08.010 Short title.
     Chapters 6.08 through 6.28 of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code shall be known as the “business code.” (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.08.020 Revenue measure.
     The provisions of the business code are enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and are not intended for regulation. All other ordinances, articles and code sections shall remain in full force and effect so far as their regulatory provisions are concerned. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.12 BUSINESS CODE—DEFINITIONS
6.12.010 Generally.
     For the purpose of the business code, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, the words and phrases used herein shall have the following meanings. Words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number, words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is mandatory, and not merely directory; “may” is permissive. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.020 Number of persons employed.
     The number of persons employed in the applicant’s business for a given license year shall be determined by identifying the total number of employees on the payroll for the business, whether part time or full time. The city clerk shall issue guidelines to assist applicants in accurately and consistently reporting such numbers. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.030 Business.
     “Business” means any business, commercial enterprise, trade, calling, service, vocation, profession or any means of livelihood, whether or not carried on for gain or profit. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.040 Business license.
     “Business license” means any license issued pursuant to the provisions of the business code. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.050 Coin.
     “Coin” includes slug, token, plate, disc, plug, key, check or other device or thing of value. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.060 Employee.
     “Employee” means a person engaged in the operation or conduct of any business, whether as owner, any member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor or any and all other persons employed or working in connection with the business, whether employed full time or part time by the business. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.070 Engaged in business.
     “Engaged in business” means the conducting, carrying on, managing or operating of a business whether done as owner, or by means of an officer, agent, manager, employee, servant or lessee of any of them. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.080 City clerk.
     “City clerk” includes all designees of the city clerk and shall be the tax and license collector of the city. The city clerk shall administer the business code pursuant to procedures established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.090 Person.
     “Person” means an individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, corporation or any other association of persons, partnerships or corporations. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.12.100 Premises.
     “Premises” includes all lands, structures, places and also the equipment and appurtenances connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either affixed to, or is otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.16 BUSINESS CODE—LICENSE REGULATIONS
6.16.010 Required when.
     A.    No person shall engage in any business for which a business license is required without having taken out the proper license as prescribed in the business code and without complying with all regulations applicable to the business.

     B.     This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to engaging in business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions of the United States or of the state.

     C.     Persons not required to obtain a license prior to engaging in business within the city because of conflict with applicable statutes or constitutional provisions of the United States or of the state shall not be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this title. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.16.020 Additional license required when.
     A.    Any person conducting several businesses of a similar type at one location may obtain a license for the principal business and include all others therein, in which event the license tax will be based on the classification and schedule applicable to the principal business. The city clerk shall make the determination of which business is the principal, pursuant to information provided by the business owner.

     B.     Except as otherwise provided herein, a separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. Warehouses, storage and distributing facilities used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this title are not deemed to be a separate place of business or branch establishment.

     C.     In the case of utility services, all locations in the city which are part of one business and whose operation is related solely to such licensed business are not deemed to be a separate place of business or branch establishment. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.16.030 Required for concessions.
     Every person who operates any business, whether upon a cost, rental or commission basis, as a concession, or upon rented floor space in or upon the premises of any person licensed under any provisions of the business code shall be required to obtain a separate and independent business license. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.20 BUSINESS CODE—FEES FOR BUSINESSES
6.20.010 License and tax payment required.
     Except as specifically exempted by the business code or other ordinance of the city, every person engaged in business, as herein defined, within the city shall pay the license tax in the amount prescribed by resolution of the city council, and shall procure and maintain a license therefor. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.020 Home occupation license.
     A.    Every person engaged in or carrying on any home-based business shall pay an annual business license tax. If said person is engaged in or carrying on such business for a total of twenty (20) hours per week or less, said business shall pay the home occupation license fee. If said person is engaged in or carrying on such business for more than twenty (20) hours per week, the business shall be classified in that category which most closely suits the business, as determined by the city clerk.

     B.     The city clerk shall require an affidavit of all persons applying for a home occupation license stating the number of hours per week engaged in this business at the home location in order to determine whether such persons meet the qualifications for this license. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.030 Multiple coin operated machines.
     Notwithstanding any other provisions of this code, every person who owns or operates five or more coin operated amusement, vending, music, game, automatic service or other machine in connection with any other business required to be licensed under the business code shall pay an additional business license tax for each such device at the rates prescribed for the business of operating such machines. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.040 Newsracks.
     Nothing in this chapter shall require the licensing or payment of a license tax for newsracks whether or not coin operated. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.050 Contracting and building trades.
     A.    No building, grading, electrical, plumbing, pool, sewer, or heating/air conditioning permit shall be issued to any such general engineering contractor, general contractor, or specialty contractor who has not paid the tax for and received a business license for this city. The contractor shall:

     1.     Furnish an affidavit that all work is being done solely by the contractor or his or her direct employees; or

     2.     Furnish the city with an affidavit listing the names of subcontractor(s) who will perform the work for which the permit is being taken. In this event, the city shall verify that such subcontractor(s) are operating with a current city business license prior to scheduling a final inspection for any such work. The contractor may amend the affidavit of subcontractors used, or may furnish an affidavit that all work has been done by the contractor who has paid the business license tax.

     B.     At such time as a property owner shall apply for a building, grading, electrical, plumbing, pool, sewer, or heating/air conditioning permit the city shall ascertain that a business license tax has been paid. The property owner shall:

     1.     Furnish an affidavit that all work is being done by the property owner and pay a business license tax, for property owner as contractor, to be set by resolution of the city council; or

     2.     Furnish the city with an affidavit listing the names of contractor(s) or subcontractor(s) who will perform the work for which the permit is being taken. In this event, the city shall verify that such contractor(s) are operating with a current city business license prior to scheduling a final inspection for any such work. The property owner may amend the affidavit of contractors used, or may furnish an affidavit that all work has been done by the property owner and pay a business license tax for property owner as contractor.

     C.     No final inspection shall be performed by the city on any work for which a business license tax has not been paid for all contractors of record at the time the job is completed.

     D.    Effective July 1, 2016, each contractor, with the exception of a property owner as contractor as identified within subsection B, shall annually procure from the city a vehicle sticker for each vehicle used by the licensee in the conduct of their business within the city limits of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. The vehicle sticker shall be attached to the rear windshield of the vehicle to which it is assigned in such manner that the sticker shall be plainly visible at all times. The fee for the vehicle sticker shall be adopted by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 442 § 3, 2015; Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.060 Exemptions.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided herein, no religious, governmental or nonprofit association or institution nor any business engaged in which is exempt from real property taxation under either Article XIII of the Constitution or the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state shall be required to pay a tax for a business, although such entities shall be required to obtain a business license from the city.

     B.     The following businesses shall be exempted from the requirement for a business license:

     1.     Those businesses which are franchised by the city, including, but not limited to, natural gas, electric and cable utility companies;

     2.     Those businesses which operate under a city permit to do business, including, but not limited to, waste haulers, and motion picture, radio, television production and still photography companies;

     3.     Contractors and subcontractors while performing work for public entities;

     4.     Any person who engages in activity subject to the provisions of the business license code and who donates a portion of their proceeds from such activity to any organization otherwise exempted by these provisions, provided that such person conducts such activity no more than thirty (30) days during each calendar year and is able to provide written verification of such donation from the executive management of the beneficiary organization.

     C.     Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to subsection A of this section shall file a verified statement with the city clerk stating the facts upon which the exemption is claimed.

     D.    The city clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under subsection A of this section without payment to the city of the license tax required by the business code.

     E.     The city clerk, after giving notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein. (Ord. 290 § 1, 1997; Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.20.070 Limitation on exemptions.
     Any exemption provision of the business code shall not apply to a person who for profit or gain conducts or operates any business required to be licensed by the business code because of the fact that such person has paid or agreed to pay to an exempt association or institution a portion of the receipts of the business or activity as a reward or recompense for the sponsorship of such business or activity, or for any other reason, and such person shall not be deemed to be acting for such exempt association or institution. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.24 BUSINESS CODE—ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
6.24.010 License year.
     The license year for all businesses shall commence July 1st. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.020 Affidavit for tax estimate.
     A.    Every person making application for a license to be issued hereunder for a newly established business shall furnish to the city clerk, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant, a signed written statement, upon a form provided by the city clerk, setting forth such information as may be required therein and as may be necessary to estimate the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant.

     B.     Such estimates, if accepted by the city clerk as reasonable, shall be used in determining the amount of license tax to be paid by the applicant; provided, however, the amount of the license tax so determined shall be tentative only, and such person shall, within thirty (30) days after the expiration of the period for which such license was issued, furnish to the city clerk written information showing the number of persons employed, full-time and part-time, during the period of such license, or such other applicable information as may be required. The license tax for such period shall be finally ascertained and paid within thirty (30) days after final determination or, if in excess of the amount due, the excess amount shall be credited against the renewal license.

     C.     The city clerk shall not issue to any person a business license until such person has furnished to the city clerk the written statement and paid the license tax as herein required. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.030 Renewal—Affidavit of number of employees.
     In all cases, the applicant for the renewal of a license shall submit to the city clerk, for his or her guidance in ascertaining the amount of the license tax to be paid by the applicant, a written statement under oath or penalty of perjury, upon a form to be provided by the city clerk, setting forth the number of persons employed during the preceding year, or such other applicable information as may be required. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.040 Prerequisites to issuance.
     No license shall be issued to engage in any business when any ordinance, rule or regulation requires a permit to be obtained as a prerequisite to engaging in such business, until such permit is first obtained, nor until all other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations have been complied with. Any license issued in violation of this section is void. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.050 License not to permit business otherwise prohibited.
     A.    No license issued pursuant to the business code, or the payment of any tax required hereunder, shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner.

     B.     The payment of a license tax and its acceptance by the city and the issuance of a business license to any person shall not entitle the holder thereof to carry on any business unless he or she has complied with all requirements of the business code and all other applicable laws, nor to carry on any business in any building or on any premises designated in such license in the event such building or premises are situated in a zone or locality in which the conduct of such business is in violation of any law.

     C.     At any time that a violation of any law is determined, the city clerk may, after giving the licensee notice and a reasonable opportunity for hearing, revoke a business license for noncompliance if such action is deemed to be in the interest of public health, safety or welfare.

     D.    For a period of one year following the enactment of this chapter or until July 1, 1993, whichever is sooner, a business may apply for and receive a business license without its signage being in conformance with the city’s sign ordinance, or legally nonconforming thereto. This shall not preclude the city from otherwise prosecuting violations of the sign ordinance. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.060 Investigation fee.
     When any provision of the business code or any other ordinance of this city requires a permit to be obtained as a prerequisite to the issuance of a license to engage in any business, and the code or ordinance does not set out the fee to be paid for an investigation to determine if the standards for such permit are met, a fee to be set by resolution of the city council shall be charged for such investigation, and the full amount retained by the city whether such permit is granted or denied. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.070 Tax proration.
     A.    Unless otherwise provided, the first business license issued to any person shall be prorated from the first day of the quarter of the license year in which applied for to the end of the license year fixed for such classification. Thereafter, the business license of such applicant shall be renewed on an annual basis for the license year.

     B.     Upon application by the licensee, a partial refund shall be made to the licensee if the business ceases, prorated for the remaining portion of the license year. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.080 Tax—Payment not relief from other fees.
     Persons required to pay a license tax for engaging in business shall not be relieved from the payment of any other license tax or permit fee for the privilege of doing such business legally required under any provisions of other city ordinances, rules or regulations except as specifically exempted therefrom. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.090 License—Posting and keeping.
     All business licenses or other identifying documents issued by the city clerk must be kept and posted in the following manner:

     A.    Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.

     B.     Any licensee engaged in business but not operating at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep the license upon his or her person at all times while engaged in business within the city. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.100 License—Duration limitations.
     The duration of any business license shall be limited as follows:

     A.    If the license is annual, the license shall expire at midnight on the last day of the license year.

     B.     If the license is for a term, the license shall expire at midnight on the last day for the license term. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.110 License—Transferability.
     Business licenses to engage in a particular business shall be transferable. No transfer necessitated by a change in ownership shall be made unless the endorsements of the transferor and the transferee are made on the license form and a transfer fee is paid. No transfer fee shall be required if the licensee and the business licensed remain the same. The transfer fee shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.120 License—Transfer for changed business.
     No person licensed hereunder shall engage in business at a different location or under a different name from the name under which the license was issued, until a license transfer has been obtained from the city clerk. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.130 License—Duplicates.
     A duplicate license may be issued by the city clerk to replace any license or card previously issued hereunder which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing an affidavit of such fact and paying a fee to the city clerk. The fee shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.140 Appeals by aggrieved persons.
     Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city clerk or of any other officer of the city made pursuant to the provisions of the business code may appeal therefrom to the city council within fifteen (15) days after notice thereof, by filing with the city clerk a written notice of appeal, briefly stating in such notice the grounds relied upon for appeal. If such appeal is made within the time prescribed, the city manager shall cause the matter to be set for hearing before the city council within forty-five (45) days from the date of receipt of such notice of appeal, giving the appellant, the city clerk and any other interested person not less than ten days’ written notice of the time and place of hearing. The findings and determination of the city council at such hearing shall be final and conclusive, and within five days after the findings and determination are made, the city clerk shall give notice thereof to the appellant and the city manager. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.150 Emergency information.
     No business shall be licensed hereunder, and no business license issued shall be renewed, unless the licensee provides the city clerk with a written statement containing all current and operational business telephone numbers and address(es) the licensed business and current and operational emergency telephone numbers and address(es) which will allow the sheriff’s department immediate contact with each owner and manager of the licensed business and with each property owner upon which the business is located, in the event of an emergency situation. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.160 Licensee with unpaid tax.
     No license for any ensuing, current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making application for any license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid license tax required to be paid under the provisions of the business code. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.170 Refunds.
     A.    Any license tax or penalty paid more than once, or illegally, erroneously or wrongfully paid or collected may be refunded by order of the city clerk; provided, that a claim therefor, duly verified by the person paying the tax or penalty, or by his or her attorney, duly authorized agent, guardian or executor or administrator, has been filed with the city clerk within six months after the date of payment of the amount sought to be refunded. The claim shall include the name and address of the claimant, the amount and date of the payment sought to be refunded, and the reason or grounds upon which the claim for refund is based. In no case shall any judgment be rendered for the plaintiff in any proceeding brought to enforce the payment of any claim arising hereunder if such action or proceeding is brought by any person other than the persons designated herein.

     B.     The city council may establish by resolution a minimum amount below which a refund shall not be provided. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.24.180 Fictitious names.
     A license may be issued pursuant to the ordinance codified in this chapter to a corporation duly authorized to transact business in this state, or to a person operating under a fictitious name who has complied with all of the provisions of Section 2466 of the Civil Code of this state or any statute superseding or taking place of such code. Otherwise all such licenses shall be issued in the true name of the individual or individuals applying therefor. Except as provided, no business so licensed may operate under any false or fictitious name. A license issued to a corporation shall designate such corporation by the exact name which appears in the articles of incorporation of such corporation. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.28 BUSINESS CODE—ENFORCEMENT PROVISIONS
6.28.010 Tax—Penalty for payment failure.
     For failure to pay a license tax when due, the city clerk shall add a penalty of twenty (20) percent of the original license tax on the last day of each month after the due date; provided, that the total penalty to be added shall in no event exceed one hundred (100) percent of the amount of the original license tax. In addition, interest shall accrue on any unpaid balance at the rate of 1.5 percent per month, unless otherwise set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.28.020 Engaging in business without license—Remedies cumulative.
     The conviction and punishment of any person for engaging in business without first obtaining a license to engage in such business shall not relieve such person from paying the license tax and penalty due and unpaid at the time of such conviction, nor shall the payment of any license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for willful violation of any provision of the business code. All remedies prescribed in this title are cumulative and the use of any one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of the business code. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.28.030 Misrepresentation of fact.
     No person shall knowingly or intentionally misrepresent to any officer or employee of the city any material fact in procuring a business license, business license card or permit, or duplicate business license. Any such misrepresentation shall constitute a misdemeanor. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.28.040 Place of business—Examination.
     A.    The city clerk, in the exercise of his or her duties hereunder, may examine all places of business in the city to ascertain compliance with the business code.

     B.     Any person having a business license in his or her possession or under his or her control who willfully fails to exhibit the same on demand is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

 

6.28.050 License tax debt to city.
     The amount of any license tax and penalty imposed by the business code is deemed a debt to the city. An action on the debt may be commenced in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 210 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 6.29 REGULATION OF ADULT BUSINESSES
6.29.010 Purpose and application.
     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult businesses which, unless closely regulated, have serious secondary effects on the community. These secondary effects include, but are not limited to, the following: depreciation of property values; increases in vacancy rates in residential and commercial areas; increases in incidences of criminal activity; increases in litter; noise and vandalism; and the interference with enjoyment of residential property in the vicinity of such businesses.

     It is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to impose limitations or restrictions on the content of any communicative material. Similarly, it is neither the intent nor the effect of this chapter to restrict or deny access by adults to materials of a sexually explicit nature, or to deny access by the distributors or exhibitors of such materials to their intended market.

     Nothing in this chapter is intended to authorize, legalize or license the establishment, operation or maintenance of any business, building or use which violates any city ordinance or any statute of the state of California regarding public nuisances, unlawful or indecent exposure, sexual conduct, lewdness or obscene or harmful matter or the exhibition or public display thereof. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.020 Definitions.
     “Adult businesses” includes the following:

     1.     Any business conducted for the entertainment of adults, engaged in the selling, renting or displaying of publications depicting the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities described herein or other material of a sexually explicit nature. Included in the definition is any business, that as a substantial or significant course of conduct, sells, offers for sale, rents, exhibits, shows or displays publications depicting the specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities described herein or other material of a sexually explicit nature. Also included in this definition is any business selling, renting or displaying sexually oriented devices for use in the specified sexual activities;

     2.     A particular business at a particular location that sells, offers for sale, rents, exhibits, shows or displays specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities in the form of a book, newspaper, pamphlet, film, video or any other form or medium or sexually oriented devices intended for use in the specified sexual activities, which receives fifty (50) percent or more of the gross revenue from, or devotes twenty five (25) percent or more of the stock on hand or twenty five (25) percent or more of the gross floor area to such activity, is presumed to be engaging in “substantial or significant” conduct with respect to such activity;

     3.     Any business conducted for the entertainment of adults wherein an employee, patron or other person engages in, or is shown, specified sexual activities or exhibits or engages in partial or total nudity or otherwise exposes specified anatomical areas. Included in this definition is any business, which as a substantial or significant portion of its business, provides live or filmed entertainment wherein specified anatomical areas of the human anatomy are exposed. “Specified anatomical areas” includes any of the following, whether actual or simulated: (1) less than completely and opaquely covered: (a) human genitals or pubic region, (b) buttock, and (c) female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or (2) human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. “Specified sexual activities” includes any of the following: (1) actual or simulated sexual intercourse, anal intercourse, oral or anal copulation, bestiality, pedophilia, necrophilia, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relationships; or (2) clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or (3) use of human or animal masturbation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, ejaculation; or (4) fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or (5) masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or (6) erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other contact with an animal by a human being; or (7) human erection, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation.

     Such a business may not sell or display obscene matter, as that term is defined by Penal Code Section 311 or its successors, and may not exhibit harmful matter, as that term is defined by Penal Code Section 313 or its successors, to minors. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.030 Location requirements.
     A.    Adult businesses shall not be located:

     1.     Within two hundred fifty (250) feet of any lot upon which there is located any residence whether such use is within or outside the incorporated limits of the city; or any property located in a residential or agricultural zone, or equivalent zone in any other jurisdiction; and

     2.     Within five hundred (500) feet of any church, chapel or other publicly recognized place of worship whether such use is within or outside the incorporated limits of the city; and

     3.     Within five hundred (500) feet of any public or private school (kindergarten through twelfth grade) or child care center whether such use is within or outside the incorporated limits of the city; and

     4.     Within five hundred (500) feet of any park owned by a public entity whether such use is within or outside the incorporated limits of the city.

     B.     The distances specified in this section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the premises in which the proposed adult business is to be established to the nearest property line of a use or zoning classification listed above. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.040 Development standards.
     The following development standards shall apply to adult businesses:

     1.     No adult business shall be located in any temporary or portable structure.

     2.     Trash dumpsters shall be enclosed by a screening enclosure so as not to be accessible to the public.

     3.     No exterior door or window on the premises shall be propped or kept open at any time while the business is open, and any exterior windows shall be covered with opaque covering at all times.

     4.     Permanent barriers shall be installed and maintained to screen the interior of the premises from public view for each door used as an entrance or exit to the business.

 

     5.     No landscaping shall exceed thirty (30) inches in height, except trees with foliage not less than six feet above the ground.

     6.     The entire exterior grounds, including the parking lot, shall be lighted in such a manner that all areas are clearly visible at all times.

     7.     Signage shall conform to the standards established for the zone and shall not contain sexually explicit photographs, silhouettes or other sexually explicit pictorial representations.

     8.     All entrances to an adult business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are prohibited from entering the premises.

     9.     No nonconforming structure shall be converted for use as an adult business.

     10.   The adult business shall not conduct or sponsor any activities which create a demand for parking spaces beyond the number of spaces required by this title for the business.

     11.   No adult business shall be operated in any manner that permits the observation of any persons or material depicting, describing or related to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, inside the premises, from any public way or from any location outside the building or area of such establishment. This provision shall apply to any merchandise, display, decoration, sign, show window or other opening.

     12.   All exterior areas of the adult business, including buildings, landscaping and parking areas shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner at all times.

     13.   Any business license required pursuant to this title shall be kept current at all times.

     14.   Each adult business shall conform to all applicable laws and regulations.

     15.   The adult business shall not operate or be open between the hours of ten p.m. and nine a.m.

     16.   The premises within which the adult business is located shall provide sufficient sound-absorbing insulation so that sound generated inside the premises shall not be audible anywhere on any adjacent property or public right-of-way or within any other building or other separate space within the same building.

     17.   The adult business will not conduct any massage, acupuncture, tattooing, accupressure or escort services, and will not allow such activities on the premises.

     18.   At least one security guard shall be on duty patrolling the premises at all times while the business is open. If the occupancy limit of the premises is greater than fifty (50) persons, an additional security guard shall be on duty. The security guard(s) shall be charged with preventing violations of law, with enforcing compliance by patrons with the requirements of this chapter and with notifying the sheriff of any violations of law observed. Security guard(s) required by this subsection shall be uniformed in such a manner so as to be readily identifiable as a security guard by the public and shall be duly licensed as a security guard as required by applicable provisions of state or local law. No security guard required pursuant to this subsection shall act as a doorperson, ticket seller, ticket taker or admittance person while acting as a security guard hereunder. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.050 Permitted zone classes.
     Premises may be used for adult businesses only in the community planned development zone (CPD). (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.060 Adult business permit—Required.
     No adult business shall be established until an application for an adult business permit is approved by the planning commission following a public hearing with notice provided in accordance with established procedures for the CPD zone. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.070 Adult business permit—Application.
     An application for an adult business permit shall contain the information required by Section 501.3 of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 1494, as adopted by reference, and a narrative description of the proposed use or development including: an explanation of how the proposed business will satisfy the applicable requirements set forth in Sections 6.29.010 through 6.29.080 of this chapter. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.080 Application fee.
     When an adult business permit application is filed, it shall be accompanied by the filing fee set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.090 Permit application—Review and approval.
     A.    When an application has been accepted as completed, the director of community development shall set the application for a nondiscretionary public hearing before the planning commission within sixty (60) days from the date on which the application was accepted as complete, following the notice procedures established by the city for the CPD zone. The planning commission shall approve or disapprove the application within ninety days (90) days from the date on which the application was accepted as complete by the director of community development.

     B.     Any application for a permit pursuant to this chapter is considered to be a ministerial permit and, as such, is not subject to the time limits specified in Section 65950 et seq., of the Government Code or the California Environmental Quality Act.

     C.     In considering an application for a permit pursuant to this chapter, the planning commission shall approve the permit if it makes the following findings:

     1.     The adult business is consistent with the location and development standards contained in this chapter; and

     2.     The adult business is located in a zone classification which lists the adult business as a permitted use; and

     3.     The adult business is consistent with the requirements set forth in this title;

     4.     Except as specifically provided in this chapter, the adult business complies with the development features prescribed in this title.

     D.    Issuance or denial of the ministerial permit is not subject to administrative appeal.

     E.     Notice of the commission’s action shall be provided to the property owner by registered mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.100 Conflicts.
     If the provisions of this chapter conflict or contravene the provisions of another chapter of this title, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail as to all matters and questions arising out of the subject matter of this chapter. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

 

6.29.110 Modifications or revocations.
     A.    The planning commission may modify or revoke an adult business permit following a public hearing as provided by Section 6.29.060 of this chapter if it finds that one or more of the following conditions exist:

     1.     The building, structure, equipment or location of such business does not comply with or fails to meet any of the health, zoning, building, fire and safety requirements or standards of any laws of the state of California or ordinances of the county of Los Angeles or city of La Cañada Flintridge applicable to such business operation;

     2.     The business owner, its employees, agents or manager has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of:

     a.     Any violation of any statute, or any other ordinance arising from any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the adult business permit, the revocation of which is under consideration, or

     b.     Any offense involving the maintenance of a nuisance caused by any act performed in the exercise of any rights granted by the adult business permit, the revocation of which is under consideration;

     c.     The business owner, its employees, agent or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in any report or record required to be filed with the planning commission.

     B.     Notice of the commission’s action shall be provided to the applicant and property owner by registered mail, return receipt requested. (Ord. 277 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 6.30 REGULATION OF NEWSRACKS, NEWSSTANDS AND/OR SIMILAR DEVICES
6.30.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

     “Display” means to show.

     “Knowingly” means having general knowledge of, or reason to know, or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further inspection of inquiry or, the character and content of any material which is reasonably susceptible to examination.

     “Newsrack,” “newsstand” and/or “similar device” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used, or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers, news periodicals, or other publications.

     “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalk and the curb of any street, and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or other legal entity having custody or control over material or objects subject to this chapter.

     “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     “Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the general use of pedestrians.

     “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.020 Newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices prohibited.
     A.    No person shall install or maintain any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device which projects onto, into or over or otherwise remains on any part of the roadway or parkway of any street.

     B.     No person shall install, maintain or use for the purposes of distributing or selling any publication, any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in or over any sidewalk, when such installation, maintenance or use endangers the safety of persons or property or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device unreasonably interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects permitted at or near said location. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.025 Registration.
     A.    No person shall install or maintain any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device which rests, either wholly or in part, upon, along or over any sidewalk without first registering such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device with the city pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Registration shall be valid continuously, subject to the following:

     1.     Registration shall not be assignable and shall expire upon a change in ownership of the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device;

     2.     Registration shall expire if, at any time, the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device is not utilized for a continuous period of sixty (60) days;

     3.     Registration shall be revoked upon impoundment of any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     The city may revoke the registration of any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device if the city, in its sole discretion, determines such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device must be removed from its approved location in order to effectuate or accommodate any change in the street, sidewalk, roadway or parkway, in any public or private infrastructure contained therein, including, without limitation, any utility lines, or in or on any building or structure in the vicinity of such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device.

     D.    A nonrefundable fee in the amount as established by resolution of the city council, shall be required at the time of application for registration. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.030 Application process.
     A.    Every application for registration must contain the following information:

     1.     Name, address and telephone number of applicant;

     2.     Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device if different from the applicant;

     3.     The exact location of each newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed and/or maintained;

     4.     Applicants who are publishers or owners of adjudicated publications and newspapers of general circulation pursuant to Division 7, Article 2 of the California Government Code and who wish to be considered as such for purposes of this chapter, must provide proof of such adjudication at the time of application for registration;

     5.     Written statement agreeing to hold harmless and indemnify the city of La Cañada Flintridge and county of Los Angeles for any damage or injury arising out of the placement, installation and/or maintenance of any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device on any sidewalk in accordance with Section 6.30.090;

     6.     Verification of general liability insurance by certified endorsement, in the amount not less than two hundred fifty thousand dollars ($250,000.00) combined single limit per occurrence for bodily injury and property damage. In addition, the policy shall name the city, its officers, agents and employees as an additional named insured;

     7.     A complete description of the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed, including manufacturer name, model, dimensions, color, and any unusual, distinctive or unique attributes;

     8.     Photographs, depiction, rendering or drawing of the actual or similar newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device to be installed is encouraged but not required;

     9.     Payment of the registration fee.

     B.     The director of public works shall review all applications for registration and shall determine whether the applicant complies with all requirements and standards as set forth in this chapter. The director of public works may approve or authorize an alternative location for placement of the proposed newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device consistent with the requirements set forth in this chapter. The director of public works shall be guided therein solely by the standards and criteria set forth in Section 6.30.040 hereof. Such application may be granted either in whole or in part when more than one location is proposed by the applicant, and in any event, when denial is solely as to location, the applicant shall be without prejudice to amend such application to state a different location or locations.

     C.     Once an application has been approved and a location has been assigned by the director of public works, said newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be entitled to remain at the assigned location as long as the registration remains valid and each newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device remains in compliance with the standards set forth in Section 6.30.040 herein. In the event that the owner of a newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device wishes to relocate his or her device to another location within the city, the owner must first re-register and receive written authorization prior to such relocation. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.040 Standards for installation, maintenance and operation.
     Any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device which, in whole or in part, rests upon, in, or over any sidewalk shall comply with the following standards:

     A.    No newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device, itself, shall exceed forty-eight (48) inches in height, thirty (30) inches in width and twenty-four (24) inches in thickness.

     B.     Newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall only be permitted on a sidewalk and shall be placed such that they are along the edge of the sidewalk which is furthest away from the curb and facing the street, parallel to the street or adjacent to the wall of a building, parallel to the wall, facing the street. Newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be placed no more than three inches from the edge of the sidewalk or wall of a building.

     C.     All newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices must be securely fastened to the ground or permanent structure in a manner as prescribed by the director of public works.

     D.    Unless expressly authorized in writing by the city, no newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the owner of the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device, including, but not limited to, other newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices owned by another, nor shall any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device be chained or attached to loose objects including, but not limited to, bricks, rocks, cinder blocks, pipes or other such objects.

     E.     Upon the written approval of the director of public works, newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices may be chained or otherwise attached to one another; provided, that such newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices are owned by the same individual or entity, however, no more than three newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices may be joined together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen (18) inches shall separate each group of up to three newsracks so attached.

     F.     Stacking of newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be permitted to the extent allowed in accordance with the size and weight restrictions provided in this chapter, however, in no event shall the aggregate height of such stacked newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices exceed fifty-eight (58) inches above the surface or platform upon which they rest.

     G.    No newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device, or group of attached newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices allowed under subsections E and F of this section, shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred seventy-five (175) pounds when empty.

     H.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection B of this section, no newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

     1.     Within five feet of any marked crosswalk;

     2.     Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

     3.     Within five feet of any fire hydrant, fire or police call box, or other emergency facility;

     4.     Within five feet of any driveway;

     5.     Within five feet ahead of, and twenty-five (25) feet to the rear of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

     6.     Within six feet of any bus bench;

     7.     At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than six feet;

     8.     Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or in such manner as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;

     9.     At any location whereby the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device obstructs motorists’ vision of regulatory or advisory traffic and parking signage or any other location whereby the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device obstructs motorists’ vision of pedestrians;

     10.   Within fifty (50) feet of any other newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device containing the same publication except where there are less than eight newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices in any location, in which case additional/duplicate newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices containing the same publication shall be permitted for each available space up to the maximum of eight at any one location. The director of public works in assigning such additional/duplicate newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device at a location where there exists more than one newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device containing the same publication, shall be guided solely by the criteria set forth under subsection K of this section.

     I.      No newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than that dealing with the display, sale or purchase of the newspaper, publication or news periodical sold therein.

     J.      Each newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be maintained in a clean and neat condition and in good repair at all times.

     K.    No more than eight newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be located on any street within a space of two hundred (200) feet in any direction within the same block of the same street; provided, however, that no more than sixteen (16) newsracks shall be allowed on any one block. As used herein, “block” shall mean one side of a street between two consecutive intersecting streets. In determining which newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices shall be authorized, the director of public works shall be guided solely by the following criteria:

     1.     First priority shall be given to applicants who are able to provide verification that they are publishers or owners of adjudicated publications or newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Division 7, Article 2 of the California Government Code.

     2.     Second priority shall be given to newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices used for the sale of daily publications (those published on five or more days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County.

     3.     Third priority shall be given to newsracks used for the sale of weekly publications (those published on at least one but less than five days in a calendar week) which have not been adjudicated to be newspapers of general circulation in Los Angeles County.

     4.     Fourth priority shall be all other publications.

     In the event there is a conflict between publications within the same priority seeking the same location, and there are insufficient newsrack spaces remaining to accommodate the conflicting publications after first filling as many spaces as possible by utilizing the criteria set forth above, then the director of public works shall assign the remaining space or spaces at random by placing the names of all applicants for the remaining spaces at a location into a container from which the names shall be drawn, one at a time, until the particular location’s remaining number of unfilled newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device spaces have been filled. Such drawing shall be open to the public and conducted at a time and date designated by the director of public works.

     L.     Newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices must be of the type equivalent to Model K-Jack No. 100 newspaper dispensers or as may be approved in advance, in writing, by the director of public works. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.050 Newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device identification required.
     Every person who places or maintains a newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device on the sidewalks of the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall have his, her or its name, address and telephone number affixed thereto in a place where such information may be easily seen. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.060 Notice of violations.
     A.    Any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device installed, used or maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be tagged with a notice of violation and a letter shall be sent to the last known address of the owner stating the violation, date of tagging, notice of intention to remove the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device if the violation is not corrected within thirty (30) days, and procedure for obtaining a pre-removal hearing before the director of public works, if desired. Where the owner and/or address of the owner is unknown, tagging of the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall constitute sufficient notice of violation.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, in the case of violations of this chapter relative to restrictions upon attachments of newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices to property other than that owned by the owner, to fixed objects, to each other, or upon unauthorized locations, the director of public works may, at his or her discretion, and as an alternative to tagging, move, align or remove such attachment, or otherwise relocate such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device in order to restore it to a legal condition. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.065 Impoundment.
     A.    If any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device has been tagged and remains in violation of the provisions stated on the tag past the thirty (30) day correction period, and no hearing has been requested, said newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be removed by the director of public works or his or her designate and stored in a place of the director of public works’ choosing. The director of public works shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a “notice of removal” to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device and the procedure for obtaining a post removal hearing before the director of public works, if desired. Any such newsrack, newsstand and/or

 

     similar device removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) days after such removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage costs therefor. Upon failure of the owner to claim such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device and to pay the reasonable charges within forty-five (45) days after the mailing of the written notice of removal, such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device shall be deemed to be unclaimed property in possession of the public works department and may be disposed of pursuant to the purchasing and property surplus policies of the city.

     B.     Any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health, safety or welfare of the public, which violation cannot be corrected by moving or otherwise repositioning the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device, may be summarily removed and stored in a place of the director of public works’ choosing so as to eliminate the danger to the health, safety and welfare of the public. The director of public works shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a “notice of removal” to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device, and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the director of public works, if desired. Any such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device removed and stored pursuant to this section shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within forty-five (45) days after the mailing of written notice of removal and upon the payment of reasonable charges of removal and storage.

     C.     The director of public works may allow replacement of a newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device removed pursuant to this section but only upon demonstration by the owner, and to the satisfaction of the director of public works, that the replacement will no longer cause, create or otherwise promote the reoccurrence of the danger for which the newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device was removed and that the owner has complied with all requirements of this chapter. This authority shall be exercised within the discretion of the director of public works and shall not be construed to be mandatory. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.070 Applicability.
     A.    With the exception of subsections (A), (G), (H)(1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (10), (K) and (L) of Section 6.30.040 as applied to newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices installed prior to the effective date of this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices whether installed and maintained prior to, on or after the effective date of this chapter. Those newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices installed prior to the effective date of this chapter shall be brought into compliance with said provisions, excepting subsections (A), (G), (H)(1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (10), (K) and (L) of Section 6.30.040, within thirty (30) days of the effective date hereof. Any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device not brought into compliance within the aforementioned time period shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter.

     B.     The director of public works shall have the authority to grant waivers to subsection 6.30.040 (B) but only as it applies to newsracks, newsstands and/or similar devices installed prior to the effective date of this chapter and only in those instances where compliance with the provision would result in the obstruction of pedestrian passageway, create public safety hazards and/or would result in nonconformance with any other provision(s) of this chapter.

     C.     Effective July 1, 1995, no newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device installed prior to the effective date of this chapter, shall be allowed to remain on any street when such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device fails to comply with any and all provisions of this chapter, including subsections (A), (B), (G), (H)(1), (2), (5), (6), (7), (10), (K) and (L) of Section 6.30.040. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.080 Penalties.
     Any person who knowingly, willingly or otherwise fails to comply with any provision of this chapter, or who fails to bring any newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device into compliance with any provision of this chapter, shall be in violation of this chapter and shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and any person convicted of such misdemeanor shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or six months imprisonment. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.090 Hold harmless.
     Every person who places or maintains a newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device on a sidewalk in the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall file a written statement with the director of public works whereby he or she agrees to indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees, and the county of Los Angeles, its officers, agents and employees, from any loss, liability or damage, including expenses and costs for bodily or personal injury, and for property damage sustained by any person as a result of the installation, use, or maintenance of such newsrack, newsstand and/or similar device. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

 

6.30.100 Appeals.
     A.    Any person, following notice or action taken by the director of public works on any provision within this chapter, and within ten days of the date thereof, may appeal any decision of the director of public works. Such appeal shall be in writing, addressed to the public works commission, and shall state the legal and factual basis upon which the appeal is to be based, and shall be timely filed with the city clerk.

     B.     A timely filing of appeal shall operate to stay any pending impounding action directed by the director of public works.

     C.     Upon receipt of the appeal, a hearing will be conducted at the next regular meeting of the public works commission to take and hear testimony from the applicant, staff and interested public. The public works commission may take any of the following actions: (1) grant a stay of the director of public works’ decision or action pending further consideration; (2) approve the director of public works’ decision and/or directive; (3) refer the matter back to the director of public works with or without instructions; (4) overturn, modify or reverse the director of public works’ decision with additional instructions; (5) delegate the matter to another city commission for resolution. (Ord. 229 § 1, 1994)

Chapter 6.40 MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
6.40.005 Findings and purpose.
     The city council finds and declares as follows:

     A.    The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting.

     B.     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State Constitution, California Government Code Sections 37100, 51030 et seq., California Business and Professions Code Sections 460, 4600 through 4620 and Section 16000, Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922, as amended) and AB 1147 (2014).

     C.     There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by persons improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage services, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

     D.    There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. Courts have long recognized massage as a pervasively regulated activity and that massage establishments are often brothels in disguise. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health.

     E.     The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient processing of permits for massage establishments, owners and managers and the ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the city. The provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the city to inspect massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are complying with applicable rules and regulations.

     F.     The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to stop the practice of businesses quickly changing ownership in name.

     G.    The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license issued pursuant to Title 6 of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     H.    The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines allowed by state law.

     I.      The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal service businesses.

     J.      The California Massage Therapy Council (“CAMTC”) can more efficiently regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public and it is in the public interest to require that all persons providing massage in the city have a certificate from the CAMTC. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.

     “California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” means the nonprofit organization created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

     “CAMTC certificate” means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by the CAMTC.

     “Certificate of operation” means the certificate issued by the city entitling a business to be operated as a massage establishment.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Cañada Flintridge or designee.

     “Compensation” means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.

     “Conviction or convicted” means a conviction following a guilty plea, nolo contendere plea, or judgment or verdict where the time for appeal has elapsed or conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under California Penal Code Section 1203.4 allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty or nolo contendere and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.

     “Employee” means any person, other than a massage practitioner, massage therapist, or operator, who renders any service, with or without compensation, to the operator or agent of an operator of a massage establishment relating to the day-to-day operation of the massage establishment whether as an employee or independent contractor.

     “Main entry door” means a door from the outside of the establishment leading into the reception area.

     “Manager” means the person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the individual to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies, and ensure that the massage establishment complies with the requirements of this code and of other laws. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must have a valid operator permit.

     “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. “Massage” includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance, and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual. (Some persons practicing massage may be exempt from all or parts of the permit requirements; please consult Section 6.40.015.)

     “Massage establishment” means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of massage in this section.

     “Massage practitioner” means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

     “Massage technician” means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by CAMTC.

     “Massage therapist” means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

     “Massage Therapy Act” means California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4620, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     “Off-premises massage” means any business or enterprise that engages in or performs massage for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever at a location other than a massage establishment.

     “Operator” means all persons who own or manage a massage establishment.

     “Operator permit” means the permit issued allowing a person to own or manage a massage establishment.

     “Owner” means all of the following:

     1.     The sole proprietor of a massage establishment, i.e., where the owner is the only person performing massage at that establishment;

     2.     In the case of a general business, each owner of the business;

     3.     In the case of a corporation, each stockholder holding more than ten percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation;

     4.     In the case of a partnership, each partner, excluding limited partners owning less than ten percent of the partnership, and where a partner is a corporation, the provisions pertaining to a corporate applicant in subsection (3) above apply.

     “Patron” means an individual on the premises of a massage establishment for the purpose of receiving a massage.

     “Permit” means an operator permit or certificate of operation, unless the context indicates otherwise.

     “Permittee” means any person who has obtained a certificate of operation or operator permit from the city.

     “Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who:

     1.     Within ten years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

     a.     A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of California Penal Code Section 290,

     b.     Conduct in violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, 653.23, or Section 647(a), (b), or (d),

     c.     An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses,

     d.     When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 415, 602, or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed,

     e.     Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage,

     f.      A violation of California Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in California Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or

     g.     Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any city or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses, including Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a);

     2.     Within ten years preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist, or trainee certificate, license, or permit issued by any state, local agency, or other licensing authority, including the CAMTC: denied, revoked, or suspended for any reason other than lack of sufficient education; or has had to surrender such a certificate, license, or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or administrative proceedings for suspension or revocation of any such certificate, license, or permit;

     3.     Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

     a.     Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above, involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit with the intent to substantially benefit him or herself or another, or substantially injure another,

     b.     Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage, including a violation of the Massage Therapy Act;

     4.     Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to California Penal Code Sections 11225 through 11235 of the Penal Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California; or

     5.     Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the same or similar type of business; or

     6.     Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice:

     a.     Has engaged in the exposing of specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person to view, or in touching the specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person, while providing massage services or while within view of a customer or patron of the massage establishment, or

     b.     Has been the owner, manager, or other similar position, in an establishment where the conduct described in subsection (6)(a) above has occurred;

     7.     “Disqualifying conduct” does not include the failure to obtain a certificate of operation or operator permit without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required, provided that the business and/or person cease operations immediately upon notification.

     “Proof of bona fide employment” means proof of an employer-employee relationship between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the massage establishment. Satisfactory proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer’s compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions, and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer’s compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements.

     “Reception area” means an area immediately inside the main entry door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services.

     “Residence address” means the actual physical home address and shall not include a P.O. Box, mailbox service, or other similar location.

     “Sheriff’s department” means any representative of the Los Angeles County sheriff’s department.

     “Sole provider” means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred (100) percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active CAMTC certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors.

     “Spa” means facilities such as mineral baths, salt rooms, mineral rooms, saunas, steam rooms, whirlpools and other therapeutic baths.

     “Specified anatomical areas” means any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and written consent of the patron.

     “Visitor” means a nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment for purposes other than receiving services. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.015 Exceptions.
     A.    Complete Exception. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to:

     1.     Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the state of California, within the scope of their license.

     2.     Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the state of California, who is an employee of and working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this state.

     a.     Any other person providing massage services that is employed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, shall be required to have a valid CAMTC certificate, as well as work under the adequate supervision of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist as required by state law or regulation. If no specific law or regulation applies, adequate supervision shall have the same meaning as set forth in 16 California Code of Regulations Section 312.

     b.     If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than him or herself, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter as well as any other applicable provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     3.     Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of California Business and Professions Code Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license.

     4.     State-licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state-licensed facilities.

     5.     Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

     6.     Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the state of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in California Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet at a state licensed facility. However, if a state licensed establishment also has a certificate of operation from the city to operate as a massage establishment, the business must also comply with all provisions of this chapter.

     7.     Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq., when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of California Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1.

     8.     Any other business or professions exempt by state law.

     B.     Partial Exception.

     1.     Businesses that offer massage services that are accessory to the primary business shall only be required to comply with the provisions set forth in subsection (B)(2) of this section. For purposes of this subsection, accessory massage services shall be those services where less than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the business is devoted to massage.

     2.     Massage services provided under subsection (B)(1) of this section shall be required to comply with the following:

     a.     Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC certificate.

     b.     The business shall comply with the following provisions of this chapter:

     i.      Section 6.40.065(A)(1) relating to hours;

     ii.     Section 6.40.065(C) relating to instruments, equipment and personnel;

     iii.    Section 6.40.065(D)(1) through (3) relating to personnel lists;

     iv.    Section 6.40.065(E) relating to prohibited conduct;

     v.     Section 6.40.070(A) through (F) relating to building and facility requirements;

     vi.    Section 6.40.075 relating to inspections.

     C.     Evidence of Entitlement to Exception. Any person claiming exception under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or she is entitled to such exception, including, proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that person relies. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.020 Business license and other permits required.
     A.    Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a city business license, conditional use permit in accordance with Title 11 of this code, or other permit if otherwise required by law.

     B.     Any individual applying for a business license as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC certificate before being issued a business license. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.025 Floor plans required.
     A.    All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor plan as part of their application for a certificate of operation.

     B.     All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this chapter pursuant to Section 6.40.015(B) shall be required to submit scaled floor plans in order to verify the applicability of the exemption.

     C.     No changes may be made to the approved floor plan without written approval from the community development department, which may require modification of any applicable conditional use permit. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.030 CAMTC certificate required.
     A.    No person shall provide massage services, including off-premises massage services, from any location in the city without having been issued a CAMTC certificate, regardless of whether such person has an operator permit or the business has a certificate of operation.

     B.     Any person certified by the state who desires to operate a massage establishment, must obtain an operator permit in accordance with Sections 6.40.035 through 6.40.060.

     C.     No operator of a massage establishment shall hire as an employee or utilize as an independent contractor any person to perform massage unless such person has been issued a CAMTC certificate.

     D.    Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.035 Certificate and permit requirement.
     A.    No person shall own or manage any massage establishment in any location within the city without first having obtained an annual operator permit.

     B.     No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the city unless the business first obtains a certificate of operation. No certificate of operation shall be approved until each operator identified in the application has obtained an operator permit.

     C.     Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of operation and/or an operator permit shall make an annual application in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

     D.    All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following statements:

     1.     A certification under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and

     2.     An authorization for the city, its officers, agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of law.

     E.     The provisions of Sections 6.40.025, 6.40.065, 6.40.070, 6.40.075 and 6.40.080 shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment, even if such business fails to obtain operator permits or certificates of operation. The city may immediately order a business that fails to have a certificate of operation or a permitted operator to cease operation.

     F.     Within thirty (30) working days following receipt of a completed application, and subject to approval of a conditional use permit where necessary, the city shall either issue the certificate of operation and the operator permit or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the city to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any certificate of operation or permit issued pursuant to this subsection F shall be deemed conditional pending the city’s receipt of the California Department of Justice report on the applicant’s fingerprints. If the fingerprint report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter.

     G.    Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.040 Operator permit.
     A.    Application—Contents. Applicants for operator permits shall submit the following information on a form supplied by the city:

     1.     The full true name of the applicant;

     2.     A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and fictitious names used by the applicant within the ten years immediately preceding the application;

     3.     The current residence address and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant;

     4.     A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address;

     5.     The applicant’s place of birth, and original documentation to verify both the applicant’s identity and employment authorization (if applicable), as listed under 8 U.S.C. 1324a(b)(l) and 8 C.F.R. part 274a.2(b)(l). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver’s license, California identification card, social security card, resident alien (“green”) card, United States passport (unexpired or expired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States Government in compliance with 8 C.F.R. part 274a.2(b)(l)(v)(A);

     6.     The history of the applicant as to any similar business or occupation within ten years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the applicant has owned, managed, provided massage services at, or worked at, whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide massage services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked, or suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation, or suspension; and the business, activity, or occupation the applicant engaged in subsequent to such denial, revocation, or suspension;

     7.     All criminal convictions within the last ten years, excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor;

     8.     Such other reasonable identification and information as the sheriff’s department may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     9.     Two passport-sized photographs of the applicant; and

     10.   An acknowledgement that by applying for an operator permit, the applicant understands that they are responsible for all violations of employees or independent contractors that may take place in the massage establishment which they own or manage and that such violations are grounds for revocation of the operator permit.

     B.     Once the information required by subsection A of this section is submitted, the applicant shall have his or her fingerprints taken for a criminal history background (LiveScan) check in the manner directed by the sheriff’s department unless the applicant is certified by CAMTC.

     C.     The city shall issue the operator permit, unless after investigation by the city and/or the sheriff’s department, any of the following findings can be made:

     1.     The applicant has failed to provide information, documentation, and assurances required by this chapter or by the sheriff’s department; has failed to reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; or

     2.     The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

     3.     There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or

     4.     The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments; or

     5.     The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age; or

     6.     The applicant is delinquent in paying city fees or penalties owed in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless revoked, for a period of three years. Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed with the city. Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid unless the permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was filed at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration, without action having been taken by the sheriff’s department. Renewal applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by resolution of the city council. A permittee shall be required to update the information contained in his or her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the sheriff’s department in order to determine whether the permit should be renewed, including all information required by subsection A of this section. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit.

     E.     If the criminal history background check report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial.

     F.     Automatic issuance and renewal for CAMTC certificate holders.

     1.     Any person who holds a valid CAMTC certificate shall only be required to provide the following information on a form that includes the statements set forth in Section 6.40.035(D):

     a.     The full true name of the applicant;

     b.     The current residence and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant; and

     c.     The name and address of the massage establishment for which the operator permit is sought.

     2.     A copy of the applicant’s CAMTC certificate and identification shall be provided with the application, along with a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

     3.     The applicant shall provide two passport-sized photographs as specified above.

     4.     The operator permit shall automatically be issued upon completion of the form and verification of the validity of the CAMTC certificate by the city. No background check shall be required.

     5.     Renewals shall be required in accordance with subsection D of this section, but such renewals shall be automatic as long as the permittee maintains and provides a copy of his or her valid CAMTC certificate.

     G.    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or transferred.

     H.    It is the duty of each operator to notify the city whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the operator permit in the first instance. Such notification shall be in writing and made within ten business days of the change on a form provided by the city.

     I.      Each operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the operator’s permit.

     J.      The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate as required by this chapter.

     K.    Any requirement of this chapter applying to an operator shall apply to each and every operator of a massage establishment.

     L.     Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.045 Certificate of operation.
     A.    Applications for a certificate of operation shall be filed with the city and shall include the information set forth below:

     1.     The full name of the applicant;

     2.     The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business license is issued pursuant to Title 6 of this code. No massage establishment business shall operate under any business name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the certificate of operation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation or on a valid DBA (“doing business as”);

     3.     The address of the proposed massage establishment;

     4.     A detailed description of the operation and type of services to be provided by the massage establishment, including other therapies to be provided, and other businesses to be operated on the same premises;

     5.     The full name of each operator of the massage establishment;

     6.     A legal size copy of the floor plan approved as part of the conditional use permit, drawn to scale showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including, but not limited to, closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs;

     7.     The full name, address, and phone number of the legal owner of the property, if other than the applicant on which the massage establishment is to be located, along with a copy of the signed lease and a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property; and

     8.     The hours and days of operation.

     B.     The city shall issue a certificate of operation based on verification of the following:

     1.     The massage establishment will comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, building, fire, zoning, health, and safety regulations, as well as any conditions which have been imposed to comply with such laws; and

     2.     Each person identified as an operator has obtained an operator permit.

     C.     Every massage establishment for which a certificate of operation has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.

     D.    A certificate of operation is not transferable to a separate location of the same business, to a different business at the same location, or to the same business under different ownership at the same location, or the same business under a different name.

     E.     It is the duty of each operator to notify the city whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the certificate of operation in the first instance. Any sale or transfer of any reportable interest of an owner in a massage establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under subsection A of this section in the first instance, shall render the certificate of operation temporarily suspended and subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless prior to the effective date of such sale or transfer, the new owner applies for and obtains an operator permit.

     F.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, where a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, or a notice of suspension or revocation, has been issued regarding a massage establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the city shall not process or issue a new application for a certificate of operation for said location unless or until the revocation or suspension proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current certificate of operation should not be suspended or revoked, or a two-year period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the suspension or revocation proceedings or other criminal actions.

     G.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, when a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and no certificate of operation shall be issued for such location for a period of two years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation proceedings. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required.

     H.    Where the applicant for the certificate of operation is not the property owner, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the certificate, the city shall send written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the certificate and the regulations applicable to the massage establishment and the property pursuant to this chapter; this may be accomplished by including a copy of this chapter with the notice.

     I.      Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.050 Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates.
     A.    Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the city manager may suspend or revoke a permit or certificate of operation issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the city manager or the sheriff’s department determines that any of the following has occurred:

     1.     The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code;

     2.     The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance;

     3.     The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare of the city or its inhabitants;

     4.     There is substantial evidence of prostitution;

     5.     The permittee, or any employee or independent contractor working on the premises, has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

     6.     The city manager makes any of the findings that would have justified denying the application in the first instance.

     B.     If, in the discretion of the city manager, an alleged violation is minor and capable of correction, then prior to suspension or revocation a written notice shall be given to the permittee of the alleged violation(s) involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged violation(s), which period shall not exceed five business days, at the end of which period, an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged violation(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice shall include either a notice of violation or an administrative citation.

     C.     If the city manager determines that an alleged violation is not minor or capable of correction, that an alleged violation(s) continues without correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even if for different reasons, then the city manager may issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, along with an administrative or criminal citation. Examples of a violation which will be determined by the city manager to be not capable of correction include, but are not limited to, substantial evidence of prostitution activity on the massage establishment premises or an immediate threat to public health, safety, or welfare.

     D.    Notice of Intent to Suspend or Revoke. A notice of intent to suspend or revoke shall contain a statement of an alleged violation(s) which constitutes the basis for the suspension or revocation, notice of the right of the permittee to respond to the charges in writing to the city for a pre-appeal determination, notice of the right to appeal to the city council, and notice that a failure to respond in the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond, but not the right to appeal. If an alleged violation is capable of correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct the alleged violation(s) within the time to respond.

     E.     Response to Notice of Intent/Pre-Appeal Determination.

     1.     The time to respond and request a pre-appeal determination shall be five business days from the date of service of the notice, regardless of whether the materials upon which the notice of intent is based are provided to the permittee at that time.

     2.     If there is no response, the permit shall be considered suspended or revoked upon the expiration of time in which to respond and request a pre-appeal hearing.

     3.     If there is a response, the permit shall remain in effect until a determination is made by the city manager. In no event shall the city council hold a hearing until at least five business days have passed from the time the city provides the materials upon which the notice of intent is issued to the permittee.

     F.     Suspension or Revocation. If, after consideration of the permittee’s response, the city manager determines that the notice of intent to suspend or revoke should be upheld, then the city manager shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation and serve it upon the permittee as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or certificate holder. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal.

     1.     Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a certificate of operation, all massage activity at the massage establishment shall cease and no activity for which the certificate of operation is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

     2.     Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of an operator permit, the operator must cease all work at the massage establishment. If there is no other person who has an operator permit which is not the subject of a suspension or revocation proceeding, then all massage activity at the massage establishment shall also cease and no massage activity shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

     G.    Surrender of Certificate of Operation and Permits. Any permittee shall immediately surrender his or her permit or certificate to the city upon its suspension or revocation. The operator shall immediately surrender the certificate of operation upon revocation of an operator permit if there is no other permitted operator. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.055 Appeals to city council.
     A.    Appeals.

     1.     Appeals shall be in writing and filed with the city clerk within the following time frames:

     a.     Appeals from any decision of the city to deny a permit shall be in writing, shall clearly state the applicable basis for the appeal, and shall be filed not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following the giving of the notice of denial.

     b.     Appeals from a notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit where no response is filed in accordance with Section 6.40.050(E) shall be filed not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following the expiration of the response period.

     c.     Appeals from a notice of suspension or revocation issued after a response is filed in accordance with Section 6.40.050(E) shall be filed not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following the giving of the notice of suspension or revocation.

     2.     The city clerk shall not accept an appeal from a decision of the city, and no hearing shall be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.

     3.     The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section.

     B.     City Council Action.

     1.     Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city council. The hearing shall be held not fewer than ten calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties.

     2.     The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing.

     3.     At the time of such hearing, the city council shall review the records and files relating to the decision.

     a.     The city council shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.

     b.     In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are now, or are hereafter permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded.

     c.     In determining whether a person should be disqualified for meeting the definition of person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct as set forth in Section 6.40.010, the city council may consider: the nature and severity of the act(s) or crime(s); whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s); the number of act(s) or crime(s); and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) were.

     4.     The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the requirements for issuing the permit or certificate in the first instance; the city shall have the burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit.

     5.     Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city council shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified, or reversed.

     6.     The city council’s decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within ten working days after the close of the hearing and submission of the matter to the city council for decision. The city council’s decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified, or reversed and shall state the reasons therefor.

     7.     The decision of the city council shall include notice that the decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.5, and that any action filed in the Superior Court shall be filed within ninety (90) days following the city council’s notice pursuant to California Civil Procedure Code Section 1094.6. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.060 Notices.
     A.    All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the responsible party (i.e., permittee, applicant, appellant, or a representative thereof) either by personal delivery or certified mail to such responsible party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file with the city. Notices shall include information regarding appeal rights and a statement that the failure to file an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies.

     B.     In all cases where the certificate holder is not the property owner, notices shall also be sent to the property owner of record where the notice relates to possible closure of the business due to suspension or revocation. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.065 Operational requirements.
     A.    Hours and Conditions of Operation.

     1.     No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be administered in any massage establishment between the hours of ten p.m. and eight a.m. A massage begun any time before ten p.m. must nevertheless terminate at ten p.m. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment. These hours of operation may be modified to be more restrictive pursuant to a conditional use permit.

     2.     During hours of operation, no person other than a valid permit holder under this chapter, a massage practitioner, a massage therapist, or a patron shall be allowed beyond the reception area of the massage establishment.

     3.     Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage establishment during the hours of operation.

     a.     Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment.

     b.     Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage technician is on the premises.

     4.     The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of operation by a manager who is one of the operators specified in the permit application.

     5.     No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes. There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than as shown on the approved floor plan. Locker facilities shall be provided for all employees and independent contractors and all personal items of the employees and independent contractors shall be kept in the lockers while at the massage establishment.

     B.     Posting Requirements. In addition to any other requirements for posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply:

     1.     A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment.

     2.     Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron.

     3.     Any posted signs which are in a language other than English shall also be posted in English.

     C.     Instruments, Equipment, and Personnel.

     1.     Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

     2.     Unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit, massages shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs which are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four inches thick or with a width of more than four feet shall not be permitted in the establishment.

     3.     No massage technician shall massage the genitals or anal area of any patron nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified areas.

     4.     No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified area.

     5.     A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of any massage establishment staff unless the patron’s genitalia and, if a female patron, the female patron’s breasts, are fully covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent covering.

     6.     Persons providing services in the massage establishment shall not be dressed in attire that is: transparent, see-through, substantially exposes the massage technician’s undergarments, or exposes the massage technician’s breasts, buttocks, or genitals; in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing a water-based massage modality which has been approved by CAMTC.

     7.     All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination.

     8.     Clean and sanitary towels, sheets, and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

     9.     All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls at all times.

     D.    Personnel Lists.

     1.     Within seven calendar days of receiving a certificate of operation, the operator shall provide the city with a complete list of all massage technicians who are working or will work, be employed, or provide massage services in the massage establishment along with a copy of their CAMTC certificate and identification card, as well as with the name and residence address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment and of any other manager.

     2.     The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the city in writing of any changes in massage technicians and managers within seven calendar days of such change.

     3.     The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician’s CAMTC certificate and identification card on file on the premises of the massage establishment which shall be available to any individual upon request, including but not limited to employees of the city. Additionally, the operator shall be required to file copies of each CAMTC certificate and identification card with the city within seven days of a massage technician beginning to work at the massage establishment. Information required by this section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment.

     4.     The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage establishment a register of all non-state certified persons employed, working or providing other services at the massage establishment. The register shall be maintained for a minimum of two years following the time that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment. The operator shall make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the city, the sheriff’s department, any health officer, or any other official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

     a.     Name, nicknames, and/or aliases;

     b.     Home address and relevant phone number, including but not limited to home, cellular, and pager numbers;

     c.     Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;

     d.     The date of employment, and termination, if any;

     e.     The duties of each person; and

     f.      In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers, which shall only be available for review by the sheriff’s department or other law enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

     E.     Prohibited Conduct.

     1.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license from the state and conditional use permit from the city.

     2.     No storage or sale of condoms or spermicides shall be permitted within the massage establishment.

     3.     No operator shall hire, employ, or allow a person to perform massage services unless such person possesses a valid CAMTC certificate. Each operator of a massage establishment shall verify that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate required by this chapter. Nothing herein prevents an operator from hiring, employing, or allowing a person to perform services allowed by such person’s cosmetology or barber license, if the business has a state establishment license in addition to a certificate of operation.

     4.     No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be any storage of, any sexually-oriented implements or paraphernalia which are designed or market primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity.

     5.     No electrical, mechanical, or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms, without the knowledge and written consent of the patron.

     6.     No operator of a massage establishment shall place, publish, or distribute or allow or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter.

     7.     Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.070 Building and facility requirements.
     A.    The building, or unit within the building where the massage establishment is located, shall comply with all applicable building code requirements.

     B.     All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that can open inward, draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles. Except for bathroom doors, interior doors may not have locks on them.

     C.     In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of the California Building Code all rooms in which massages are being provided shall be lit with a minimum of one light fixture emitting at least two hundred ten (210) lumens for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of space during the administration of such services, with the light fixtures being spread throughout the space. No dimmer switches, strobe lights, flashing lights, colored light, or any coverings or other apparatus, other than a lampshade, which changes or darkens the color of the primary light source shall be used in any room in which massage services are being provided.

     D.    Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patron’s valuables and the patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access.

     E.     The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable mold-resistant surface.

     F.     All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use.

     G.    One main entry door that enters into the reception area shall be provided for patron use. All patrons, and any persons other than those providing services at the massage establishment, shall be required to enter and exit through the front door of the establishment.

     H.    All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety agency. Notwithstanding the above, the front door may be locked if there is no staff available to assure security for the clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors.

     I.      There shall be no buzzer, alarm, or intercom system.

     J.      No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs or darkens the view into the premises or by signs that cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of any windowpane. The interior of the business shall be plainly visible from the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians.

     K.    Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.075 Inspections.
     A.    Representatives of the sheriff’s department, fire department, community development department, code enforcement and agents for the city from the county health department and representatives of any state or local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments shall have the right to enter massage establishments, from time to time, during regular business hours, or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or open for business, to verify the massage establishment is in compliance with all applicable laws without the need for an inspection or abatement warrant.

     B.     The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage establishment, in letters that are a minimum of one inch in height, a notice in English which provides substantially as follows:

 

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE

 

     In addition, operators are encouraged to post this notice in language(s) that are best understood by the customers of the massage establishment.

     C.     No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay of, or interfere with, a lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed in subsection A of this section at any time.

     D.    Penalty, see Section 6.40.080. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.080 Penalty.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards set forth in this chapter.

     B.     Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the sole discretion of the city prosecutor, it is charged as, or reduced to, an infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel.

     C.     In addition to the above, any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal, and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the state of California or the city of La Cañada Flintridge; and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought, attorney’s fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction.

     D.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

 

6.40.085 Off-premises massage.
     No person shall perform or administer a massage off the premises of a massage establishment, for any form of consideration, without being CAMTC certified consistent with the provisions of Section 6.40.040 and obtaining an off-premises massage permit under this section. Any person desiring an off-premises massage permit shall file a written application on the required form with the city along with a filing fee established by resolution of the city council. The application shall contain or be accompanied by the following information:

     A.    The complete name, including all aliases, residence and business address and telephone number of the applicant;

     B.     The specific reasons necessitating the performance of the massage at a location other than a massage establishment. If the off-premises massage is to be conducted at a commercial business during normal business hours while patron remains fully clothed, a letter from the commercial business confirming these conditions shall accompany the application. (Ord. 454 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 6.50 TAXICABS AND OTHER VEHICLES FOR HIRE
6.50.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the words and phrases as defined herein shall be deemed and construed to have the meanings respectively ascribed to them, unless from the particular context, it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended.

     “Automobile for hire” means and includes every motor vehicle of private appearance, not equipped with a taximeter, which is operated and hired from a public or a private garage only, and where the destination and route of which are under the control of the passengers being carried therein for a compensation which is fixed in accordance with the distance traveled, waiting time or both. No such automobile for hire shall be painted a distinctive color for the purpose of identification.

     “Certificate” means a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the city manager or city council or their designated representative.

     “Dial-a-ride vehicle” means and includes every motor vehicle of a distinct color or commercial appearance used in the business of carrying passengers; which is hired from a public or a private garage or any fixed stand or location and the destination and route of which are under the joint control of the driver and the passengers being carried therein, corresponding with the designation and general direction of each of them and requests from additional customers for a compensation which is fixed in accordance with the distance traveled, by zone.

     “Driver” means and includes every person in actual charge and control of any public transportation vehicle for hire as the driver thereof.

     “Holder” means an owner who has received a certificate from the city under this chapter.

     “Limousine” means a passenger-carrying motor vehicle for hire, of private appearance (except as to license plates), not equipped with a taximeter or top light, and used for the transportation of persons along a route directed by persons hiring or passengers in the vehicle, the charge for use of which is based upon rates per hour (with a minimum one-hour charge), per day, per week or per month.

     “Owner” means and includes every person owning or directing the general operation of any public transportation vehicle for hire.

     “Public transportation vehicle for hire” means every self-propelled vehicle used for transportation of persons over the public highways otherwise than for the owner and/or nonpaying guests of the owner and otherwise than upon fixed rails or tracks. Public transportation vehicles as defined is intended to include reference to all automobiles for hire, dial-a-ride vehicles, taxicabs and limousines.

     “Stand” means and includes a portion of the street designated by the city manager for the exclusive use of public transportation vehicles while waiting for employment.

     “Taxicab” means and includes every motor vehicle of a distinct color or commercial appearance used in the business of carrying passengers which is rented from a public or a private garage or any fixed stand or location and the destination and route of which are under the exclusive control of the passengers being carried therein.

     “Taximeter” means and includes a mechanical or electronic instrument or device by which the charge for hire of a passenger-carrying vehicle is mechanically or electronically calculated and registered, either for distance traveled or for waiting time or both, and upon which such charge is indicated by means of figures. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.020 Certificate of public convenience and necessity required.
     A.    No person shall operate any public transportation vehicle for hire with a base of operation from within the city unless such vehicle is licensed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. No such license shall be issued unless and until the public convenience and necessity require the licensing of such vehicle for which application is made, and a certificate is issued therefor.

     B.     The city manager shall have the authority and it shall be his or her duty to issue such certificate of convenience, or to refuse to issue the same, according as in his or her judgment the public convenience of the city and its inhabitants may require, provided all criteria in this chapter are met.

     C.     In determining whether to issue a certificate, the following factors shall be taken into consideration:

     1.     Whether the demands of public convenience require such proposed or additional transportation service;

     2.     The financial responsibility of the applicant and the likelihood of the proposed service being permanent, responsible and satisfactory;

     3.     The number, kind, type and condition of equipment;

     4.     The schedule of rates proposed to be charged;

     5.     The number of vehicles for hire operating in the city and the increased traffic congestion and demand for increased parking space upon the streets of the city which may result, and whether the safe use of the streets in the city by the public, both vehicular and pedestrian, will be preserved;

     6.     Any such further investigation or other relevant facts as the party issuing the certificate may deem advisable and necessary.

     D.    The decision of the city manager denying a certificate of public convenience and necessity may be appealed to the city council by the filing of a written appeal with the city clerk not more than ten days after the date of the city manager’s decision. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city manager shall set a date for hearing on the appeal before the city council. Public notice of such hearing shall be given by publishing notice in the official newspaper, at least ten days before the time of the hearing. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.030 Application for certificate.
     Any owner desiring to obtain the certificate required by this chapter shall make application therefor. The application shall be verified under oath, filed with the city clerk, and shall set forth the following:

     A.    The name, age, business address, residence and citizenship of the applicant, if a natural person; or if a corporation, its name, date and place of incorporation, address of its principal officers, together with their respective addresses; or if a partnership, association or unincorporated company, the names of the partners, or the persons comprising the association or company, with the place of business and residence of each partner or person;

     B.     A brief description of the public transportation vehicles which the applicant proposes to use, indicating the number, make, model and type of vehicle(s), vehicle license number(s), the vehicle identification number(s) (VIN) and the seating capacity of each, according to its trade or factory rating; or if a truck, the actual carrying and seating capacity thereof;

     C.     The street number and exact location of the public or private garage from which each vehicle is to be operated;

     D.    A complete schedule of the fares or rates to be charged. In the case of dial-a-ride vehicles, a map of fare zones shall also be filed, and in the case of other public transportation vehicles, a map of the routes to be established, if any, shall be filed;

     E.     The past experience of the applicant in the matter to which the requested permit appertains; and the name, address and past experience of the person to be in charge of the premises or business;

     F.     A verified financial statement of the applicant;

     G.    Whether or not any permit issued to the applicant for operation of a public transportation vehicle has been suspended, denied, terminated, canceled or revoked, and if so, the circumstances regarding same;

     H.    The distinctive color scheme, name, monogram or insignia, if any, which shall be used on the vehicles which are subject to the certificate;

     I.      If any stand is proposed, the application shall be accompanied by a written consent thereto of all occupants of the ground floor of any building or lot in front of which stand is to be located, and for twenty-five (25) feet each way therefrom, or if there is no such occupant, by the written consent thereto of the owner or lessee of such building or lot;

     J.      Such further information as the city manager or such official of the city to whom the application may be referred, may require. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.040 Bond or certificate of insurance required.
     No owner or driver of a public transportation vehicle for hire with a base of operation within the city shall drive or operate a vehicle, or cause or permit any vehicle under his or her control to be driven or operated within the city, and no permit for the operation thereof shall be granted, unless there is on file with the city clerk and in full force and effect at all times while such taxicab is being operated, a policy or certificate of insurance evidencing that the permit holder is insured, issued by a company authorized to do business in the state, insuring the owner of such vehicle against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons, including passengers in the vehicle, or property from the negligent operation or defective construction of such public transportation vehicle for hire, or from violation of this chapter or any other section of this code or of any law of the state. The policy or certificate shall be for not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per occurrence for injury or death of any persons and five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for injury or destruction of property. The certificate by the insurance carrier shall contain a statement of obligation on the part of the carrier to notify the city of any material change, cancellation or termination of the coverage at least thirty (30) days in advance of the effective date of any such material change, cancellation or termination, and shall also name the city as an additional insured. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.050 Issuance of license.
     Upon approval of the certificate and upon payment of the required business license tax, the city clerk shall issue to the applicant a license to operate a public transportation vehicle for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.060 Suspension, alteration or revocation of license.
     The city may at any time after hearing and for good cause, suspend, alter, amend or revoke the license issued by this chapter. Such revocation hearing shall be conducted by the party issuing the certificate. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.070 Display of license.
     The license issued by the city clerk as provided in Section 6.50.050 shall be prominently displayed in the driver’s compartment of the vehicle. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.080 Permission to make changes in mode of operation.
     In the event that any certificate holder desires to change the approved schedule of rates and charges or the color scheme, name, monogram or insignia used on a licensed vehicle, or to substitute any vehicle for and in place of the vehicle described in the application, or to increase or decrease the number of vehicles used, he or she shall make application for permission to do so from the city manager, which permission shall be granted if, and in the discretion of the city manager, the public interest, necessity and convenience will be served by such change, and if the certificate holder has complied with all provisions of this chapter, and no such change shall be made without such permission. The decision of the city manager denying a change may be appealed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (D) of Section 6.50.020. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.090 License not required.
     No license shall be required of the owner of the following:

     A.    Any operations for which a certificate of convenience and necessity has been granted by the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California; or

     B.     Any public transportation vehicle whose base of operations is not within the city. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.100 Rules and regulations for operation.
     The following rules and regulations shall be observed by all persons operating vehicles for which licenses are required pursuant to this chapter:

     A.    License. Every driver or chauffeur of any public transportation vehicle for hire shall possess a valid California driver’s license of Class 3 or better and/or a chauffeur’s permit as may be required by the state of California.

     B.     Soliciting Passengers. The services of an automobile for hire, dial-a-ride vehicle, limousine or taxicab shall be available only upon telephone call or upon engagement at the public or private garage from which such vehicle is operated; no person shall cruise or cause or permit to be cruised any such vehicle. A vehicle shall be deemed to be cruising when it solicits or takes on any passenger other than in response to an order given at its garage or in response to a telephone call requesting transportation.

     C.     Direct Route. The driver of any public transportation vehicle for hire shall carry any passengers engaging the same safely and expeditiously to his or her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

     D.    Business License. No person shall operate any public transportation vehicle without paying any license fee required by the city for the transaction for such business.

     E.     Mechanical Condition. All public transportation vehicles for hire shall be kept in good mechanical condition.

     F.     Information to be Posted. Every public transportation vehicle for hire shall have displayed in plain view, with character lettering of not less than one-half inch size, in the rear passenger compartment thereof at all times a sign stating in clearly legible characters the rates or fare charged for carrying passengers therein, the owner’s name or the fictitious name under which he or she operates, the business address and telephone number of such owner.

     G.    Sanitary Condition. No public transportation vehicle for hire shall be operated unless the passenger compartment is kept clean and in sanitary condition.

     H.    Fire Extinguisher. Every public transportation vehicle for hire shall be equipped with a standard type fire extinguisher in good working condition.

     I.      Drivers Generally. Drivers of all public transportation vehicles for hire shall be courteous and clean of body and wearing apparel. Smoking by drivers or passengers in any such vehicle while same is available for, or actually hired for use, shall be prohibited.

     J.      Conduct of Drivers. Drivers of a public transportation vehicle for hire shall not discriminate, refuse or neglect to convey an orderly person upon request unless previously engaged or unable or forbidden by the provisions of this chapter to do so. Drivers shall not use the vehicle for any purpose other than the transportation of passengers and luggage. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.110 Failure to pay fare.
     No person shall refuse to pay the legal fare for the hire of any public transportation vehicle for hire, after having hired the same, with the intent to defraud the person from whom it is hired. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.120 Stands.
     The city manager may specify the location(s) for stands at which any taxicab or dial-a-ride vehicle may be parked and he or she may specify the nature and extent of the use of the stand. Such stand shall consist of a one-car space, to be marked, painted and reserved for such purposes only. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.130 Public transportation vehicle numbers.
     Every certificate holder shall designate and assign each public transportation vehicle a vehicle number. No two vehicles of any certificate holder shall be designated by the same number. The name or trade name of the certificate holder and the number by which the vehicle is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each vehicle and in the passenger compartment. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

 

6.50.140 Nontransferability—Certificate or license.
     No certificate or license issued under the terms of this chapter shall be transferable either by contract or operation of law and any such attempted transfer shall be sufficient cause for revocation thereof. (Ord. 232 § 1, 1994)

Title 7 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 7.08 BUILDING CODE
Chapter 7.10 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
Chapter 7.12 ELECTRICAL CODE
Chapter 7.16 MECHANICAL CODE
Chapter 7.20 PLUMBING CODE
Chapter 7.24 EXCAVATION
Chapter 7.30 RESIDENTIAL CODE
Chapter 7.31 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
Chapter 7.32 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES

Chapter 7.08 BUILDING CODE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 27, 31, 83, 121, 164, 188, 218, 247, 251, 300, 315, 338, 370, 392, 393, 405-U, 409 and 422.

 

7.08.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the building code of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to regulate grading, and the erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, use, height, area and maintenance of all structures and certain equipment therein specifically regulated within the city, providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor, and providing procedures for correction of violation of this code. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.030 Adoption by reference.
     A.    Except as otherwise amended in this Chapter 7.08, Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, which chapter is entitled “Building Code,” is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference and expressly incorporated herein. Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby made a part of this chapter as if, for all intents and purposes, fully set forth in this chapter. This adoption by reference shall include any subsequent amendments to Title 26 unless modified in this chapter.

     B.     A copy of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code, which is referenced as the “2020 County of Los Angeles Building Code (Title 26) Based on the 2019 California Building Code and the 2018 International Building Code” is on file in the office of the City Clerk for public record and inspection.

     C.     If there is any inconsistency between any provisions of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code and other provisions of this municipal code, such other provisions of this municipal code shall prevail. (Ord. 493 § 1, 2020; Ord. 457 § 1, 2017; Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.040 Amendments.
     Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended as follows:

     A.    Chapters 94, 95, 98, and 99 are hereby excluded from the adoption of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code.

     B.     Section 106.5.4 of Chapter 1, relating to permit expirations, is amended to read as follows:

        (a)       Every permit issued by the building official under the provisions of this code shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the building or work authorized by such permit is not commenced within 180 days from the date of such permit, or if the building or work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of 180 days. Before such work can be commenced or recommenced, a new permit shall first be obtained and the fee therefor shall be one-half of the amount required for a new permit for such work, provided no changes have been made or will be made in the original plans and specifications for such work; and provided, further, that the duration of such failure to commence, suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.

        (b)      Any permittee holding an unexpired permit for which work has not commenced, may apply for an extension of time within which work may commence under that permit. The building official may extend the time for action by the permittee for a period not exceeding 180 days on a written request and payment of a fee equal to 25 percent of the original permit fee. No permit shall be extended more than twice.

        (c)       Every permit shall be valid for a duration of not more than two years from the commencement of work. If work has been recommenced pursuant to subsection (a) above, the permit shall be valid for a duration of not more than two years from the commencement of work under the original issued permit for the property. If the work is not completed within two years from the commencement, the permit shall expire by time limit and become null and void. The building official may extend in writing the two-year construction time limit for a period not exceeding one year upon written request submitted by the permittee prior to expiration showing that the size, scope, and complexity of the work or other physical conditions have necessitated longer construction time, and the permittee has made satisfactory progress under such circumstances. Incomplete construction, after the expiration of the permit, shall constitute a public nuisance and shall be subject to abatement pursuant to the provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. For purposes of this subsection, the first recorded inspection approval constitutes commencement of work.

 

     C.     Section 106.3 of Chapter 1, entitled “Administration,” relating to building permits for walls and fences, is amended to read as follows:

 

        2.        Building permits are required for all fences and walls over forty-two (42) inches in height.

 

     D.    Section 6807.2 of Chapter 68, entitled “Expedited Permitting for Small Residential Rooftop Solar Energy Systems,” is hereby excluded from the adoption of Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code. (Ord. 457 § 2, 2017; Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.050 Construction placard.
     Work requiring a building permit shall not be commenced until the permit holder or the permit holder’s agent have posted in a conspicuous location at the construction site, a construction placard provided by the building official at the time of permit issuance. Said placard shall not be removed until final approval of the work by the building department. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.060 Restrictions on issuance of new permits.
     The building official shall not issue any permits for properties with illegal structures, active code enforcement cases and/or expired permits, unless its purpose is to resolve the code enforcement case and/or reactivate the expired permit. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.070 Construction fencing.
     Protection of Bystanders. Temporary chain link construction fencing shall be erected to protect bystanders from entering a construction site. The temporary construction fence shall not be lower than five feet nor higher than six feet in height and shall be installed in conjunction with a mesh windscreen for dust and visibility reduction. The location and height of temporary construction fencing shall be reviewed and approved by the director of community development and shall not be installed prior to a valid building permit being issued for demolition or grading or building activities on the site. Temporary construction fencing shall be removed within seven days of building permit final or the expiration of the permit, which ever shall come first. (Ord. 457 § 3, 2017; Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.080 Appeals.
     In order to hear building appeals provided for in the Los Angeles County Building Code and this chapter, there is created a building rehabilitation appeals board (“board”) consisting of the five members of the La Cañada Flintridge planning commission, who shall serve so long as they are members of the planning commission. The board shall have all of the powers set forth in the building code and shall keep a record of all its proceedings and notify all parties concerned of its findings and decisions. Decisions of the board may be appealed in writing to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the date that the board’s decision is rendered. In the case of any such appeal, the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.090 Fees.
     Any person making application for any building permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall adopt by resolution, as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 440 § 3, 2015)

 

7.08.100 Unpermitted construction.
     Any person who undertakes any work without required permits shall comply with the provisions of the Los Angeles County Building Code Section 107.13. (Ord. 457 § 4, 2017)

Chapter 7.10 EXISTING BUILDING CODE
7.10.010 Adopted.
     Except as hereinafter provided, that certain existing building code known and designated as the Los Angeles County Existing Building Code shall be and become the existing building code of the city, providing for the issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor, and providing penalties for violation of such code.

     As used in this chapter, the Los Angeles County Existing Building Code refers to the current existing building code adopted by the county of Los Angeles and any amendments to such code subsequently adopted by the County of Los Angeles. In the event of any conflict between provisions of the Los Angeles County Existing Building Code, Title 33 of the Los Angeles County Code, or the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code, the provision contained in the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code shall control. (Ord. 493 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 7.12 ELECTRICAL CODE
7.12.010 Adopted.
     The city of La Cañada Flintridge does adopt by reference, except as hereafter provided, that certain electrical code known and designated as the Los Angeles County Electrical Code as published in the 2020 Edition of Title 27 of the Los Angeles County Code and any amendments to such code subsequently adopted by the County of Los Angeles, which shall be and become the electrical code of the city of La Cañada Flintridge and provide for the issuance of permits therefor. (Ord. 493 § 3, 2020; Ord. 457 § 5, 2017; Ord. 422 § 3, 2014; Ord. 393 § 2, 2011; Ord. 392 § 2, 2011; Ord. 370 § 5, 2008; Ord. 338 § 3, 2003; Ord. 300 § 5, 1999; Ord. 251 § 2, 1996; Ord. 247 § 3, 1995; Ord. 218 § 2, 1993; Ord. 164 § 3, 1989; Ord. 133 § 1, 1986; Ord. 60 § 1, 1979; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

7.12.020 Fees.
     Any person making application for any electrical permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, approve. (Ord. 300 § 6, 1999; Ord. 133 § 2, 1986; Ord. 121 § 4, 1985; Ord. 60 § 2, 1979; Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 7.16 MECHANICAL CODE
7.16.010 Adopted.
     Except as hereinafter provided, that certain mechanical code known and designated as the Los Angeles County Mechanical Code as contained in the 2020 Edition of Title 29 of the Los Angeles County Code and any amendments to such code subsequently adopted by the County of Los Angeles, which shall be and become the mechanical code of the city, and providing for the issuance of permits and the collection of fees therefor. (Ord. 493 § 4, 2020; Ord. 457 § 6, 2017; Ord. 422 § 4, 2014; Ord. 393 § 3, 2011; Ord. 392 § 3, 2011; Ord. 370 § 6, 2008; Ord. 338 § 4, 2003; Ord. 300 § 7, 1999; Ord. 251 § 3, 1996; Ord. 247 § 4, 1995; Ord. 218 § 3, 1993; Ord. 180 § 1, 1990; Ord. 164 § 4, 1989; Ord. 121 § 5, 1985; Ord. 33 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

7.16.020 Fees.
     Any person making application for any mechanical permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, approve. (Ord. 300 § 9, 1999)

Chapter 7.20 PLUMBING CODE
7.20.010 Adopted.
     Except as hereinafter provided, that certain plumbing code known and designated as the Los Angeles County Plumbing Code as contained in the 2020 Edition of Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code and any amendments to such code subsequently adopted by the County of Los Angeles shall be and become the plumbing code of the city, regulating plumbing and drainage systems, house sewers and private sewage disposal systems, prescribing conditions under which such work may be carried on within the city, and providing for the issuance of permits therefor. (Ord. 493 § 5, 2020; Ord. 457 § 7, 2017; Ord. 422 § 5, 2014; Ord. 393 § 4, 2011; Ord. 392 § 4, 2011; Ord. 370 § 7, 2008; Ord. 338 § 5, 2003; Ord. 300 § 10, 1999; Ord. 251 § 4, 1996; Ord. 247 § 5, 1995; Ord. 218 § 4, 1993; Ord. 180 § 2, 1996; Ord. 164 § 5, 1989; Ord. 121 § 7, 1985; Ord. 32 § 1, 1978; Ord. 27, 1977)

 

7.20.020 Fees.
     Any person making application for any plumbing permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, approve. (Ord. 300 § 11, 1999; Ord. 32 § 2, 1978)

 

7.20.030 Amendments.
     Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended as follows:

     A.    Section 304.1 is hereby excluded from the adoption of Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code.

     B.     Footnote 10 of Table H 101.8 Location of Sewage Disposal System is hereby excluded from the adoption of Title 28 of the Los Angeles County Code. (Ord. 493 § 6, 2020)

Chapter 7.24 EXCAVATION
7.24.010 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of this chapter apply to permits for the making, or causing to be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing, testing, repairing, changing, monitoring, removing or abandoning of facilities or encroachments. The provisions of this chapter also apply to written emergency plans for owners or operators of pipelines used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, and mandatory membership in a one-call notification system. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 4, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 5, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 801, 1940)

 

7.24.020 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Membership in one-call notification system required.
     When a one-call notification system is operational in the city, no person shall maintain and operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous substances below the surface of a highway unless said person is a member of the system. Such person shall provide to the city engineer such proof as required that said person is a member of the system in the city. For the purpose of this section, electrical facilities shall not be considered hazardous. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 5, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 801.1, 1940)

 

7.24.030 Excavation or encroachment permit—Plat filing required with application when—Contents.
     Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application a plat in quintuplicate showing the highways in which the proposed excavation, facility or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavations, or the specifications and characteristics of the facility or encroachment, together with any other details which the city engineer requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the city engineer may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records. (LACC Ord. 11581 § 6, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802, 1940)

 

7.24.040 Underground pipelines—Minimum depth of cover.
     The following minimum depths of cover below existing, finished or proposed gutter grade shall be required for all underground pipelines within the roadway area:

     A.    Twenty-four (24) inches for service pipelines;

     B.     Thirty (30) inches for all pipelines in local streets except pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances and service pipelines;

     C.     Thirty (30) inches for electric and natural gas facilities in local streets;

     D.    Thirty-six (36) inches for all pipelines in master plan highways except pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances and service pipelines;

     E.     Forty-two (42) inches in local streets and master plan highways for pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances such as, but not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, butane, propane or chemicals;

     F.     Forty-two (42) inches for electric and natural gas facilities in master plan highways. (LACC Ord. 11581 § 7, 1977: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.1, 1940)

 

7.24.050 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Pressure test specifications.
     A.    After initial installation under this chapter of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, such pipeline shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before it is placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall not be less than twenty-four (24) hours.

     B.     After repair or placement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, made necessary to repair leaks or breaks, or replacements made necessary for changes required by improvements within the roadway, the affected portion of the pipeline shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before placing in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall be not less than twenty-four (24) hours. However, no such test is required for a minor repair which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation. If the affected section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of the tie-in welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by radiographic means.

     C.     No pipeline subject to this chapter used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and over ten years of age shall be operated beyond the successive ensuing twelve (12) month period of time unless retested annually by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the city engineer. The duration of the periodic test for this purpose shall not be less than four hours.

     D.    Each pressure test, either initial or retest, shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision. The city engineer may authorize the use of a liquid petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly (i.e., flash point over 150 degrees Fahrenheit or 66 degrees Centigrade) as a test medium. Pressure tests after initial installation of pipelines and before they are placed in operation shall show no unexplained loss. Annual or retest pressure tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each section of the pipeline under test at the time, in excess of either ten gallons, or the sum of one gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per mile equivalent to one-tenth of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe.

     E.     The city engineer may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner or operator under this chapter as to the periodic pressure testing of any pipelines as herein provided if owner or operator can demonstrate that such testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants, terminals, refineries or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an integral part.

     F.     In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by this chapter and subject to pressure testing shall be subjected to a pressure test by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the city engineer in the interest of public safety.

     G.    Within thirty (30) days after completion of any test made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner or operator shall submit a certified report of such text for the city engineer’s review. The report shall show the date of test, description of portion of pipeline tested (identified with respect to county highways), and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any other applicable ordinance, rule or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as may be specifically requested by the city engineer. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 6, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.2, 1940)

 

7.24.060 Pipeline system—Block valves required where.
     Block valves shall be installed on each new main at locations along the pipeline system that will minimize damage from accidental product discharge. Said location shall be appropriate for the terrain and the population density of the area. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 7, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.3, 1940)

 

7.24.070 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Cathodic protection system required—Specifications.
     As provided in the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed for all new ferrous pipelines used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable substances other than utility gases in order to mitigate corrosion deterioration that might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection system for all new ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed in accordance with General Order No. 112-C of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or operator to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved and submitted to the city engineer for approval. Reports of cathodic protection evaluation in accordance with such approved procedure shall be made available annually for review by the city engineer. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 8, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.4, 1940)

 

7.24.080 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Emergency plan requirements.
     A.    Each owner or operator of a pipeline used or to be used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids shall have a written emergency plan approved and on file with the city forester and fire warden. The plan shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision.

     B.     The plan shall include but not be limited to the following elements:

     1.     A “liaison” element for intercommunications between public agencies and pipeline owners or operators to provide for prompt coordinated remedial action, and the dissemination of information as to the location and ownership identification of pipelines based on the best available records and plans;

     2.     A “spill contingency” element to limit the extent of accidental product discharge by which pipeline owners or operators shall involve themselves in a cooperative pipeline leak notification emergency action system;

     3.     A “leak detection” element by which the pipeline owners or operators can monitor the flow of their product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow of said product at the first indication of a product leak;

     4.     A “first-on-the-scene emergency containment” element, in cooperation with other pipeline owners or operators, to be utilized until arrival of the affected pipeline owner’s or operator’s personnel. “First-on-the-scene” costs shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility, and shall be reimbursed to the organization effecting the emergency containment. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 9, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.5, 1940)

 

7.24.090 Completion of work—Restoration of area required.
     Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation, facility or encroachment permitted by any permit issued, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner restore the area affected by his or her activity to a condition satisfactory to the city engineer. (LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 803, 1940)

 

7.24.100 Completion of work—Method of refilling excavations.
     A permittee shall refill an excavation in the manner which is satisfactory to the city engineer and is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the highway to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 804, 1940)

 

7.24.110 Completion of work—Notice to commissioner—As-built plat required when.
     Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, or completion of the cut or fill, the permittee shall so notify the city engineer in writing on a form prescribed by the city engineer. Whenever a plat was required by Section 7.24.030 and there were substantial deviations approved during the work from the dimensions or locations as shown on the plat, the permittee shall transmit to the city engineer a concise “as-built plat” upon completion of his or her work, showing the accurate location, depth and size of the facility or encroachment so laid, removed or abandoned. (LACC Ord. 11581 § 9, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 805, 1940)

 

7.24.120 Relocation of facilities or encroachments—Statement required in application.
     Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any facility or encroachment placed in the excavation or the facility or encroachment for which a permit is issued interferes with the future use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his or her successors or assigns will at his or her own expense remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the city engineer such facility or encroachment. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement. (LACC Ord. 11581 § 10, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 806, 1940)

 

7.24.130 Obtaining permit next business day permitted when.
     Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any facility or encroachment in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property if the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day. (LACC Ord. 11581 § 11, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 807, 1940)

 

7.24.140 Lines for TV or audio signals—Undergrounding required when.
     The city engineer shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground, and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the commission finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. (LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 808, 1940)

 

7.24.150 City engineer authorized to establish other requirements.
     The city engineer may establish such requirements as he or she may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the highway and with holders of other permits. (LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 809, 1940)

 

7.24.160 Abandonment or removal of facilities or encroachments—Specifications.
     A.    Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any facility or encroachment in the highway shall do so under terms and conditions prescribed by the city engineer. The permit application shall include a plat or other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to be abandoned or removed, and indicating its exact location. Permission to abandon a facility or encroachment without removing shall be subject to removal within one year after the effective date of the abandonment if the facility or encroachment may interfere with a present or future public improvement. If it is determined that the facility or encroachment should be removed, the permittee or its successor in interest shall remove it at its expense or pay county for the cost of such removal. Permittee shall leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe condition.

     B.     In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids will be subject to the following requirements:

     1.     The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors and filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semisolid state if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future.

     2.     The permittee shall file a certificate with the city engineer that said requirements have been complied with and the abandoned pipeline has been left in a safe condition. (LACC Ord. 12038 § 10, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 12, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 810, 1940)

Chapter 7.30 RESIDENTIAL CODE
7.30.010 Adopted.
     Except as hereinafter provided, that certain residential code known and designated as the Los Angeles Residential Code as contained in the 2020 Edition of Title 30 of the Los Angeles County Code and any amendments to such code subsequently adopted by the County of Los Angeles, which shall be and become the residential code of the city, to improve public health, safety and general welfare by enhancing the design and construction of buildings through the use of building concepts having a reduced negative impact or positive environmental impact, encouraging sustainable construction practices, and provide for the issuance of permits therefor. (Ord. 493 § 7, 2020; Ord. 457 § 8, 2017; Ord. 422 § 6, 2014; Ord. 393 § 6, 2011; Ord. 392 § 6, 2011)

 

7.30.020 Fees.
     Any person making application for any residential permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, approve. (Ord. 393 § 6, 2011; Ord. 392 § 6, 2011)

Chapter 7.31 GREEN BUILDING STANDARDS CODE
7.31.010 Adopted.
     The city of La Cañada Flintridge does adopt by reference the latest state-adopted version of the green building standards code known as Title 24, Part 11 of the California Code of Regulations, which shall be and become the green building standards code of the city of La Cañada Flintridge and provides for the issuance of permits and collections of fees therefor. (Ord. 457 § 9, 2017; Ord. 422 § 7, 2014; Ord. 393 § 7, 2011; Ord. 392 § 7, 2011)

 

7.31.020 Fees.
     Any person making application for any green building standards permit shall pay a fee to the city in an amount which the city council shall by resolution, from time to time, approve. (Ord. 393 § 7, 2011; Ord. 392 § 7, 2011)

Chapter 7.32 UNDERGROUNDING OF UTILITIES
7.32.010 Undergrounding of utilities required.
     The director of community development shall, as a condition precedent to the issuance of any building, electrical or plumbing permit, require all utility services located within exterior boundary lines of any lot or parcel of property to be installed underground if:

     A.    The property is to be developed with a new or relocated main building;

     B.     A residential building or use is converted to any nonresidential use or purpose;

     C.     The remodeling, alteration or addition to an existing commercial building involves an expense totaling within any twelve (12) month period a sum equal to or greater than twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of such commercial building prior to such work being performed. The director of community development may refer to available records of the county assessor’s office to assist him or her in ascertaining the market value of the building.

     For purpose of this chapter, “main building” means a building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot or building site on which it is located.

     For purposes of this chapter, “commercial building” means a building in which is conducted any use which is nonresidential, excluding uses accessory to residential use, and home occupational uses. (Ord. 198 § 1, 1991)

 

7.32.020 Exceptions.
     The following exceptions shall apply:

     A.    Utility service poles may be placed in the area within six feet of the rear lot line of the property to be developed, for the sole purpose of terminating underground facilities.

     B.     Temporary utilities along with the necessary service poles, wires and cables may be permitted for the period during which authorized construction is continuing for which valid burning permits have been issued or for temporary uses which comply with requirements of the zoning ordinance, building code and other applicable regulations.

     C.     Appurtenances and associated equipment, including, but not limited to, surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts within a structure as part of an underground system, may be placed above ground. All equipment placed above ground shall be considered accessory equipment and shall be exempt from yard setback requirements. (Ord. 198 § 1, 1991)

 

7.32.030 Waiver, modification or delay.
     It is the intention that all the utility facilities of developments described in this chapter be placed underground. If it is determined that practical difficulties or unreasonable hardships inconsistent with the purpose of this section and unique to a particular parcel of property would result from the literal application of this chapter, the planning commission may waive, modify or delay the application of any undergrounding re-

quirement imposed pursuant to this chapter upon written application of any affected property owner. The planning commission shall notify the applicant of its decision in writing by mail. If the planning commission determines to delay the installation of the required underground utilities, it may require a recorded agreement guaranteeing the future performance of the work together with adequate performance security enforceable by the city in the form of a cash deposit, bond, letter of credit or other instrument satisfactory to the city attorney. (Ord. 198 § 1, 1991)

 

7.32.040 Right of appeal.
     Any person dissatisfied by any decision of the planning commission may file an appeal with the city council within fifteen (15) days after the decision of the planning commission. The city council may overrule, modify or affirm the decision of the planning commission. (Ord. 198 § 1, 1991)

Title 8 STREETS
Chapter 8.01 HIGHWAY PERMITS
Chapter 8.02 PRIVATE ENCROACHMENTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 8.03 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 8.04 DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND VIDEO SYSTEM FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 8.05 MEDIAN STRIP PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS
Chapter 8.07 PARKING IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR SLEEPING PROHIBITED
Chapter 8.10 RESTRICTED PARKING ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS
Chapter 8.11 AUTHORIZED PARKING ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS
Chapter 8.12 HOUSE NUMBERING
Chapter 8.16 PROPERTY OWNER REPAIR RESPONSIBILITIES

Chapter 8.01 HIGHWAY PERMITS
8.01.010 General provisions.
     A.    Title for Citation. The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the “highway permit ordinance.”

     B.     Continuation of Provisions. The provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they are substantially the same as provisions of any of the ordinances repealed by said ordinance relating to the same subject matter, shall be construed as restatements and continuations, and not as new enactments.

     C.     Construction of Provisions. Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, these general provisions, rules of construction and definitions set out in Sections 8.01.010 through 8.01.260 shall govern the construction of this chapter.

     D.    Reference to Amendments and Additions. Whenever reference is made to any portion of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any other ordinance or statute, such reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made.

     E.     Severability. If any provision of the ordinance set out in this chapter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of said ordinance and the application of such provisions to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

     F.     Powers of Deputies. Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty is imposed upon a public officer, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by a deputy of the officer, or by a person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance by the officer, unless this chapter expressly provides otherwise. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 §§ 101—106, 1940)

 

8.01.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Base course” means that portion of the highway located between the pavement and the native soil.

     “City engineer” shall also mean public works director.

     “Commissioner” means the public works director.

     “Driveway” means that portion of the road right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the highway onto adjacent property.

     “Encroachment” means and includes any obstruction, tower, pole, pole line, pipe, fence, wire, cable, conduit, stand, building, roll-off bin, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this chapter, which is placed in, along, under, over or across the highway. This section does not apply to the temporary use of the highway for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment; nor to the suspension or stringing on existing pole lines of additional cables, wires, transmission lines, conduits or service connections solely for telephone or electric power purposes.

     “Facilities” or “pipelines,” as used in Sections 8.01.030(A)(3), 8.01.130 through 8.01.210, 8.01.830 through 8.01.920, 8.01.940, 8.01.950, 8.01.960 and 8.01.990, mean pipes, pipelines, valves, tanks, mains, service lines, conduits, duct banks, cables, wires, poles, tunnels, obstructions and other apparatus, both aerial and underground.

     “Hazardous substance” means one having the potential for an immediate disaster, such as, but not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, butane, propane, chemicals, or chlorine, and natural gas transported at pressures greater than sixty (60) psi; and, for the purposes of this chapter, electrical facilities shall comply with the requirements applicable to hazardous substances.

     “Height” means that dimension measured from the level surface upon which the vehicle stands to the highest protrusion in a vertical line.

     “Highway” means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for the purpose of travel. The term includes all or any part of the entire width of right-of-way, and above and below the same, whether or not such entire area is actually used for highway purposes.

     “Load” means any object or thing which, when transported by a vehicle or combination of vehicles over, upon, along or across any highway, would be required to have a special permit in accordance with provisions of the Vehicle Code, and includes, but is not limited to, any house, vessel, machine, equipment, transformer, tree, girder, boat or airplane.

     “Moving contractor” means any person who, for him or herself or for another, moves or causes to be moved any load over, upon, along or across any highway.

     “Native soil” means the compacted native material.

     “Newsrack” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and sale of newspapers or news periodicals.

     “One-call notification system” or “system” means an association providing for mutual receipt of notification of construction activities in the city.

     “Overhead structure” means any structure other than franchise utility poles and their facilities extending over the dedicated portion of a highway, including canopies but excluding such projections from buildings as are enumerated in LACC Ordinance 2225, the “Building Code,” set out in Title 26 of the LACC.

     “Pavement” means the surfaced portion of the highway which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with Portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, any district, any city including this city, any county, and all departments and bureaus thereof except the road department of this city.

     “Portable storage container” means a freestanding container usually without wheels that is primarily used for the temporary storage and/or transport of personal property or other household items intended for eventual reuse by the owner(s).

     “Public” means any person as defined by this chapter other than the Los Angeles County road department and includes the United States and this state.

     “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     “Roll-off bin” means a freestanding waste container used for the deposit and collection of solid waste and/or recycling, excluding waste containers used for regularly scheduled solid waste collection as permitted in Section 9.12.110. A roll-off bin is characterized by a rectangular footprint, is designed to be transported by specially equipped trucks, and utilizes wheels to facilitate its placement.

     “Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this code unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned.

     “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

     Tense, Gender and Number.

     1.     The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future, the present.

     2.     The masculine gender includes the feminine.

     3.     The singular number includes the plural, and the plural, the singular.

     “Vehicle” means a vehicle or combination of vehicles as described in the Vehicle Code which:

     1.     Whether laden or unladen is required by the Vehicle Code to have a special permit to be on any highway; or

     2.     Is so laden that it is required to have such special permit.

     “Vehicle Code” means the state of California Vehicle Code in effect at the time of issuance of the permit.

     “Width” means that dimension measured at right angles to the anterior-posterior axis of the conveyance upon which the load or portion thereof is, or is to be, loaded or moved, or to the median line of the highway over which the same is being or is to be moved. (Ord. 402 §§ 1, 2, 2011; Ord. 63 (part) 1979; LACC Ord. 85-0207 § 1, 1985; LACC Ord. 12038 §§ 1, 2, 1979; LACC Ord. 11581 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 10816 § 2, 1974; LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 §§ 107—127.4, 141, 145, 1940)

 

8.01.030 Permit—Prerequisite to commencement of certain work.
     A.    Every person, except as otherwise provided in this chapter, is required to obtain a permit from the public works director before that person:

     1.     Moves or causes to be moved over, along or across any highway any load or vehicle;

     2.     Makes or causes to be made any excavation or encroachment in any highway;

     3.     Places, changes, renews or abandons a facility or encroachment;

     4.     Places, constructs or repairs any curb, gutter, sidewalk, driveway, pavement, base course, retaining wall, storm drain, culvert, or other work of similar nature in, over, along, across or through any highway;

     5.     Constructs, reconstructs or repairs any highway light or highway lighting system in any highway or in any privately owned thoroughfare which is open to public travel; this subsection does not apply if any agreement with the county exists for the construction, reconstruction or maintenance of such installation;

     6.     Constructs, reconstructs, repairs or maintains any overhead structure or other appurtenant facility;

     7.     Places or leaves any impediment to travel upon any highway.

     8.     Places or causes to be placed any roll-off bin upon any highway, public property or public right-of-way.

     B.     Any person who does any of the acts specified in this section, without the authority of such a permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 402 § 1, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 1, 1977; LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 100, 1940)

 

8.01.040 Excavations in new street improvements.
     Notwithstanding any provision of the highway permit ordinance of the city, the following provisions are enacted by the city council to prevent unnecessary interference with new pavement on public streets and highways during the period immediately following its construction or resurfacing:

     A.    The city shall attempt to give notice to all owners of substructures located within the city streets who might be affected, approximately one year prior to the probable date of construction of any new paving or repaving of any street in the city, and approximately four months prior to such date. The failure to give any such notice shall not affect the further provisions of this section.

     B.     No excavation shall be made in any city street within three years following the date of completion and acceptance of any slurry seal and within five years following the date of completion and acceptance of any resurfacing of such street, except for emergency repairs or service, unless the person proposing to make such excavation shall agree to pay for the pavement grindings and for the resurfacing of the entire street section with an asphalt concrete cap of a minimum thickness of one inch for a distance of fifty (50) feet on either side of the excavation on a longitudinal basis from curb to curb or the full width of the street.

     C.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city manager or the director of public works may authorize the issuance of an excavation permit if he or she determines:

     1.     That an emergency exists or the work to be performed is necessary to eliminate a hazardous condition; or

     2.     Following an administrative hearing before the director of public works that:

     a.     Such work will not constitute a public or attractive nuisance, and

     b.     Such work will not create a potential safety hazard to traffic and/or pedestrians, and

     c.     It is within the community’s best interest to allow excavation during the restricted period. (Ord. 252 § 2, 1996)

 

8.01.045 Excavations on Foothill Boulevard restricted.
     A.    No excavating permits shall be granted and no person shall excavate or be granted an excavation permit in the public right-of-way along Foothill Boulevard during the period of November 15th through January 3rd in any year.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the city manager or the director of public works may authorize the issuance of an excavation permit if he or she determines:

     1.     That an emergency exists or the work to be performed is necessary to eliminate a hazardous condition; or

     2.     Following an administrative hearing before the director of public works that:

     a.     Such work will not constitute a public or attractive nuisance, and

     b.     Such work will not create a potential safety hazard to traffic and/or pedestrians, and

     c.     It is within the community’s best interest to allow excavation of Foothill Boulevard during the restricted period. (Ord. 253 § 1, 1996)

 

8.01.050 Permit—Conditions of granting.
     Every permit issued under this chapter for activity or work, in, along, on, over, across or under the highway shall be granted subject to the right of the city or of any other person entitled thereto, to use that part of such highway for any purpose for which such highway may lawfully be used. Proof of the applicant’s right to use the highways for the purposes set forth in the application shall be filed with the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 131, 1940)

 

8.01.055 Permit—Nonpermitted uses of highway.
     A.    Portable storage containers for storage of personal property shall not be placed upon the highway, public right-of-way or public property.

     B.     Roll-off bins owned or operated by waste haulers not possessing a current waste haulers permit pursuant to Chapter 9.12 may not be placed upon the highway, public right-of-way or public property unless expressly authorized by the public works director or designee. (Ord. 402 § 1, 2011)

 

8.01.060 Permit—Availability for inspection.
     The permittee shall make the permit available for inspection by the public works director or representative or by any peace officer or other person having responsibility for safety or maintenance of the highway. Each permit for moving must be in or on the vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 134, 1940)

 

8.01.070 Permit—Cancellation when work not commenced promptly.
     The commission may cancel a permit unless the activity therein permitted is commenced within the time specified and is diligently prosecuted to completion. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 138, 1940)

 

8.01.080 Work—Compliance with regulations and code provisions required.
     Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by this chapter must comply with the provisions of this chapter, the provisions made part of any permit, and the provisions of the specifications and all codes referred to by this chapter. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 136, 1940)

 

8.01.090 Work—Standard Specifications for Public Works and other specifications applicable.
     All work shall be performed in accordance with the Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, or according to the plans and specifications referred to in the permit and, in addition, to any special requirements and/or specifications which are made a part of the permit. In case of conflict between two specifications, the higher specification shall apply. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 132, 1940)

 

8.01.100 Work—Safeguarding, restoration, completion and cleanup.
     Every person who commences any activity or work regulated by this chapter shall safeguard and complete the activity or work within a reasonable time. Any part of the highway facility of any nature removed or disturbed shall be repaired, restored and replaced in a condition satisfactory to the public works director. All surplus material of any kind shall be removed from the highway. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 135, 1940)

 

8.01.110 Work—Warning signs, lights and barricades—Requirements.
     Any person engaged in performing work regulated by this chapter which interferes with or endangers the safe movement of traffic shall have the work safeguarded by adequate warning signs, barricades, lights and devices. He or she shall be responsible for placing and maintaining adequate warning signs, lights, barricades and devices during all periods of his or her activity in order to promote the safe movement of traffic, including, but not limited to, periods of twilight, nighttime, fog and/or rain. All warning signs, barriers, barricades, flags and other devices shall comply with or exceed the standards required in the Vehicle Code. All roll-off bins shall be equipped with reflectors on all sides as prescribed in the permit. Warning devices shall be placed in advance of each roll-off bin placed on a highway as directed by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 1, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 128, 1940)

 

8.01.120 Applicability of provisions.
     Whenever the provisions of this chapter require a permittee to perform any work, take any action or be liable for any fees or costs, such requirement also applies to any person who commences any work for which a permit is required by this chapter, whether such person obtains such a permit or not. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 130, 1940)

 

8.01.130 Facilities within highways—Work restrictions generally.
     The permittee shall investigate and be aware of all existing facilities lawfully within the highways which are within the limits of his or her activity. The permittee shall not interfere with any existing public or private facility without the consent of its owner. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing facility, this shall be done by its owner or to the satisfaction of its owner. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(A), 1940)

 

8.01.140 Facilities within highways—Costs of work borne by permittee—Exceptions.
     The cost of locating, exposing, moving or relocating publicly and privately owned facilities shall be borne by the permittee unless he or she makes other arrangements with the owner of the facility or unless the owner is required by his or her franchise or agreement to relocate his or her facility without cost. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(B), 1940)

 

8.01.150 Facilities within highways—Protection—Repair of damages.
     The permittee shall support and protect all facilities by a method satisfactory to the owner. The owner has the right to support or protect any of its facilities at the sole expense of the permittee. In case any of said facilities should be damaged (and for this purpose, pipe coating or other encasement of devices should be considered as part of a structure), they may be repaired by the owner at the expense of the permittee or, if authorized by the owner, may be repaired by the permittee under the supervision of the owner. The expense of repairs to any damaged facilities shall be borne by the permittee. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(C), 1940)

 

8.01.160 Facilities within highways—Underground facilities and excavations.
     Except in emergency work to protect the public and property, any permittee proposing to excavate in any highway shall make a search of available records of underground facilities and shall notify owners or operators known to have such facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation by telephone or other acceptable means of communications at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. At such time as a one-call notification system is operational in the city, permittee shall notify those owners or operators who are members of the system by notifying the system by telephone at least forty-eight (48) hours prior to time of proposed excavation, exclusive of weekends or legal holidays. The permit shall not be valid until permittee receives a ticket number from the system acknowledging the notification, which number permittee shall enter upon the face of the permit. Said notification is an additional method to be used in determining underground facilities, and does not relieve permittee from the responsibility to assure that owners or operators of such facilities are notified. Any permittee shall likewise notify nonmembers of the system who are owners or operators of facilities in the vicinity of the proposed excavation. Any person receiving notice pursuant to this chapter shall, not less than one working day in advance of proposed construction unless otherwise agreed between said person and permittee, inform the permittee of or field mark the location of any underground facility in the proposed area of excavation. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 3, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(D), 1940)

 

8.01.170 Facilities within highways—Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Location.
     A.    Any permittee, prior to making any excavation within the construction area where a pipeline known to carry a hazardous substance exists, shall not excavate until the pipeline has been located by potholing or other proven acceptable methods at intervals sufficient to determine its exact location. The permittee shall arrange with the owner to locate or expose private and public facilities. Abandoned or inoperative pipelines designed to carry hazardous substances shall be considered as carrying a hazardous substance until determined otherwise by owner.

     B.     In no case shall the intervals between potholes or the location by proven acceptable methods exceed the distance set forth as follows:

     1.     Excavations for Highway Construction. The pipeline shall be located at intervals not greater than twenty-five (25) feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, fifty (50) feet for lines of eight inches through twenty-four (24) inches in diameter, and two hundred (200) feet for lines greater than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.

     2.     Trench Excavation.

     a.     Longitudinal Pipelines. All longitudinal pipelines in the construction area of the highway shall be located at intervals not greater than five hundred (500) feet. If determined to be within six feet of the excavation, it shall be further located at intervals not greater than twenty-five (25) feet for lines less than eight inches in diameter, fifty (50) feet for lines of eight inches through twenty-four (24) inches in diameter, and one hundred (100) feet for lines greater than twenty-four (24) inches in diameter.

     b.     Transverse Pipelines. If the location of the pipeline is above or less than six inches below the facility being installed, it shall be carefully hand-tool exposed before excavating. If its location is six inches or more below the facility, it need only be located. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(E), 1940)

 

8.01.180 Facilities within highways—Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Excavation restrictions.
     A.    After it is determined that the horizontal or vertical clearance between the pipeline known to carry hazardous substances and the construction limits is less than twelve (12) inches (eighteen (18) inches if scarifying), the permittee shall confer with the owner. Unless the owner elects to relocate, abandon or take the pipeline out of service, the permittee shall not excavate until the pipeline has been completely hand-tool exposed within the limits of construction.

     B.     Once the physical location of pipelines known to carry hazardous substances has been determined, as above described, the permittee doing the excavating, in cooperation with and with the occurrence of the owner, shall determine how to protect the pipeline from damage before proceeding with his or her work. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(F), 1940)

 

8.01.190 Facilities within highways—Notice when unidentified utilities are located.
     Each permittee excavating in the highway shall notify the public agency maintaining records for the jurisdiction and the owner, if known, whenever previously unidentified or unknown utilities or underground facilities are encountered so that the location can be accurately established and made a part of the permanent substructure records. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(G), 1940)

 

8.01.200 Facilities within highways—Moving contractors and utility facilities.
     No moving contractor, as defined in Section 8.01.140, shall interfere in any manner whatsoever with any property of any public utility. When any load requiring a special permit is moved along or across any highway, and it is determined that the height, width or weight of said load exceeds the height, width or weight as stated in the permit, and property damage results therefrom, the public works director is authorized to withhold any other moving permit from the violator until he or she produces evidence satisfactory to the public works director that each additional permit load complies with all dimensions and weights as shown upon the application and the load will not interfere with any public utility. The permittee violating this section may also be prosecuted under the provisions of Sections 8.01.1160 and 8.01.1170. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(H), 1940)

 

8.01.210 Facilities within highways—Liability for damage or injury.
     The permittee shall save harmless the county, its officers, agents, and employees of and from any and all liability or responsibility for any property damage or loss, or injury or death to any person arising out of or occurring as the proximate results of any of the work undertaken. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 3, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 139(I), 1940)

 

8.01.220 Restoration of highway surface.
     A.    Upon completion of the permittee’s activity, the public works director, at his or her option, may require the permittee to restore that portion of the highway facilities damaged by the permittee’s activity, or the public works director, may elect to do such restoration him or herself.

     B.     Where the pavement or surface has been removed, the permittee shall replace it to a thickness one inch greater than that of the surrounding pavement or surface, and in no event to a thickness less than two inches.

     C.     The base course removed shall be replaced to the same thickness as that of the surrounding base course.

     D.    When the street surface has been treated with a seal or slurry prior to the work under permit, the seal and/or slurry shall be replaced upon the portion repaired.

     E.     When the structural section removed varies from or exceeds the average existing section, the public works director may elect to require the replacement of an equivalent section which would meet the average structural section requirements.

     F.     In those instances where the permittee’s excavation is within an area of highway to be reconstructed by the city and the resurfacing of the excavation is an integral part of the general city improvement, the public works director may waive such resurfacing. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 137, 1940)

 

8.01.230 Compliance with public works director’s orders and rules required—Exception.
     All persons shall obey and comply with every order, decision, direction or rule made or presented by the public works director in the matters specified on the permit or by attachments, or by any other matter in any way relating to or affecting their use of the highway, and shall do everything necessary or proper to secure compliance therewith by all of its officers, agents and employees, except in the case of a public utility regulated by the public utilities commission when such order, decision, direction or rule is contrary to or in conflict with any order, decision, direction or rule made or prescribed by the public utilities commission applicable to such public utility. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 142, 1940)

 

8.01.240 Inspections or tests—Obstruction prohibited.
     A person shall not obstruct the public works director, or his or her duly authorized representative, in making any inspection authorized by this chapter or in taking any sample or in making any test. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 129, 1940)

 

8.01.250 Failure to comply with regulations—City to perform work when—Costs.
     When paving, excavated material, barricades, lights or other devices are not properly placed or maintained; when the work started is not completed; when the work does not comply with the specifications or any special requirement; when the person fails or refuses to remove any obstruction; when any highway facility has been damaged and the person fails or refuses to repair or restore; then the commissioner with his or her own forces or otherwise may cause such to be placed, erected, completed, repaired, restored, removed and/or maintained. The person shall pay for any and all costs. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 140, 1940)

 

8.01.260 Highway closure or use restriction authorized when.
     The public works director may restrict the use of, or close, any city highway whenever he or she considers such closing or restriction of use necessary:

     A.    For the protection of the public;

     B.     For the protection of such highway from damage during storms;

     C.     During construction, improvement or maintenance operations thereon. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9879 § 1, 1969: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 1 § 143, 1940)

 

8.01.270 Permit application—Form.
     Application for a permit shall be made in writing to the public works director, on the forms provided by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 201, 1940)

 

8.01.280 Permit application—Information required.
     An applicant for a permit shall state in his or her application: name and address, such other information as is required by this chapter, and such other information as the public works director may require. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 202, 1940)

 

8.01.290 Permit application—Liability statement required.
     On each application the applicant or agent shall sign a statement that he or she agrees to preserve and save harmless the city and each officer and employee thereof from any liability or responsibility for any accident, loss or damage to persons or property happening or occurring as a proximate result of his or her activities pursuant to the permit applied for. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 203, 1940)

 

8.01.300 Permit application—Changes and additions authorized when.
     The public works director may make such changes or additions in any application for a permit as in his or her opinion are necessary for the protection of the highways, for the prevention of undue interference with traffic, for the safety of persons using such highways, as to the route over which to move any over height, width, length or weight load; as to the location, depth, dimensions, character and number of excavations; as to encroachments made or placed; and as to other permits issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 204, 1940)

 

8.01.310 Additional requirements for work authorized when—Violations.
     The public works director may establish additional requirements for the work to be done under the permit, including equipment to be used, type of backfill, compaction, paving, traffic regulations, hours of work, flagmen, lights, inspection and other similar requirements. He or she also may require whatever advance notice he or she deems proper for requests for inspection. The public works director may add these requirements and conditions by rubber stamp or attachments to the permit, or both, and they shall be an integral part thereof. If any of the requirements of the permit are violated, the public works director may revoke the permit and require that a new permit be secured before further work is done. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 205, 1940)

 

8.01.320 Relocation of facilities or plantings—Procedures and costs.
     The public works director may require the permittee to make proper arrangements for and bear the cost of the relocation of any structure, publicly owned facility, tree or shrub where such relocation is made necessary by the proposed work for which a permit is issued. The public works director may elect to do the necessary relocation at the permittee’s expense. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967; Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 208, 1940)

 

8.01.330 Overhead structures or encroachments.
     The public works director may require that evidence be submitted with the application to satisfy him or her that the proposed overhead structure or encroachment will not, insofar as he or she can foresee, create a hazard of any kind. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 213, 1940)

 

8.01.340 Permit application—Issuance conditions.
     If the applicant complies with every applicable provision of this chapter and all applicable provisions of all other ordinances and statutes, the public works director may issue to the applicant a written permit to perform the work set forth in the application. The public works director may refuse to issue a permit if he or she finds that it is not in the best interest of the general public to do so. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 209, 1940)

 

8.01.350 Blanket permits.
     Blanket permits, renewable annually, may be issued subject to the compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The public works director may revoke any such blanket permit if the permittee fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter. The issuance of a blanket permit does not relieve the permittee from making such reports of activity under the blanket permit as may be required by the public works director and for paying for inspection, repairs and other costs incurred by the public works director due to the permittee’s activity. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 207, 1940)

 

8.01.360 Permits—Not transferable.
     Permits issued under the authority of this chapter are nontransferable. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 212, 1940)

 

8.01.370 Permits—Period of validity to be specified—Extension.
     Each permit shall specify the time the permit shall become null and void and the permit shall become null and void on the date so specified unless the public works director extends the time. The public works director may extend the time if in his or her opinion the work for which the permit was issued was delayed in completion because of inclement weather, strikes, an act of God, or other causes not within the control of the permittee. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 206, 1940)

 

8.01.380 Permits—Denial or revocation conditions—Assessment district work.
     The public works director may refuse to issue permits or may revoke any outstanding permits heretofore or hereafter issued, or any portion thereof, when the work has not been started, when the work authorized by the permits or such portions thereof is included in the proposed work to be done by any proposed assessment district for which proceedings have been instituted by the board of supervisors. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 211, 1940)

 

8.01.390 Permits—Removal from location or cancellation conditions.
     The public works director, or representative, for cause, may cancel the privilege granted by the permit and may remove the permit from the job location. If removed or cancelled by other means by anyone other than the public works director, it shall be delivered to the office of the public works director within twenty-four (24) hours accompanied by a written report regarding the incident. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 2 § 210, 1940)

 

8.01.400 Issuance fee—Required.
     All persons, except as otherwise specified in this chapter, shall pay an issuance fee and all other costs and charges as established for the work covered in this chapter. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 301, 1940)

 

8.01.410 Issuance fee—Established by board order.
     The issuance fee shall be established by order of the city council. The fee shall not exceed the amount determined by the city council to be sufficient to defray the cost of handling by the city. In the absence of any such order, the issuance fee shall be one dollar ($1.00). (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 304, 1940)

 

8.01.420 Deposit of fees and charges.
     Issuance fees and charges for repairs, inspection or engineering collected under the provisions of this chapter shall be deposited in the respective funds from which the corresponding disbursements were made. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 302, 1940)

 

8.01.430 Issuance fee—Agencies exempt from payment.
     The following shall be exempt from paying the issuance fee: the United States, this state, all departments of this city, any municipal corporation, any school district, and any special district organized under state law. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 303, 1940)

 

8.01.440 Issuance fee—Exemption for city public works.
     The public works director may grant a permit without issuance fee if he or she finds that the work to be done has been requested by the city in connection with proposed public works. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 305, 1940)

 

8.01.450 Waiver of fees or deposits authorized when.
     If the public works director determines that the waiver of any part of the fees is necessary to promote the safety and public welfare he or she may in specific instances waive all fees and deposits. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 306, 1940)

 

8.01.460 Engineering and inspection charges for curb, gutter, sidewalk and highway surface.
     The public works director shall not charge for any engineering or inspection on permits for the construction of curbs, gutters, walks and highway surfaces except when the construction of curbs, gutters, walks and highway surfaces is in connection with subdivision activity or is directly for private interests where the public is not benefitted. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 308, 1940)

 

8.01.470 Fee for copy of permit.
     The fee for each true copy of a permit to the permittee is twenty-five cents ($0.25). (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 307, 1940)

 

8.01.480 Unit fees for inspection, tests and other costs.
     The city council may establish unit fees for inspection, transportation, tests, or any other costs incurred by the public works director due to the permittee’s activity. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 309, 1940)

 

8.01.490 Costs related to permit—Permittee liability.
     The permittee is liable for and shall pay for all the public works director’s costs related to the permit, including, but not restricted to, the following:

     A.    The permit issuance fee if that has not otherwise been paid;

     B.     Engineering, which includes design, inspection, survey and tests;

     C.     The cost of any inspection, transportation, or test made;

     D.    The cost of repairing or restoring the highways and all appurtenant facilities to the same or equal condition that they were in before being cut or damaged as a result of the permittee’s activities;

     E.     The cost of furnishing and/or maintaining any lights, barricades or warning devices;

     F.     The cost of alteration, removal, replacement and/or repair to traffic signals and devices, the removal of temporary and/or permanent traffic stripes, and any other expense for traffic control;

     G.    The cost of removing or remedying any hazardous condition;

     H.    The cost of tree trimming;

     I.      Any other cost to the county caused by the permittee’s activity. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 310, 1940)

 

8.01.500 Work inspected by governmental agency—No inspection fee or deposit when.
     The public works director may issue a permit without any inspection fee or deposit for work which will be inspected by a qualified governmental agency which will furnish evidence to the effect that the work will be inspected and will comply with minimum standards required by the city. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 314, 1940)

 

8.01.510 Failure of government agency to inspect—City to perform work—Costs.
     If an applicant receives a permit pursuant to the provisions of Section 8.01.500 and the governmental agency fails to make the inspection or fails to file evidence as required, the public works director may inspect the work and the permittee shall pay the actual cost of such inspection to the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 315, 1940)

 

8.01.520 Computation of costs.
     Whenever in the provisions of this chapter any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation of such costs is specified, such costs are the actual costs, including overhead and depreciation, in accordance with current practice in charging for work performed for the public. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 311, 1940)

 

8.01.530 Unauthorized highway work—Rehabilitation by city authorized when—Costs.
     In order to promote the welfare, well-being and safety of the public traveling along or across any highway, the public works director may do any work within the highways of whatever nature is required in his or her opinion to reestablish conditions as they existed prior to commencement of work done by any person within the highways and for which a permit has been obtained. The public works director shall charge the cost of this rehabilitation to the person doing the unauthorized work. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 312, 1940)

 

8.01.540 Highway surface repairs—Computation of costs.
     A.    The public works director’s costs of repairing and restoring the highway surface may be charged to a permittee on the square-foot-thickness method or an actual-cost basis.

     B.     Under the square-foot-thickness method, the charge shall be computed as follows: the square feet of surface repaired, multiplied by the number of inches of depth plus one inch, multiplied by the rate set by order of the city council. In the absence of such an order, the rate shall be ten cents ($0.10), and the cost in any case shall be presumed to be not less than five dollars ($5.00). (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 313, 1940)

 

8.01.550 Failure to comply with permit conditions—Revocation of privilege—Highway restoration requirements.
     Whenever a permittee fails to comply with the conditions established for the exercise of a privilege granted under a permit, the public works director may revoke the privilege. Upon such revocation, the permittee shall immediately restore the highway to the satisfaction of the public works director. If the permittee fails to do so, the public works director may restore the highway at the expense of the permittee or charge the permittee a fee of two hundred dollars ($200.00) a day for each day of failure to restore the highway. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 4, 1977: LACC Ord. 9879 § 2, 1969: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 3 § 316, 1940)

 

8.01.560 Cash deposit or other security required—Exceptions.
     A.    Every applicant for a permit, unless exempt by law, other than the United States, this state, departments of this city, municipalities and special districts, shall be required to provide a cash deposit or other adequate security, as determined by the commissioner, to guarantee payment of charges due under this chapter. The amount of the deposit or security shall be sufficient to recover all costs of any nature which the public works director estimates he or she will incur if the permittee does not fulfill his or her permit requirements.

     B.     A cash deposit or other adequate security is not required in the case of construction under contract with the county where a faithful performance bond is posted or other surety is deposited and assigned to the city which guarantees to the city the repair of the highway, including construction financed in whole or in part by special assessments. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 4 § 401, 1940)

 

8.01.570 Cash deposit—Form and use conditions.
     A cash deposit may be in the form of a special deposit for each permit, or in the form of a general deposit to be maintained as security for all the permits issued to an applicant. If an applicant maintains a general cash deposit, it shall be with the understanding that he or she will pay all bills sent him or her by the public works director for work covered by this chapter. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 4 § 402, 1940)

 

8.01.580 Other security—Types acceptable.
     In lieu of a general cash deposit, the public works director may accept from an applicant other types of security as specified below:

     A.    Surety Bond. The public works director may accept a surety bond in a sum of not less than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) on a form supplied by the public works director and executed by a corporation incorporated for the purpose of making, guaranteeing or becoming a surety upon bonds complying with Section 1056 of the Code of Civil Procedure. It shall guarantee the payment of all fees and other charges required by this chapter which may become due because of any permits issued during the life of the said surety bond.

     B.     Savings and Loan Association Shares. The public works director may accept the assignment of savings and loan certificates or shares subject to the county Administrative Code provisions set out at Chapter 4.36 of the Los Angeles County Code.

     C.     Insurance. As security on moving permits only, the public works director may accept a certificate of insurance and endorsement on the standard forms provided by the public works director. Such certificate and endorsement shall show that an insurance policy of not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) has been issued to the applicant and is in full force and effect, and in which policy the insurer directly agrees to reimburse the city for all sums due it from the permittee for damage to highway facilities.

     D.    Additional Securities. The public works director may require any type of security that has, in his or her opinion, become insufficient for protection of the public interest to be increased to such an amount as he or she has determined will be sufficient to protect the public interest. He or she may require special deposits or other security. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 4 § 403, 1940)

 

8.01.590 Authority to accept negotiable paper.
     The public works director may accept negotiable paper in payment of any permit fee, including engineering and inspection fees, deposit or other payment required by this chapter, as provided in the Administrative Code of the county of Los Angeles set out in Titles 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the LACC. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 4 § 404, 1940)

 

8.01.600 Billing of all chargeable fees and costs.
     The public works director shall bill the permittee or deduct from the deposit made or maintained by the permittee for all fees and costs chargeable under this chapter. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 5 § 501, 1940)

 

8.01.610 Late payment—Deduction from deposit or security—Collection by legal means when.
     If, within thirty (30) days after a bill has been sent, the permittee does not pay same in full, such amount may be deducted from his or her general deposit, or the public works director may recover the amount due from any security the permittee has filed under Sections 8.01.560 through 8.01.590. If the deposit or security is insufficient to pay the amount due, the city may enforce collection by legal means. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 5 § 502, 1940)

 

8.01.620 Billing in lieu of fee prepayment authorized when.
     At the request of a permittee who maintains with the public works director adequate security, as provided in Sections 8.01.560 through 8.01.590, and to whom ten or more permits have been issued monthly for three consecutive months, the public works director may waive the requirement covering prepayment of the issuance fees, and bill said permittee for issuance fees covering permits issued subsequent to such request. The public works director may revoke such waiver at any time. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 5 § 503, 1940)

 

8.01.630 Additional repairs to highway surfaces—Costs charged to permittee when.
     If at any time subsequent to the first repair of a surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation, encroachment or moving operation in such highway it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation, encroachment or moving operation, the permittee shall pay to the public works director the cost of such additional repair; provided, however, that the public works director shall have the option of either making the repair or requiring the permittee to make the repair. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 5 § 504, 1940)

 

8.01.640 Unpaid bills—Remedies authorized by public works director.
     The public works director may elect not to issue further permits to the permittee and may hold any deposits, guarantees or bonds of the permittee as long as any bill remains unpaid. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 5 § 505, 1940)

 

8.01.650 Refunds—Remainder of deposits.
     The remainder of any deposit, if there is any remainder, shall be refunded to the person making such deposit, or to his or her assigns. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 6 § 601, 1940)

 

8.01.660 Refunds—Permit issuance fees.
     An issuance fee may be refunded when a permit has been issued as the result of an error not made by the permittee. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 6 § 602, 1940)

 

8.01.670 Refunds—Driveway inspection or other unit fees.
     The fee deposited for driveway inspection or any other unit fee established may be refunded if it was erroneously collected or if the work was not constructed by the permittee. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 6 § 603, 1940)

 

8.01.680 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of Sections 8.01.690 through 8.01.820 apply to permits for the laying, constructing, reconstructing or repairing of curbs, sidewalks, gutters, driveways, highway surfaces, retaining walls, storm drains, culverts, highway lights or lighting system, or other appurtenant structures. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 701, 1940)

 

8.01.690 Plans prepared by engineer required when.
     If, in the opinion of the public works director, the work proposed to be done requires the making of plans or the setting of stakes, or both, the public works director may require the application be accompanied by the necessary plans, which plans shall be prepared by a competent engineer. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 702, 1940)

 

8.01.700 Lines and grades for performance of work.
     Before a permittee performs any work covered by this chapter he or she shall obtain from the public works director the approved lines and grades therefor. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 703, 1940)

 

8.01.710 Driveways—Concrete construction required when.
     Driveways shall be constructed of cement concrete where a cement concrete curb exists. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 704, 1940)

 

8.01.720 Driveways—Location restrictions.
     A driveway shall not be constructed or maintained where fences, buildings, natural grade or any other obstacle will prevent a vehicle from being stored entirely off the public right-of-way after entering such driveway. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 705, 1940)

 

8.01.730 Driveways—Width specifications.
     The width of an individual driveway shall be considered as being the net width thereof, exclusive of side slopes and returns, measured along the line of the curb or centerline of the highway. The width of an individual driveway shall be not less than ten feet and shall not exceed in width:

     A.    Twenty (20) feet if the driveway serves only residences or apartments;

     B.     Twenty (20) feet for lots or parcels of land less than one hundred (100) feet wide;

     C.     Thirty (30) feet or twenty (20) percent of the front frontage of the lot or parcel of land, whichever is greater, but not to exceed sixty (60) feet, when the driveway serves other than residences or apartments on a lot or parcel of land not less than one hundred (100) feet wide. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 706, 1940)

 

8.01.740 Driveways—Aggregate width limitations.
     The aggregate width of the total number of driveways serving any single lot or parcel of land from any one highway shall not exceed:

     A.    Forty (40) percent of the frontage, if the driveway serves only residences or apartments;

     B.     Sixty (60) percent of the frontage in other cases. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 707, 1940)

 

8.01.750 Driveways—Minimum intervening distance.
     The minimum intervening distance between the side slopes or returns of adjacent driveways serving the same lot or parcel shall be twenty-two (22) feet. In the case of adjacent driveways serving two adjoining lots or parcels, the intervening distance between the side slopes or returns shall be at least one foot; otherwise, a common or continuous driveway will be required. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 708, 1940)

 

8.01.760 Driveways—Prohibited in certain locations.
     A.    A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed:

     1.     Between the prolonged intersecting property lines of any highways; or

     2.     Between the points of curvature of any curb return having a radius of twenty (20) feet or less.

     B.     In applying the provisions of this section, the condition producing the greater length of curb between the specified control points in the particular case shall govern. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 709, 1940)

 

8.01.770 Driveways—In curb return curvature—Limitations.
     A.    A driveway, including the side slopes, shall not be constructed between the points of curvature of any curb return except:

     1.     In the case of a curb return having a radius of twenty-five (25) feet or more, driveways may encroach at each end thereof for a distance not greater than one-eighth of the total arc length of return, leaving in the clear at least three-quarters of such arc length, if such encroachment does not conflict with other requirements of this section.

     2.     In the case of a curb return having a radius of less than twenty-five (25) feet but more than twenty (20) feet, the maximum permissible encroachment at each end of the return, subject to other requirements of this section, shall be that proportion of one-eighth of the total arc length that the difference between the length of the radius and twenty (20) feet bears to five.

     B.     Notwithstanding any of the foregoing provisions, a driveway shall not encroach on any curb return beyond or ahead of any traffic-regulating device located on or adjacent thereto. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 710, 1940)

 

8.01.780 Driveways—Deviation from requirements authorized when.
     Where topographical or traffic conditions are such that a modification of the provisions of Sections 8.01.710 through 8.01.770 are necessary for the promotion of traffic safety, and the public works director so finds, he or she may permit a deviation from the provisions of such sections to the extent which he or she finds necessary. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 711, 1940)

 

8.01.790 Certificate of acceptance for completed work.
     If the public works director, by survey or by inspection or by both, ascertains that the work has been completed according to the requirements of the permit issued therefor, and of all the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue, if requested so to do by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature, and extent of the work performed under the permit. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 712, 1940)

 

8.01.800 Highway lights or lighting system—Investigation before dedication to city.
     If any person offers to dedicate as a highway any land upon which any highway light or highway lighting system has been installed, the city council, shall refer such offer to the public works director for investigation and report as to whether such highway light or highway lighting system conforms with the requirements of this chapter and with the standard specifications. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 713, 1940)

 

8.01.810 Highway lights or lighting system—Report of investigation—Conditions for acceptance by city.
     A.    Upon reference to him or her, the public works director shall make an adequate investigation of such highway light or highway lighting system, and the construction and installation thereof, and shall report, in writing, to the city council advising it as to whether or not such highway light or highway lighting system so complies, and if not, what changes or alterations are necessary so that such light or system will conform.

     B.     If such light or system does not conform, the city council shall not accept such offer of dedication unless and until such light or system shall have first been made to conform to the provisions of this chapter and to the said specifications. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 714, 1940)

 

8.01.820 Stakes set for work—Charge for resetting required when.
     If any stakes set for any work covered by this chapter are disturbed or destroyed by cause directly attributable to the permittee’s delay in making use of the stakes, the public works director shall set the additional stakes and shall charge the cost thereof to the permittee. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 7 § 715, 1940)

 

8.01.830 Excavations and encroachments—Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of Sections 8.01.840 through 8.01.990 apply to permits for the making, or causing to be made, in any highway, of excavations, and for the placing, constructing, testing, repairing, changing, monitoring, removing or abandoning of facilities or encroachments. The provisions of this chapter also apply to written emergency plans for owners or operators of pipelines used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, and mandatory membership in a one-call notification system. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 4, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 5, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 801, 1940)

 

8.01.840 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Membership in one-call notification system required.
     When a one-call notification system is operational in the city, no person shall maintain and operate a pipeline designed to carry hazardous substances below the surface of a highway unless said person is a member of the system. Such person shall provide to the public works director such proof as required that said person is a member of the system in the city. For the purpose of this section, electrical facilities shall not be considered hazardous. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 5, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 801.1, 1940)

 

8.01.850 Excavation or encroachment permit—Plat filing required with application when—Contents.
     Each applicant for an excavation or encroachment permit shall file with the application a plat in quintuplicate showing the highways in which the proposed excavation, facility or encroachment will be placed, together with the exact location and dimensions of the proposed excavations, or the specifications and characteristics of the facility or encroachment, together with any other details which the public works director requires. When excavations are made for service connections or for the location of trouble in conduits, cable or pipe, or for making repairs thereto, the public works director may waive the filing of a plat. Approved plats shall become public records. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 6, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802, 1940)

 

8.01.860 Underground pipelines—Minimum depth of cover.
     Except as provided in Section 8.01.870, the following minimum depths of cover below existing, finished or proposed gutter grade shall be required for all underground pipelines within the roadway area:

     A.    Local Streets.

             Twenty-four (24) inches for service pipelines;

             Thirty (30) inches for all pipelines transporting nonhazardous substances;

             Thirty (30) inches for electrical facilities;

             Forty-two (42) inches for all pipelines transporting hazardous substances as defined in Section 8.01.020.

     B.     Master Plan Highways.

             Twenty-four (24) inches for service pipelines;

             Thirty-six (36) inches for pipelines transporting nonhazardous substances;

             Forty-two (42) inches for electrical facilities;

             Forty-two (42) inches for pipelines transporting hazardous substances, as defined in Section 8.01.020. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 85-0207 § 2, 1985: LACC Ord. 82-0268 § 1, 1982: LACC Ord. 11581 § 7, 1977: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.1, 1940)

 

8.01.870 Underground cable TV and telephone conduits in systems designed pursuant to special requirements of the road commissioner.
     A minimum depth of cover of eighteen (18) inches below existing or proposed edge of gutter grade shall be permitted for cable TV and telephone conduits designed pursuant to special requirements of the road commissioner, and to be placed in existing roadways as follows:

     A.    Mainline cable conduit in a four- to five-inch-wide trench located adjacent to the concrete gutter (three from the edge of curb if no gutter exists);

     B.     Service cable conduits crossing the roadway from the mainline to serve users on the opposite side of local streets when installed by an acceptable boring method. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 82-0268 § 2, 1982)

 

8.01.880 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Pressure test specifications.
     A.    After initial installation under this chapter of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, such pipeline shall be subject to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before it is placed in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall not be less than twenty-four (24) hours.

     B.     After repair or replacement of any pipeline used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids, made necessary to repair leaks or breaks, or replacements made necessary for changes required by improvements within the roadway, the affected portion of the pipeline shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure test as provided herein before placing in operation. The duration of the hydrostatic test for this purpose shall be not less than twenty-four (24) hours. However, no such test is required for a minor repair which does not require removal of the pipeline from operation. If the affected section is isolated and tested hydrostatically, pressure test of the tie-in welds is not required; however, tie-in welds shall be examined by radiographic means.

     C.     No pipeline subject to this chapter used or to be used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids and over ten years of age shall be operated beyond the successive ensuing twelve (12) month period of time unless retested annually by a hydrostatic pressure test or other test means acceptable to the public works director. The duration of the periodic test for this purpose shall not be less than four hours.

     D.    Each pressure test, either initial or retest, shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision. The public works director may authorize the use of a liquid petroleum that does not vaporize rapidly (i.e., flash point over one hundred fifty (150) degrees Fahrenheit or sixty-six (66) degrees Centigrade) as a test medium. Pressure tests after initial installation of pipelines and before they are placed in operation shall show no unexplained loss. Annual or retest pressure tests shall not show an hourly loss, for each section of the pipeline under test at the time, in excess of either ten gallons, or the sum of one gallon and an amount computed at a rate in gallons per mile equivalent to one-tenth of the nominal internal diameter of the pipe.

     E.     The public works director may grant administrative waiver or other relief to an owner or operator under this chapter as to the periodic pressure testing of any pipelines as herein provided if owner or operator can demonstrate that such testing will cause the unreasonable unscheduled shutdown of plants, terminals, refineries or other facilities of which such pipelines constitute an integral part.

     F.     In addition to the foregoing requirements, any pipeline authorized by this chapter and subject to pressure testing shall be subjected to a pressure test by the owner or operator at any time as may be required by the public works director in the interest of public safety.

     G.    Within thirty (30) days after completion of any test made pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the owner or operator shall submit a certified report of such text for the public works director’s review. The report shall show the date of test, description of portion of pipeline tested (identified with respect to city highways), and the test data. The report shall be sufficient in detail to permit analysis of test results and determination of compliance with the applicable provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any other applicable ordinance, rule or regulation. The report shall also contain any other test information as may be specifically requested by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 6, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.2, 1940)

 

8.01.890 Pipeline system—Block valves required where.
     Block valves shall be installed on each new main at locations along the pipeline system that will minimize damage from accidental product discharge. Said location shall be appropriate for the terrain and the population density of the area. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 7, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.3, 1940)

 

8.01.900 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Cathodic protection system required—Specifications.
     As provided in the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision, a cathodic protection system shall be installed for all new ferrous pipelines used to carry toxic, corrosive or flammable substances other than utility gases in order to mitigate corrosion deterioration that might result in structural failure. The cathodic protection system for all new ferrous pipelines carrying utility gases shall be installed in accordance with General Order No. 112-C of the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California. A test procedure shall be developed by the owner or operator to determine whether adequate cathodic protection has been achieved and submitted to the commissioner for approval. Reports of cathodic protection evaluation in accordance with such approved procedure shall be made available annually for review by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 8, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.4, 1940)

 

8.01.910 Pipelines carrying hazardous substances—Emergency plan requirements.
     A.    Each owner or operator of a pipeline used or to be used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids shall have a written emergency plan approved and on file with the city forester and fire warden. The plan shall be in accordance with the American National Standard Institute’s Code for Pressure Piping, Liquid Petroleum Transportation Piping Systems (ANSI B 31.4) in its latest revision.

     B.     The plan shall include, but not be limited to, the following elements:

     1.     A liaison element for intercommunications between public agencies and pipeline owners or operators to provide for prompt coordinated remedial action, and the dissemination of information as to the location and ownership identification of pipelines based on the best available records and plans;

     2.     A spill contingency element to limit the extent of accidental product discharge by which pipeline owners or operators shall involve themselves in a cooperative pipeline leak notification emergency action system;

     3.     A leak detection element by which the pipeline owners or operators can monitor the flow of their product and can divert, reduce or stop the flow of said product at the first indication of a product leak;

     4.     A first-on-the-scene emergency containment element, in cooperation with other pipeline owners or operators, to be utilized until arrival of the affected pipeline owner’s or operator’s personnel. First-on-the-scene costs shall be borne by the owner or operator of the facility, and shall be reimbursed to the organization effecting the emergency containment. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 9, 1979: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 802.5, 1940)

 

8.01.920 Completion of work—Restoration of area required.
     Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation, facility or encroachment permitted by any permit issued, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner restore the area affected by his or her activity to a condition satisfactory to the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 803, 1940)

 

8.01.930 Completion of work—Method of refilling excavations.
     A permittee shall refill an excavation in the manner which is satisfactory to the public works director and is most effective to accomplish thorough consolidation and enable the highway to be restored to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 804, 1940)

 

8.01.940 Completion of work—Notice to public works director—As-built plat required when.
     Upon completion of the refilling of the excavation, or completion of the cut or fill, the permittee shall so notify the public works director in writing on a form prescribed by the public works director. Whenever a plat was required by Section 8.01.850 and there were substantial deviations approved during the work from the dimensions or locations as shown on the plat, the permittee shall transmit to the commissioner a concise “as-built plat” upon completion of his or her work, showing the accurate location, depth and size of the facility or encroachment so laid, removed or abandoned. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 9, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 805, 1940)

 

8.01.950 Relocation of facilities or encroachments—Statement required in application.
     Every application shall contain a statement, signed by the applicant, that if any facility or encroachment placed in the excavation or the facility or encroachment for which a permit is issued interferes with the future use of the highway by the general public, then the applicant and his or her successors or assigns will at his or her own expense remove or relocate to a location satisfactory to the public works director such facility or encroachment. The statement signed by the applicant will not apply in cases when the applicant has an easement superior to the highway easement at the time of application and can furnish evidence when required of such superior easement. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 10, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 806, 1940)

 

8.01.960 Obtaining permit next business day permitted when.
     Nothing in this chapter prohibits any person from maintaining by virtue of any law, ordinance or permit, any facility or encroachment in any highway, or from making such excavation as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property if the person making such excavation applies for a permit not later than the next business day. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 11, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 807, 1940)

 

8.01.970 Lines for TV or audio signals—Undergrounding required when.
     The public works director shall require all lines for the transmission and distribution of standard television or audio signals to be placed underground in highways when all power and telephone lines are underground, and shall also require underground installation in all instances except where the applicant provides satisfactory proof of permission to use existing pole lines or where the commission finds that the remoteness of the area or other conditions render underground installation impractical or infeasible. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 808, 1940)

 

8.01.980 Public works director authorized to establish other requirements.
     The public works director may establish such requirements as he or she may find necessary to apply to the work to be done by any person in order to prevent interference with users of the highway and with holders of other permits. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 809, 1940)

 

8.01.990 Abandonment or removal of facilities or encroachments—Specifications.
     A.    Each applicant for a permit to abandon in place or remove any facility or encroachment in the highway shall do so under terms and conditions prescribed by the public works director. The permit application shall include a plat or other suitable means describing the facility or encroachment to be abandoned or removed, and indicating its exact location. Permission to abandon a facility or encroachment without removing shall be subject to removal within one year after the effective date of the abandonment if the facility or encroachment may interfere with a present or future public improvement. If it is determined that the facility or encroachment should be removed, the permittee or its successor in interest shall remove it at its expense or pay county for the cost of such removal. Permittee shall leave any abandoned facility or encroachment in a safe condition.

     B.     In addition to the foregoing, abandonment in place of a pipeline used to convey toxic, corrosive or flammable liquids will be subject to the following requirements:

     1.     The pipeline shall be thoroughly purged of liquids and vapors and filled with an inert material that will remain in a solid or semisolid state if any portion of the pipeline is cut or removed in the future.

     2.     The permittee shall file a certificate with the commissioner that said requirements have been complied with and the abandoned pipeline has been left in a safe condition. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 12038 § 10, 1979: LACC Ord. 11581 § 12, 1977: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 8 § 810, 1940)

 

8.01.1000 Permit to drill hole in sidewalk or highway granted when.
     The public works director may grant a permit to drill a hole not exceeding four inches in diameter in a public sidewalk or in that portion of a public highway not used for vehicular traffic for the purpose of inserting a flagpole therein upon which the flag of the United States, the flag of the state of California, or the flag of the county of Los Angeles is displayed. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 11 § 1101, 1940)

 

8.01.1010 Covering or refilling hole required when.
     Except when such hole is being used to support the flagpole of the flag of the United States, state of California or county of Los Angeles, permittee or his or her successor or assign shall plug such hole with wood, metal, plastic or concrete plug, which shall be so constructed as to completely cover such hole level with the surrounding surface, or shall refill such hole and restore the highway to a condition equivalent to that in which it was prior to the excavation. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 11 § 1102, 1940)

 

8.01.1020 Applicability of provisions.
     The provisions of Sections 8.01.1030 through 8.01.1090 apply to the use of the highway by a vehicle or load, or to any combination. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 901, 1940)

 

8.01.1030 Moving permit—Relocation permit required for certain buildings.
     In all cases where Ordinance 2225, entitled Building Code and set out at Title 26 of the Los Angeles County Code requires the owner of any premises to which it is proposed to move any building or structure to obtain a relocation permit, the public works director shall not grant a permit to move such building or structure until the applicant furnishes to the public works director evidence that such owner has such relocation permit. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967; Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 903, 1940)

 

8.01.1040 Moving permit—Issuance conditions for overweight loads.
     The public works director shall not issue a permit to move any load when the weight of load, plus the weight of the vehicle or other equipment, exceeds the weight permitted by the Vehicle Code, except that if it appears to the public works director that the size, shape or physical characteristics of the load, or portion thereof, to be moved make it impossible or impracticable to keep within such weight limits, the public works director may issue a permit to move a load on a vehicle every wheel of which is equipped with pneumatic tires where the commissioner has determined that such movement will not cause injury to the highways, bridges, and appurtenances installed therein or thereunder. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967; Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 904, 1940)

 

8.01.1050 Moving permit—Public works director’s authority to issue and set conditions.
     The public works director is authorized to issue or withhold the permit at his or her discretion; or, if the permit is issued, to limit the number of trips, or to establish seasonal or other time limitations within which the vehicle or vehicles described may be operated on the highways indicated, or otherwise to limit or prescribe conditions of operation of the vehicle when necessary to assure against undue interference with traffic or damage to the road foundations, surfaces or structures, and may require the undertaking of other security measures as may be deemed necessary to protect the highways and bridges from injury, or to provide indemnity for any injury resulting from the operation of the vehicle. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 907, 1940)

 

8.01.1060 Overhead facilities—Moving permit information available to operator—Procedure.
     Any person lawfully operating or maintaining overhead facilities across any highway in the city who desires information pertaining to any moving permits issued for the moving of a building of eighteen (18) feet or more feet in height shall file a written request with the public works director. The public works director shall make such information available to the requesting person. The public works director shall not allow the moving of a building for a period of forty-eight (48) hours after the filing of a permit application in order to allow such person time to inspect the route the permittee intends to take. In the event the permittee needs to make any change in the route set forth on the permit, said permit shall be void until the moving contractor has obtained an approved change in the route. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 908, 1940)

 

8.01.1070 Runway required under wheels of moving vehicles.
     When so required by the public works director, a moving contractor shall place under each dolly or wheel used in moving a building or structure, or under each wheel of a vehicle, boards or planks of adequate width and strength to carry the load without being broken, to serve as a runway for such dolly or wheel during such moving along or across any portion of any highway which has a surface other than natural soil. The moving contractor shall prevent such dolly or wheel from ever revolving on or resting on such surface except upon such board, plank or runway. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 902, 1940)

 

8.01.1080 Copy of permit required on each part of shipment.
     If a building or structure is moved in more than one section, and more than one of such sections is moved at the same time, the moving contractor shall affix and maintain at all times in conspicuous places on each section on which the original permit is not affixed, true copies of such permit. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 905, 1940)

 

8.01.1090 Supervision by inspector required when.
     The public works director may require that the moving of any load or vehicle be under the supervision of an inspector to be appointed by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 9 § 906, 1940)

 

8.01.1100 Minimum height over highways.
     Each overhead structure which extends over the portion of the highway used by vehicles shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet above the highest portion of the highway surface. If the public works director finds that traffic conditions are such that it is necessary for highway safety for such structure to be at a greater height, then such structure shall be at such greater height as specified by the public works director. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 10 § 1001, 1940)

 

8.01.1110 Doorway shelters.
     Each overhead structure used primarily for a covered shelter for ingress and egress into a doorway shall not exceed ten feet in width and shall have a vertical clearance of not less than eight feet at every point. Each structure shall be supported by metal posts on a line two feet back from the face of the curb, if any, otherwise from the edge of the portion of the highway designed for use by motor vehicles, and shall be constructed in such a manner that no portion thereof shall extend toward the roadway more than six inches beyond the metal posts. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 10 § 1002, 1940)

 

8.01.1120 Permit allows maintenance of structures—Exception.
     Any permit to erect or maintain an overhead structure shall be treated as and deemed to be a permit to maintain such structure until expiration or revocation of the permit. This section does not apply to agencies operating under approved franchise. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 10 § 1003, 1940)

 

8.01.1130 Removal of structures following permit expiration or revocation.
     Upon the effective date of the expiration or revocation of the permit, the person maintaining the overhead structure shall remove same, and restore any highway facility damaged or removed. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 10 § 1004, 1940)

 

8.01.1135 Removal of encroachments to protect public safety.
     A.    Whenever the director of public works or designee or a law enforcement official determines that a roll-off bin, portable storage container or other encroachment located on the highway, public property or public right-of-way causes a dangerous condition or obstruction, he or she may cause the immediate removal, relocation and/or remedy of that condition without prior notice to the responsible owner or permittee of that encroachment.

     B.     The director of public works or designee may remove or cause to be removed any roll-off bin or other encroachment that is placed on the highway, public property or public right-of-way without a required permit or in violation of permit conditions, provided that a reasonable attempt has been made to contact the owner and to give twenty-four (24) hours’ notice of the intent to remove the bin.

     C.     The director of public works or designee may remove or cause to be removed any portable storage container placed on the highway, public property or public right-of-way, provided that a reasonable attempt has been made to contact the owner and to give twenty-four (24) hours’ notice of the intent to remove the container.

     D.    The responsible property owner and/or operator shall pay any and all costs incurred for removal and storage of a roll-off bin or encroachment pursuant to this section. (Ord. 402 § 1, 2011)

 

8.01.1140 Excavations in new street improvements.
     Notwithstanding any provisions of the highway permit ordinance of the city, the following provisions are enacted by the city council to prevent unnecessary interference with new pavement on public streets and highways during the period immediately following its construction or resurfacing:

     A.    The city shall attempt to give notice to all owners of substructures located within the city streets who might be affected, approximately one year prior to the probable date of construction of any new paving or repaving of any street in the city, and approximately four months prior to such date. The failure to give any such notice shall not affect the further provisions of this section.

     B.     No excavation shall be made in any city street within two years following the date of completion and acceptance of any work of paving or repaving of such street except for emergency repairs or service, unless the person proposing to make such excavation shall agree to pay for the resurfacing of the entire street section with an asphaltic concrete cap of a minimum thickness of one inch for a distance of fifty (50) feet on either side of the excavation on a longitudinal basis from curb to curb or the full width of the street. (Ord. 132 § 1, 1986)

 

8.01.1150 Certificates of insurance.
     A.    If an applicant for a building or encroachment permit is required, as a condition for the issuance of such permit, to indemnify the city from liability or responsibility for any damage or injury to persons or property occurring as a proximate result to activities undertaken pursuant to the permit applied for, the applicant may be required to file a certificate of insurance evidencing coverage of the city of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for bodily injury and/or one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage liability to assure compliance with the foregoing indemnification.

     B.     When the county of Los Angeles is providing services to the city in the issuance of such permits, the county of Los Angeles as well as the city shall be a named insured. (Ord. 150 § 1, 1987)

 

8.01.1160 Acts constituting misdemeanors designated.
     Every person who performs any work regulated by this chapter, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the public works director or who, having a permit, fails or refuses to comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter or with any condition of the permit or who performs work contrary to any of the general or special requirements or specifications of the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is guilty of a separate offense for every day during any part of which such violation occurs. (Ord. 402 § 2, 2011; Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 10816 § 1 (part) 1973: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 19 § 1901, 1940)

 

8.01.1170 Violation—Penalty.
     Violation of any provision of this chapter is punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in a county jail for not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 63, 1979: LACC Ord. 10816 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 9349 § 1, 1967: LACC Ord. 3597 Ch. 19 § 1902, 1940)

Chapter 8.02 PRIVATE ENCROACHMENTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
8.02.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards and regulations for the installation, construction, maintenance, repair and removal of private encroachments in the city’s public right-of-way, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the personal enjoyment of private property.

     B.     These standards and controls are intended: (1) to ensure that these private encroachments are maintained in a manner consistent with previously adopted policies of the city as set forth in the general plan; (2) to guide the orderly development of the community; (3) to ensure the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the city; and (4) to regulate the removal or modification of existing encroachments when required by the city.

     C.     Nothing in this chapter precludes the director of public works from ordering the removal or modification of any existing encroachment, landscaping or vegetation, whether previously permitted or not, that is determined by the director of public works to interfere with a public works project(s), cause a potential public safety issue, or is otherwise inconsistent with this code. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.020 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Breakaway” means constructed in a manner such that the encroachment will yield readily if struck by a vehicle pursuant to state guidelines for breakaway objects as described in the California Manual of Traffic Control Devices or Roadside Design Guide or Caltrans Highway Design Manual or as approved by the public works director.

     “Curb” means the raised edging along any public road, boulevard, street, avenue, lane or alley and includes the contiguous public gutter or channel for carrying off surface water.

     “Director” means the director of public works, or designee for the purposes of this chapter.

 

     “Driveway” means that portion of the road right-of-way between the property line and curb, or between the property line and the pavement if no curb exists, where vehicles enter or leave the street onto adjacent property.

     “Encroachment” means and includes any fence, wall, building, structure, obstruction, tower, pole, pipe, wire, cable, conduit, stand or building, or any structure or object of any kind or character not particularly mentioned in this chapter, which is temporarily placed in, along, under, over or across the street.

     “EA” means encroachment agreement, a recorded document establishing the terms and conditions under which a private encroachment may be constructed and/or maintained.

     “Parkway” means that area between the curb of any street and the adjacent private property line, and where there is no sidewalk and/or curb, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway shall also include any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel, and includes sidewalks, landscaped areas, center medians, unimproved areas, driveway approach, curbing, bulkhead, retaining wall or other works located in any public street, way or thoroughfare within the city.

     “Pavement” means the surfaced portion of the street which is composed of various size aggregates mixed with Portland cement and/or asphaltic compounds used for vehicle and/or pedestrian travel.

     “Permit” means a highway permit as described in Chapter 8.01 of this code, also known as a “construction permit.”

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, any district, any city including this city, any county, and all departments and bureaus thereof except the road department of this city.

     “Private encroachment” means any encroachment installed, constructed, maintained, repaired, reconstructed, or modified by someone other than a governmental agency. “Private encroachment” does not include any encroachment maintained by a governmental agency as part of the public infrastructure, whether or not it was installed by private person.

     “Property owner” means any individual, firm, corporation, nonprofit organization, collective, entity, or the agent or representative of any individual, firm, corporation, nonprofit organization, collective or entity, holding current or future ownership, title and/or property interest (including, but not limited to, tenancy interests) or is materially responsible for private encroachments located within the right-of-way, including their successors.

     “Public” means any person as defined by this chapter and includes the United States, this state, the county of Los Angeles and the city.

     “Repair” includes the fixing, reconstruction, replacement, modification, or restoration of any structure in the public right-of-way or on private property.

     “Right-of-way” means any property of which the city has an easement or ownership for public travel use or as a buffer between road use and private property.

     “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     “Section” means a section of an ordinance codified in this code unless some other ordinance or statute is specifically mentioned.

     “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive.

     “Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the general use of pedestrians.

     “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and shall include, but not be limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, sidewalks, berms or shoulder parkway, right-of-way or median strip.

     “Structure” means anything built, constructed, fabricated, formed or placed which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground regardless of method or location of its creation.

     “Vehicle” means and includes every wagon, cart, push cart, coach, carriage, omnibus, automobile, cycle, car, motorcycle, truck, trailer, tractor engine, tractor or other conveyance or contrivance for moving persons, animals or things in whatever manner and by whatever force or power the same may be ridden, driven, propelled, drawn or moved, which is driven, propelled, drawn or moved on a public right-of-way.

     “Vehicle Code” means the state of California Vehicle Code in effect at the time of issuance of an encroachment permit.

     All other definitions used in the Municipal Code not identified in this section shall remain applicable to this chapter. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.030 Applicability and prohibition.
     The procedures and rules set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all existing or proposed private encroachment(s), except as provided in Section 8.02.060. No encroachment subject to this chapter shall be installed, modified or added onto within the city’s public right-of-way without first complying with the provisions of this chapter. Nothing in this chapter relieves the property owner or responsible party to obtain a permit for any work in the public right-of-way as specified in Chapter 8.01. A permit shall not be required to perform routine maintenance of an existing private encroachment, in accordance with Section 8.02.040, unless otherwise required by this code. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.040 Property owner responsibility to maintain and repair private encroachments.
     It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to maintain and repair any and all of the property owner’s private encroachments within the public right-of-way in compliance with Section 8.02.140 and Chapter 8.16 whether or not they have been permitted. Maintenance and repair shall include cleaning, painting and/or replacement of in kind materials in order for the encroachment to be kept in an original and safe condition. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.050 Required—Encroachment agreement (EA).
     An encroachment agreement (EA) shall be required to install or modify any private encroachment in the public right-of-way. The EA shall be deemed a conditional approval allowing the encroachment to remain in the public right-of-way until such future time as the city orders its removal and/or it is removed by the owner pursuant to this chapter. Upon approval of an EA, a permit must be obtained prior to installation or modification of the approved private encroachment. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.060 Exceptions.
     This chapter does not apply to the following encroachments:

     A.    Temporary use of the street for ordinary maintenance of any existing authorized or permitted encroachment;

     B.     An encroachment subject to a different city agreement or authorization, such as an easement or city franchise agreement;

     C.     An encroachment authorized by an independent right to use the city right-of-way;

     D.    Public works projects, public utility work, or work performed pursuant to Chapters 8.03 and 8.04 of this code;

     E.     Mailboxes constructed of breakaway materials which do not create an obstruction, as determined by the director; or

     F.     Existing private encroachments constructed before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter if maintained subject to the requirements of Sections 8.02.040 and 8.02.140 of this chapter. This exception does not preclude the authority of the director to order the removal of any permitted or unpermitted private encroachment(s) at any time pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.070 Encroachment agreement findings and decision.
     A.    An encroachment agreement (EA) may be issued for a new or modified private encroachment if the director, or upon appeal, the public works and traffic commission or city council, can make all of the following findings:

     1.     The private encroachment does not block access to streets or private driveways; obstruct the view of vehicles, pedestrians, equestrians or bicycles; nor negatively impact vehicular parking, circulation, line-of-sight or safety;

     2.     The private encroachment is in character with the neighborhood;

     3.     The private encroachment does not present a risk to the health, safety or general welfare of the public;

     4.     The private encroachment does not create or encourage a violation of the California Vehicle Code or other code or regulation of the city;

     5.     The need for the private encroachment is a unique condition and does not establish a precedent for similar private encroachments in the future;

     6.     The private encroachment does not create an inequitable condition that prevents normal use of the public right-of-way by the public or adjacent property owners;

     7.     An alternative solution or similar improvement is not reasonably feasible on private property.

     B.     The director may impose conditions of approval as deemed necessary in order to make the findings required by subsection A.

     C.     The failure to meet all findings shall result in denial of an EA and removal of the private encroachment, if existing. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.080 Standard conditions of approval.
     In addition to conditions of approval which may be imposed in order to make the findings required in this chapter, the following conditions shall be imposed on all EA approvals:

     A.    The property owner herein indemnifies, defends and holds harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from and against any and all liability, damages, costs, losses, claims and expenses, including attorneys’ fees and costs, caused or suffered by any person resulting directly or indirectly from or connected with the privilege of conditionally encroaching upon the public right-of-way. Said indemnification and defense shall include all areas under the control of the property owner under the EA.

     B.     The property owner agrees to maintain a policy in connection with the homeowner’s insurance carrier, with proof to the public works department that the city has been named as additional insured for liability associated with the encroachment. The coverage shall provide for thirty (30) days’ notice of cancellation or nonrenewal of coverage to the city. The property owner shall provide proof of continuing coverage to the city.

     C.     City may terminate this EA at any time, without cause, upon giving thirty (30) days’ written notice to property owner.

     1.     Upon receipt of said notice, the property owner agrees to remove, at his or her sole expense, any and all private encroachments within said public right-of-way and clear all unimproved portions of the property affected by the prior installation as directed by the city. The public right-of-way shall be left in a clean condition, free of weeds, debris and materials.

     2.     If the private encroachment is not removed within thirty (30) days following the date of notice, the city may remove the encroachment and all costs in connection with said removal shall be charged to the property owner, as provided in Section 8.01.250. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.090 Authority of director to remove private encroachment.
     The director shall have the authority to order the removal of any private encroachment whether or not it has been permitted pursuant to this chapter at any time with or without cause. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.100 Administrative reviews and additional conditions.
     A.    Administrative Review. Each EA shall be subject to review by the director at any time. At his or her discretion, the director may hold a review hearing. The director will notify the property owner at his or her last known address at least thirty (30) days prior to a review hearing. The purpose of an administrative review is to uphold the provisions of this chapter as it relates to a specific EA.

     B.     Additional Conditions. Pursuant to the review, the director may add conditions to any permit as necessary at any time to ensure health, safety or welfare of the general public or to comply with city standards, regulations, laws and decisions relating to the EA which are issued by any legislative body, court or agency with competent jurisdiction over the matter, and that the additional conditions are appealable pursuant to Section 8.02.120. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.110 Revocations.
     At any time, the director may terminate an EA and/or revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Grounds for revocation may include, but not be limited to, the following reasons:

     A.    The property owner or responsible party has abandoned the private encroachment; or

     B.     The property owner or responsible party has failed to bring the private encroachment into compliance with the conditions of approval, or the requirements of this chapter, within the period of time provided in a written notice sent by the city requiring the private encroachment to be brought into compliance; or

     C.     The private encroachment has been determined by the director to pose a risk to the health, safety or general welfare of the public; or

     D.    An EA for a private encroachment has been terminated upon thirty (30) days’ notice pursuant to Section 8.02.080(C) of this chapter; or

     E.     An existing or proposed private encroachment conflicts with a planned public works project, public utility project or other city approved encroachment. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.120 Appeals.
     A.    A decision made by the director to approve or deny the issuance of an EA pursuant to this chapter may be appealed to the public works and traffic commission. A decision made by the public works and traffic commission may be appealed to the city council. Appeals shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of director or commission decision as applicable.

     B.     To appeal a decision related to an EA, the appellant or property owner shall be required to submit a letter of appeal, a drawing indicating the location and proposed construction of the encroachment, if applicable, and the required appeal fees. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.130 Removal.
     A.    Upon abandonment, revocation, termination, or order to discontinue use, the property owner shall physically remove the private encroachment or abandoned elements within thirty (30) days from the date of abandonment or notice from the city, unless a shorter period of time is required by the city. Property owner shall obtain a permit from the city prior to removal work. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     Complete removal of existing private encroachment(s), including foundations, substructures, and related materials and equipment within the right-of-way;

     2.     Transportation of the private encroachments and related materials and equipment to an appropriate repository; and

     3.     Restoration of the site to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city.

     B.     Nuisance Abatement. If a property owner or responsible party fails to remove a private encroachment in accordance with this chapter, the private encroachment shall be deemed a public nuisance.

     C.     If the private encroachment is not removed, the city shall remove the encroachment and all costs in connection with said removal shall be charged to the property owner, as provided in Section 8.01.250. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.140 Maintenance requirements.
     A.    All private encroachments, whether or not they have been permitted, shall be maintained by the property owner or responsible party in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism. Any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible, but no later than thirty (30) days from city notice, so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight.

     B.     All private encroachments, whether or not they have been permitted, shall be maintained with like materials and without modification to the overall shape, color or size of the existing encroachment.

     C.     Inspections. Each property owner of a private encroachment shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

 

8.02.150 Penalty.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this code. Every person who performs any work regulated by this chapter, either without first obtaining a permit therefor from the director or who, having a permit, fails or refuses to comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter or with any condition of the permit or who performs work contrary to any of the general or special requirements or specifications of the permit, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 396 § 1, 2011)

Chapter 8.03 WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
8.03.010 Purpose.
     The purpose and intent of this chapter is to provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation and maintenance of wireless telecommunications facilities in the city’s public right-of-way. These regulations are intended to prescribe clear and reasonable criteria to assess and process applications in a consistent and expeditious manner, while reducing the impacts associated with wireless telecommunications facilities. This chapter provides standards necessary: (1) for the preservation of the public right-of-way (“PROW”) in the city for the maximum benefit and use of the public; (2) to promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources and the aesthetic quality of the city consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the general plan; and (3) to provide for the orderly, managed and efficient development of wireless telecommunications facilities in accordance with the state and federal laws, rules and regulations, including those regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (“FCC”) and California Public Utilities Commission (“CPUC”); and (4) to ensure that the use and enjoyment of the PROW is not inconvenienced by the use of the PROW for the placement of wireless facilities. The city recognizes the importance of wireless facilities to provide high-quality communications service to the residents and businesses within the city, and the city also recognizes its obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws. This chapter shall be constructed and applied in consistency with the provisions of state and federal laws, and the rules and regulations of FCC and CPUC. In the event of any inconsistency between any such laws, rules and regulations and this chapter, the laws, rules and regulations shall control. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.020 Definitions.
     “Accessory equipment” means any and all on-site equipment, including, without limitation, back-up generators and power supply units, cabinets, coaxial and fiber optic cables, connections, equipment buildings, shelters, radio transceivers, transmitters, pedestals, splice boxes, fencing and shielding, surface location markers, meters, regular power supply units, fans, air conditioning units, cables and wiring, to which an antenna is attached in order to facilitate the provision of wireless telecommunication services.

     “Antenna” means that specific device for transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency or other signals for purposes of wireless telecommunications services. “Antenna” is specific to the antenna portion of a wireless telecommunications facility.

     “Antenna array” shall mean two or more antennas having active elements extending in one or more directions, and directional antennas mounted upon and rotated through a vertical mast or tower interconnecting the beam and antenna support, all of which elements are deemed to be part of the antenna.

     “Base station” shall have the meaning as set forth in Title 47 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Section 1.40001(b)(1), or any successor provision. This means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network (regardless of the technological configuration, and encompassing DAS and small cells). “Base station” does not encompass a tower or any equipment associated with a tower. Base station includes, without limitation:

     1.     Equipment associated with wireless communications services such as private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

     2.     Radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, regular and backup power supplies, and comparable equipment, regardless of technological configuration (including distributed antenna systems and small cells).

     3.     Any structure other than a tower that, at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this chapter, supports or houses equipment described in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this definition that has been reviewed and approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another state or local regulatory review process, even if the structure was not built for the sole or primary purpose of providing that support.

     4.     “Base station” does not include any structure that, at the time the relevant application is filed under this chapter, does not support or house equipment described in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this definition. Other structures that do not host wireless telecommunications facilities are not “base stations.”

As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition of “base station” refers to any structure that actually supports wireless equipment even though it was not originally intended for that purpose. Examples include, but are not limited to, wireless facilities mounted on buildings, utility poles, light standards or traffic signals. A structure without wireless equipment replaced with a new structure designed to bear the additional weight from wireless equipment constitutes a base station.

     “Cellular” means an analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Code” means the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     “Collocation” bears the following meanings:

     1.     For the purposes of any eligible facilities request, the same as defined by the FCC in 47 CFR Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as “[t]he mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting and/or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.” As an illustration and not a limitation, the FCC’s definition means to add transmission equipment to an existing facility and does not necessarily refer to two or more different facility operators in the same location; and

     2.     For all other purposes, the same as defined in 47 CFR 1.6002(g)(1) and (2), as may be amended, which defines that term as: (1) mounting or installing an antenna facility on a pre-existing structure; and/or (2) modifying a structure for the purpose of mounting or installing an antenna facility on that structure.

     “Collocation facility” means the eligible support structure on, or immediately adjacent to, which a collocation is proposed, or a wireless telecommunications facility that includes collocation facilities. (See Gov. Code, Section 65850.6(d).)

     “COW” means a “cell on wheels,” which is a portable, self-contained wireless telecommunications facility that can be moved to a location and set up to provide wireless telecommunication services, which facility is temporarily rolled in, or temporarily installed, at a location. Under this chapter, the maximum time a facility can be installed to be considered a COW is five days. A COW is normally vehicle-mounted and contains a telescoping boom as the antenna support structure.

     “Director” means the director of public works of the city of La Cañada Flintridge, or his or her designee.

     “Distributed antenna system” or “DAS” means a network of spatially separated antennas (nodes) connected to a common source (a hub) via a transport medium (often fiber optics) that provide wireless telecommunications service within a specific geographic area or building. DAS includes the transport medium, the hub, and any other equipment to which the DAS network or its antennas or nodes are connected to provide wireless telecommunication services.

     “Eligible facilities request” means any request for modification to an existing eligible support structure that does not substantially change the physical dimensions of such structure, involving:

     1.     Collocation of new transmission equipment;

     2.     Removal of transmission equipment;

     3.     Replacement of transmission equipment (replacement does not include completely replacing the underlying support structure); or

     4.     Hardening through structural enhancement where such hardening is necessary to accomplish the eligible facilities request, but does not include replacement of the underlying support structure.

     “Eligible facilities request” does not include modifications or replacements when an eligible support structure was constructed or deployed without proper local review, was not required to undergo local review, or involves equipment that was not properly approved.

     “Eligible facilities request” does include collocation facilities satisfying all the requirements for a non-discretionary collocation facility pursuant to Government Code Section 65850.6.

     “Eligible support structure” means any support structure located in the PROW that is existing at the time the relevant application is filed with the city under this chapter.

     “Existing” means a support structure, wireless telecommunications facility, or accessory equipment that has been reviewed and approved under the city’s applicable zoning or siting process, or under another applicable state or local regulatory review process, and lawfully constructed prior to the time the relevant application is filed under this chapter. However, a support structure, wireless telecommunications facility, or accessory equipment that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is “existing” for purposes of this chapter. “Existing” does not apply to any structure that: (1) was illegally constructed without all proper local agency approvals; or (2) was constructed in noncompliance with such approvals. “Existing” does not apply where an existing support structure is proposed to be replaced in furtherance of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

     “Facility(ies)” means wireless telecommunications facility(ies).

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

     “Ground-mounted” means mounted to a pole, tower or other freestanding structure which is specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna or wireless telecommunications facility and placed directly on the ground at grade level.

     “Lattice tower” means an open framework structure used to support one or more antennas, typically with three or four support legs.

     “Located within (or in) the public right-of-way” includes any facility which in whole or in part, itself or as part of another structure, rests upon, in, over or under the PROW.

     “Modification” means a change to an existing wireless telecommunications facility that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, changes in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. “Modification” does not include repair, replacement or maintenance if those actions do not involve whatsoever any expansion, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation of an existing wireless telecommunications facility.

     “Monopole” means a structure composed of a pole or tower used to support antennas or related equipment. A monopole also includes a monopine, monopalm and similar monopoles camouflaged to resemble faux trees or other faux objects attached on a monopole (e.g. water tower).

     “Mounted” means attached or supported.

     “OTARD antennas” means antennas covered by the “over-the-air reception devices” rule in 47 CFR Section 1.4000 et seq. as may be amended or replaced from time to time.

     “Permittee” means any person or entity granted a WTFP pursuant to this chapter.

     “Personal wireless services” shall have the same meaning as set forth in 47 United States Code Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i).

     “Pole” means a single shaft of wood, steel, concrete or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this code.

     “Public right-of-way” or “PROW” means a strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, prescription, condemnation, or easement that allows for the passage of people and goods. The PROW includes, but is not necessarily limited to, streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, roadway medians, and parking strips. The PROW does not include lands owned, controlled or operated by the city for uses unrelated to streets or the passage of people and goods, such as, without limitation, parks, city hall and community center lands, city yards, and lands supporting reservoirs, water towers, police or fire facilities and non-publicly accessible utilities.

     “Replacement” refers only to replacement of transmission equipment, wireless telecommunications facilities or eligible support structures where the replacement structure will be of like-for-like kind to resemble the appearance and dimensions of the structure or equipment replaced, including size, height, color, landscaping, materials and style.

     1.     In the context of determining whether an application qualifies as an eligible facilities request, the term “replacement” relates only to the replacement of transmission equipment and does not include replacing the support structure on which the equipment is located.

     2.     In the context of determining whether an SWF application qualifies as being placed upon a new eligible support structure or qualifies as a collocation, an application proposing the “replacement” of the underlying support structure qualifies as a new pole proposal.

     “RF” means radio frequency.

     “Small cell” means a low-powered antenna (node) that has a range of ten meters to two kilometers. The nodes of a “small cell” may or may not be connected by fiber. “Small,” for purposes of “small cell,” refers to the area covered, not the size of the facility. “Small cell” includes, but is not limited to, devices generally known as microcells, picocells and femtocells.

     “Small cell network” means a network of small cells.

     “Spectrum Act” means Section 6409(a) of the Middle Class Tax Relief Act and Job Creation Act of 2012, 47 U.S.C. Section 1455(a).

     “Substantial change” has the same meaning as “substantial change” as defined by the FCC at 47 CFR 1.40001(b)(7). Notwithstanding the definition above, if an existing pole-mounted cabinet is proposed to be replaced with an underground cabinet at a facility where there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, such modification may be deemed a non-substantial change, in the discretion of the director and based upon his or her reasonable consideration of the cabinet’s proximity to residential view sheds, interference to public views and/or degradation of concealment elements. If undergrounding the cabinet is technologically infeasible such that it is materially inhibitive to the project, the director may allow for a ground mounted cabinet. A modification or collocation results is a “substantial change” to the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure if it does any of the following:

     1.     It increases the height of the structure by more than ten percent or more than ten feet, whichever is greater;

     2.     It involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet;

     3.     It involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets. However, for towers and base stations located in the public rights-of-way, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure;

     4.     It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site. For purposes of this subsection, excavation outside the current site occurs where excavation more than twelve feet from the eligible support structure is proposed;

     5.     It defeats the concealment or stealthing elements of the eligible support structure; or

     6.     It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs 1 through 4 of this definition.

     7.     For all proposed collocations and modifications, a substantial change occurs when:

     a.     The proposed collocation or modification involves more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four equipment cabinets;

     b.     The proposed collocation or modification would defeat the concealment elements of the support structure; or

     c.     The proposed collocation or modification violates a prior condition of approval; provided, however, that the collocation need not comply with any prior condition of approval that is inconsistent with the thresholds for a substantial change described in this section.

     The thresholds and conditions for a “substantial change” described in this section are disjunctive such that the violation of any individual threshold or condition results in a substantial change. The height and width thresholds for a substantial change described in this section are cumulative for each individual support structure. The cumulative limit is measured from the physical dimensions of the original structure for base stations, and for all other facilities sites in the PROW from the smallest physical dimensions that existed on or after February 22, 2012, inclusive of originally approved-appurtenances and any modifications that were approved prior to that date.

     “Support structure” means a tower, pole, base station or other structure used to support a wireless telecommunications facility.

     “SWF” means a “small wireless facility” as defined by the FCC in 47 CFR 1.6002(l) as may be amended, which are personal wireless services facilities that meet all the following conditions that, solely for convenience, have been set forth below:

     1.     The facilities:

     a.     Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure fifty (50) feet or less in height, including antennas, as defined in Title 47 CFR Section 1.1320(d), or

     b.     Is mounted on an existing or proposed structure no more than ten percent taller than other adjacent structures, or

     c.     Does not extend an existing structure on which it is located to a height of more than fifty (50) feet or by more than ten percent, whichever is greater;

     2.     Each antenna associated with the deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment (as defined in the definition of antenna in 47 CFR Section 1.1320(d)), is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

     3.     All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than twenty-eight (28) cubic feet in volume;

     4.     The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47 CFR Part 17;

     5.     The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under Title 36 CFR Section 800.16(x); and

     6.     The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in Title 47 CFR Section 1.1307(b).

     “SWF Regulations” means those regulations adopted by the city council pursuant to City Council Resolution No. 19-08, implementing the provisions of this chapter applicable to SWFs and further regulations and standards applicable to SWFs.

     “Telecommunications tower” or “tower” bears the meaning ascribed to wireless towers by the FCC in 47 CFR Section 1.40001(b)(9), including, without limitation, a freestanding mast, pole, monopole, guyed tower, lattice tower, free standing tower or other structure designed and built for the sole or primary purpose of supporting any FCC-licensed or authorized antennas and their associated facilities, including structures that are constructed for wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul, and the associated site. This definition does not include utility poles.

     “Transmission equipment” means equipment that facilitates transmission for any FCC-licensed or authorized wireless communication service, including, but not limited to, radio transceivers, antennas, coaxial or fiber-optic cable, and regular and backup power supply. The term includes equipment associated with wireless communications services including, but not limited to, private, broadcast, and public safety services, as well as unlicensed wireless services and fixed wireless services such as microwave backhaul.

     “Utility pole” means any pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission. A telecommunications tower is not a utility pole.

     “Wireless telecommunications facility” means equipment and network components such as antennas, accessory equipment, support structures, and emergency power systems that are integral to providing wireless telecommunications services. Exceptions: The term “wireless telecommunications facility” does not apply to the following:

     1.     Government-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

     2.     Emergency medical care provider-owned and operated telecommunications facilities.

     3.     Mobile services providing public information coverage of news events of a temporary nature.

     4.     Any wireless telecommunications facilities exempted from this code by federal law or state law.

     “Wireless telecommunications services” means the provision of services using a wireless telecommunications facility or a collocation facility, and shall include, but not limited to, the following services: personal wireless services as defined in the federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 at 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C) or its successor statute, cellular service, personal communication service, and/or data radio telecommunications.

     “WTFP” means a “wireless telecommunications facility permit” required by this chapter, which may be categorized as either a Major WTFP or an Administrative WTFP. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.030 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter applies to the siting, construction or modification of any and all wireless telecommunications facilities proposed to be located in the public right-of-way as follows:

     B.     Pre-Existing Facilities in the ROW. Nothing in this chapter shall validate any existing illegal or unpermitted wireless facilities. All existing wireless facilities shall comply with and receive a wireless encroachment permit, when applicable, to be considered legal and conforming.

     C.     This chapter does not apply to the following:

     1.     Amateur radio facilities;

     2.     OTARD antennas;

     3.     Facilities owned and operated by the city for its use or for public safety purposes;

     4.     Any entity legally entitled to an exemption pursuant to state or federal law or governing franchise agreement, excepting that to the extent such the terms of state or federal law, or franchise agreement, are preemptive of the terms of this chapter, then the terms of this chapter shall be severable to the extent of such preemption and all remaining regulations shall remain in full force and effect.

     5.     Installation of a COW or a similar structure for a temporary period in connection with an emergency or event at the discretion of the director, but no longer than required for the emergency or event, provided that installation does not involve excavation, movement, or removal of existing facilities.

     D.    Public Use. Except as otherwise provided by state or federal law, any use of the PROW authorized pursuant to this chapter will be subordinate to the city’s use and use by the public. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.040 Wireless telecommunications facility permit requirements.
     A.    Administration. The director is responsible for administering this chapter. As part of the administration of this chapter, the director may:

     1.     Interpret the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     Develop and implement standards governing the placement and modification of wireless telecommunications facilities consistent with the requirements of this chapter, including regulations governing collocation and resolution of conflicting applications for placement of wireless facilities;

     3.     Develop and implement acceptable design, location and development standards for wireless telecommunications facilities in the PROW, taking into account the zoning districts bounding the PROW;

     4.     Develop forms and procedures for submission of applications for placement or modification of wireless facilities, and proposed changes to any support structure consistent with this chapter;

     5.     Collect, as a condition of the completeness of any application, any fee established by this chapter;

     6.     Establish deadlines for submission of information related to an application, and extend or shorten deadlines where appropriate and consistent with federal laws and regulations;

     7.     Issue any notices of incompleteness, requests for information, or conduct or commission such studies as may be required to determine whether a permit should be issued;

     8.     Require, as part of, and as a condition of completeness of any application, that an applicant for a wireless encroachment permit send notice to members of the public that may be affected by the placement or modification of the wireless facility and proposed changes to any support structure;

     9.     Subject to appeal as provided herein, determine whether to approve, approve subject to conditions, or deny an application; and

     10.   Take such other steps as may be required to timely act upon applications for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities, including issuing written decisions and entering into agreements to mutually extend the time for action on an application.

     B.     Administrative Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permits (“Administrative WTFP”).

     1.     An Administrative WTFP, subject to the director’s approval, may be issued for wireless telecommunications facilities, collocations, modifications or replacements to an eligible support structure that meet the following criteria:

     a.     The proposal is determined to be for an SWF; or

     b.     The proposal is determined to be an eligible facilities request; or

     c.     Both.

     2.     In the event that the director determines that any application submitted for an Administrative WTFP does not meet the administrative permit criteria of this chapter, the director shall convert the application to a Major WTFP. Except in the case of an eligible facilities request, the director may refer, in his or her discretion, any application for an Administrative WTFP to the Public Works and Traffic Commission for hearing.

     C.     Major Wireless Telecommunications Facilities Permit (“Major WTFP”). All other new wireless telecommunications facilities or replacements, collocations, or modifications to a wireless telecommunications facility that are not qualified for an Administrative WTFP shall require a Major WTFP subject to Public Works and Traffic Commission hearing and approval unless otherwise provided for in this chapter.

     D.    Special Provisions for SWFs; SWF Regulations. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter as provided herein, all SWFs are subject to a permit as specified in the SWF Regulations, which is adopted and may be amended by city council resolution. All SWFs, shall comply with the SWF Regulations, as they may be amended from time to time.

     1.     The SWF Regulations are intended to be constructed in consistency with, and addition to, the terms and provisions of this chapter. To the extent general provisions of this chapter are lawfully applicable to SWFs, such terms shall apply unless in contradiction to more specific terms set forth in the SWF Regulations, in which case the more specific terms of the SWF Regulations shall control.

     E.     Other Permits Required. In addition to any permit that may be required under this chapter, the applicant must obtain all other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, or state or federal agencies. Any permit granted under this chapter is subject to the conditions and/or requirements of other required prior permits or other approvals from other city departments, state or federal agencies. Building and encroachment permits, and all city standards and requirements therefor, are applicable.

     F.     Eligible Applicants. Only applicants who have been granted the right to enter the PROW pursuant to state or federal law, or who have entered into a franchise agreement with the city permitting them to use the PROW, shall be eligible for a WTFP pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

 

8.03.050 Application for wireless telecommunications facility permits.
     A.    Generally. Unless the SWF Regulations specifically provide otherwise, the applicant shall submit a paper copy and an electronic copy of any application, amendments, or supplements to a WTFP application, or responses to requests for information regarding a WTFP, in accordance with the provisions of this section. SWF applications shall be governed by any additional terms set forth in the SWF Regulations, and in the event of an inconsistency between the provisions of this section and the terms of the SWF Regulations, the Regulations shall control.

     1.     All applications for WTFPs shall be initially submitted to the director. In addition to the information required of an applicant for an encroachment permit or any other permit required by this code, each applicant shall fully and completely submit to the city a written application on a form prepared by the director and published on the city’s website.

     2.     Application Submittal Appointment. All WTFP applications must be submitted to the director at a pre-scheduled application submission appointment. City staff will endeavor to provide applicants with an appointment within five business days after receipt of a written request. A WTFP application will only be reviewed upon submission of a complete application therefor.

     3.     If the wireless telecommunications facility will also require the installation of fiber, cable or coaxial cable, such cable installations shall be included within the application form and processed in conjunction with the proposal for vertical support structure(s). Applicants shall simultaneously request fiber installation or other cable installation when seeking to install antennas in the PROW. Standalone applications for the installation of fiber, cable or coaxial cable, or accessory equipment designed to serve an antenna must include all features of the wireless telecommunications facility proposed.

     B.     Application Contents—Administrative WTFPs. The content of the application form for facilities subject to an Administrative WTFP shall be determined by the director, but at a minimum shall include the following:

     1.     The name of the applicant, its telephone number and contact information, and if the applicant is a wireless infrastructure provider, the name and contact information for the wireless service provider that will be using the wireless facility.

     2.     The name of the owner of the structure, if different from the applicant, and a signed and notarized owner’s authorization for use of the structure.

     3.     A complete description of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and any and all work that will be required to install or modify it, including, but not limited to, detail regarding proposed excavations, if any; detailed site plans showing the location of the wireless telecommunications facility, and dimensioned drawings with specifications for each element of the wireless facility, clearly describing the site and all structures and facilities at the site before and after installation or modification; and a dimensioned map identifying and describing the distance to the nearest residential dwelling unit and any historical structure within five hundred (500) feet of the facility. Before and after three hundred sixty (360) degree photo simulations must be provided.

     4.     Documentation sufficient to show that the proposed facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of the municipal code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards.

     5.     A copy of the lease or other agreement, if any, between the applicant and the owner of the property to which the proposed facility will be attached.

     6.     If the application is for an SWF, the application shall state as such and shall explain why the proposed facility meets the definition of an SWF.

     7.     If the application is for an eligible facilities request, the application shall state as such and must contain information sufficient to show that the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request, which information must demonstrate that the eligible support structure was not constructed or deployed without proper local review, was not required to undergo local review, or involves equipment that was not properly approved. This shall include copies of all applicable local permits in-effect and as-built drawings of the current site. Before and after three hundred sixty (360) degree photo simulations must be provided, as well as documentation sufficient to show that the proposed facility will comply with generally-applicable health and safety provisions of the municipal code and the FCC’s radio frequency emissions standards.

     8.     Proof of neighborhood notification to all property owners within a four hundred (400) foot radius of the proposed installation, in accordance with City Council Resolution No. 19-08.

     a.     Proof of the notification must include:

     i.      A site plan including proposed installation specifications.

     ii.     Proof of mailing of the notifications.

     iii.    A list of properties to which the notification was mailed.

     iv.    Written approval from the owner of the facility that will be used in mounting the wireless equipment.

     9.     If the pole is used by the city to mount decorative fixtures such as banners and flags, regardless of pole ownership, then wind load calculations that account for the decorative fixtures must be included in the submittal package.

     10.   For SWFs, the application must contain all additional application information, if any, required by the SWF Regulations.

     11.   The Administrative WTFP applicant shall submit a mailing list and envelopes, stamped and addressed, for all properties and record owners of properties within four hundred (400) feet of the project location. Insufficient postage and/or illegible addressing shall be a basis to deem the application incomplete.

     12.   If the applicant contends that denial of the application would prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of service in violation of federal law, or otherwise violate applicable law, the application must provide all information on which the applicant relies on in support of that claim. Applicants are not permitted to supplement this showing if doing so would prevent the city from complying with any deadline for action on an application.

     C.     Application Contents—Major WTFPs. The director shall develop an application form and make it available to applicants upon request and post the application form on the city’s website. The application form for a Major WTFP shall require the following information, in addition to all other information determined necessary by the director:

     1.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant, owner and the operator of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility.

     2.     If the applicant does not, or will not, own the support structure, the applicant shall provide a duly-executed letter of authorization from the owner of the structure. If the owner of the support structure is the applicant, but such owner/applicant will not directly provide wireless telecommunications services, the owner/applicant shall provide a duly-executed letter of authorization from the person(s) or entity(ies) that will provide those services.

     3.     A full written description of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and its purpose.

     4.     Detailed engineering plans of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and related report prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state documenting the following:

     a.     Height/elevation, diameter, layout and design of the facility, including technical engineering specifications, economic and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design, together with evidence that demonstrates that the proposed facility has been designed to be the least intrusive equipment within the particular technology available to the carrier for deployment.

     b.     A photograph and model name and number of each piece of the facility or proposed antenna array and accessory equipment included.

     c.     Power output and operating frequency for the proposed antenna array (including any antennas existing as of the date of the application serving the carrier identified in the application).

     d.     Total anticipated capacity of the wireless telecommunications facility for the subject carrier, indicating the number and types of antennas and power and frequency ranges, which can be accommodated.

     e.     Sufficient evidence of the structural integrity of the support structure as required by the city.

     5.     A written description identifying the geographic service area to be served by the proposed WTFP, plus geographic or propagation maps showing applicant’s service area objectives.

     6.     A justification study which includes the rationale for selecting the proposed wireless telecommunication facility design, support structure and location. A detailed explanation of the applicant’s coverage objectives that the proposal would serve, and how the proposed use is the least intrusive means for the applicant to cover such objectives. This shall include:

     a.     A meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviate are the least noncompliant or intrusive location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law).

     b.     Said study shall include all eligible support structures and/or alternative sites evaluated for the proposed WTFP, and why said alternatives are not reasonably available, technically feasible options that most closely conform to the local values. The alternative site analysis must include the consideration of at least two eligible support structures; or, if no eligible support facilities are analyzed as alternatives, why no eligible support facilities are reasonably available or technically feasible.

     c.     If a portion of the proposed facility lies within a jurisdiction other than the city’s jurisdiction, the applicant must demonstrate that alternative options for locating the project fully within one jurisdiction or the other is not a viable option. Applicant must demonstrate that it has obtained all approvals from the adjacent jurisdiction for the installation of the extra-jurisdictional portion of the project.

     7.     Site plan(s) to scale, specifying and depicting the exact proposed location of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility, location of accessory equipment in relation to the support structure, access or utility easements, existing utilities, adjacent land uses, and showing compliance with all design and safety requirements set forth in this chapter.

     8.     A completed environmental assessment application, or in the alternative any and all documentation identifying the proposed WTFP as exempt from environmental review (under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code 21000–21189, the National Environmental Policy Act, 42 U.S.C. Section 4321 et seq., or related environmental laws). Notwithstanding any determination of environmental exemption issued by another governmental entity, the city reserves its right to exercise its rights as a responsible agency to review de novo the environmental impacts of any WTFP application.

     9.     An accurate visual impact analysis showing the maximum silhouette, view-shed analysis, color and finish palette and proposed screening for the wireless telecommunications facility, including scaled photo simulations from at least three different angles.

     10.   Completion of the radio frequency (RF) emissions exposure guidelines checklist contained in Appendix A to the FCC’s “Local Government Official’s Guide to Transmitting Antenna RF Emission Safety” to determine whether the facility will be “categorically excluded” as that term is used by the FCC.

     11.   For a facility that is not categorically excluded under the FCC regulations for RF emissions, the applicant shall submit an RF exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer acceptable to the city that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any facilities that contribute to the cumulative exposure in the subject area, will comply with applicable federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power “ERP”) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits that show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the controlled/occupational limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

     12.   Copies of any documents that the applicant is required to file pursuant to Federal Aviation Administration regulations for the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

     13.   A noise study prepared by a qualified acoustic engineer documenting that the level of noise to be emitted by the proposed wireless telecommunications facility will comply with this code, including Chapter 5.02 (Noise) of this code.

     14.   A traffic control plan when the proposed installation is on any street in a non-residential zone. The city shall have the discretion to require a traffic control plan when the applicant seeks to use large equipment (e.g. crane).

     15.   A scaled conceptual landscape plan showing existing trees and vegetation and all proposed landscaping, concealment, screening and proposed irrigation with a discussion of how the chosen material at maturity will screen the wireless telecommunication facility.

     16.   Certification that applicant is a telephone corporation or a statement providing the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way. If the applicant has a certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN) issued by the California Public Utilities Commission, it shall provide a copy of its CPCN.

     17.   Evidence that the proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in U.S.C., Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii).

     18.   Address labels for use by the city in noticing all property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the proposed wireless telecommunication facility and, if applicable, all public hearing information required by the municipal code for public noticing requirements.

     19.   Any other information and/or studies reasonably determined to be necessary by the director may be required.

     D.    Fees and Deposits Submitted with Application(s). For all WTFPs, application fee(s) shall be required to be submitted with any application, as established by city council resolution and in accordance with California Government Code Section 50030. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no application fee shall be refundable, in whole or in part, to an applicant for a WTFP unless paid as a refundable deposit.

     E.     Independent Expert. The director is authorized to retain on behalf of the city one or more independent, qualified consultant(s) to review any WTFP application. The review is intended to be a review of technical aspects of the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and shall include, but not be limited to, application completeness or accuracy, structural engineering analysis, or compliance with FCC radio frequency emissions standards.

     F.     Costs. Reasonable costs of city staff, consultant and attorney time (including that of the city attorney) pertaining to the review, processing, noticing and hearing procedures directly attributable to a WTFP shall be reimbursable to the city. To this end, the director may require applicants to enter a trust/deposit reimbursement agreement, in a form approved by the city attorney, or other established trust/deposit accounting mechanism for purposes of obtaining an applicant deposit from which the direct costs of city processing of an application may be drawn-down.

     G.    Effect of State or Federal Law on Application Process. In the event a state or federal law prohibits the collection of any information or application conditions required by this section, the director is authorized to omit, modify or add to that request from the city’s application form in consultation with the city attorney. Requests for waivers from any application requirement of this section shall be made in writing to the director or his or her designee. The director may grant a request for waiver if it is demonstrated that, notwithstanding the issuance of a waiver, the city will be provided all information necessary to understand the nature of the construction or other activity to be conducted pursuant to the WTFP sought. All waivers approved pursuant to this subsection shall be: (1) granted only on a case-by-case basis; and (2) narrowly-tailored to minimize deviation from the requirements of the municipal code.

     H.    Applications Deemed Withdrawn. To promote efficient review and timely decisions, any application governed under this chapter will be automatically deemed withdrawn by the applicant when the applicant fails to tender a substantive response to the city on any application within thirty (30) calendar days after the application is deemed incomplete in a written notice to the applicant. The director may, in his or her discretion, grant a written extension for up to an additional thirty (30) calendar days when the applicant submits a written request prior to the 90th day that shows good cause to grant the extension.

     I.      Waiver of Applications Superseded by Submission of New Project. If an applicant submits a WTFP application, but substantially revises the proposed facility during the application process prior to any city hearing or decision on such application, the substantially revised application shall be deemed a new application for all processing purposes, including federal shot clocks, and the prior submittals deemed waived and superseded by the substantially revised application. For purposes of this subparagraph, “substantially revised” means that the project as initially-proposed has been alternately proposed for a location four hundred (400) feet or more from the original proposal or constitutes a substantial change in the dimensions or equipment that was proposed in the original WTFP application.

     J.      Rejection for Incompleteness. WTFPs will be processed, and notices of incompleteness provided, in conformity with state, local, and federal law. If such an application is incomplete, it may be rejected by the director by notifying the applicant in writing and specifying the material omitted from the application. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.060 Review procedure.
     A.    Generally. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be installed and modified in a manner that minimizes risks to public safety and utilizes installation of new support structures or equipment cabinets in the PROW only after all existing and replacement structure options have been exhausted, and where feasible, places equipment underground, and otherwise maintains the integrity and character of the neighborhoods and corridors in which the facilities are located; ensures that installations are subject to periodic review to minimize the intrusion on the PROW; and ensures that the city bears no risk or liability as a result of the installations, and that such use does not inconvenience the public, interfere with the primary uses of the ROW, or hinder the ability of the city or other government agencies to improve, modify, relocate, abandon, or vacate the PROW or any portion thereof, or to cause the improvement, modification, relocation, vacation, or abandonment of facilities in the PROW.

     B.     Collocation Encouraged. Where the facility site is capable of accommodating a collocated facility upon the same site in a manner consistent with the permit conditions for the existing facility, the owner and operator of the existing facility shall allow collocation of third-party facilities, provided the parties can mutually agree upon reasonable terms and conditions.

     C.     Findings Required for Approval.

     1.     Administrative WTFP Applications for SWFs. For WTFP applications proposing an SWF, the director shall approve such application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, all of the following findings can be made:

     a.     The facility qualifies as an SWF; and

     b.     The facility meets all standards, requirements and further findings as may be specified in the SWF Regulations; and

     c.     The facility is not detrimental to the public health, safety, and welfare; and

     d.     The facility meets applicable requirements and standards of state and federal law.

     2.     Administrative WTFP Applications for Eligible Facility Requests. For WTFP applications proposing an eligible facilities request, the director shall approve such application if, on the basis of the application and other materials or evidence provided in review thereof, all of the following findings can be made:

     a.     That the application qualifies as an eligible facilities request; and

     b.     That the proposed facility will comply with all generally-applicable laws.

     3.     Major WTFP Applications. No Major WTFP shall be granted unless all of the following findings are made by the applicable decision-maker:

     a.     If applicable, all notices required for the proposed WTFP have been given, including the inclusion, or placement on-site, of photo simulations for the proposed facility.

     b.     The proposed wireless telecommunications facility has been designed and located in compliance with all applicable provisions of this chapter.

     c.     If applicable, the applicant has demonstrated its inability to locate on an eligible support structure.

     d.     The applicant has provided sufficient evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to state or federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise agreement with the city permitting them to use the public right-of-way.

     e.     The applicant has demonstrated the proposed installation is designed such that the proposed installation represents the least intrusive means possible, supported by factual evidence and a meaningful comparative analysis to show that all alternative locations and designs identified in the application review process were technically infeasible or not reasonably available.

     D.    Notice; Decisions. The provisions in this section describe the procedures for the approval process, any required notice and public hearings for a WTFP application.

     1.     Administrative WTFP Applications. Notice of a WTFP application for an SWF shall be mailed to owners and occupants of real property surrounding the proposed SWF site in the manner specified in the SWF Regulations. Applications qualifying for eligible facilities requests shall not require notice.

     2.     Major WTFP Applications. Any Major WTFP application shall require notice and a public hearing. Notice of such hearing shall be provided in accordance with Government Code Section 65091. Public notices shall include color photo simulations from three different angles depicting the wireless telecommunication facility as proposed to be considered by the Public Works and Traffic Commission. If the application proposes the use of an existing or replacement eligible support structure, such simulations shall be posted upon the proposed support structure for a period of at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of approval; such posted simulations shall remain in-place until final decision on the application is reached.

     3.     Written Decision Required for All WTFP Determinations. Unless otherwise specified for SWF’s in the SWF Regulations, all final decisions made pursuant to this chapter, including those for administratively-processed permits and eligible facilities requests, shall be in writing and based on substantial evidence in the written administrative record. Within five days after any decision to grant, approve, deny or conditionally grant a WTFP application, the director shall provide written notice including the following:

     a.     A general explanation of the decision, including the findings required for the decision, if any, and how those findings were supported or not supported by substantial evidence;

     b.     A general description of the property involved;

     c.     Information about applicable rights to appeal the decision and explanation of how that right may be exercised; and

     d.     To be given by first class mail to:

     i.      The project applicant and property owner,

     ii.     Any person who submitted written comments concerning the WTFP,

     iii.    Any person who has filed a written request with the city to receive such notice, and

     iv.    Any homeowner association on file with the city that has jurisdiction over the WTFP site.

     4.     Once a WTFP is approved, no changes shall be made to the approved plans without review and approval in accordance with this chapter.

     E.     Appeals.

     1.     Administrative WTFP Appeals. Any person claiming to be adversely affected by an administrative decision pursuant to this chapter may appeal such decision. The appeal will be considered by a hearing officer appointed by the city manager. The hearing officer may decide the issues de novo and whose written decision will be the final decision of the city. An appeal by a wireless infrastructure provider must be taken jointly with the wireless service provider that intends to use the wireless facility. Because Section 332(c)(7) of the Telecommunications Act preempts local decisions premised directly or indirectly on the environmental effects of radio frequency (RF) emissions, appeals of the administrative decision premised on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions will not be considered.

     a.     Where the administrative decision grants an application based on a finding that denial would result in a prohibition or effective prohibition under applicable federal law, the decision shall be automatically appealed to the hearing officer. All appeals must be filed within two business days of the written administrative decision, unless the director extends the time therefor. An extension may not be granted where extension would result in approval of the application by operation of law.

     b.     Any appeal shall be conducted so that a timely written decision may be issued in accordance with applicable law. For SWFs, the appeal shall be conducted in accordance with any procedures adopted in the SWF Regulations.

     2.     Appeals on Major WTFPs shall proceed as provided in accordance with the appeal provisions in Title 11 of the municipal code, Section 11.49.010 (Appeals). The appellate authority may hear the appeal de novo.

     F.     Notice of Shot Clock Expiration. The city acknowledges there are federal and state shot clocks which may be applicable to a proposed wireless telecommunications facility. That is, federal and state law provide time periods in which the city must approve or deny a proposed wireless telecommunications facility. As such, the applicant is required to provide the city written notice of the expiration of any shot clock, which the applicant shall ensure is received by the city (e.g. overnight mail) no later than twenty (20) days prior to the expiration. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.070 Design and development standards.
     A.    SWF Design and Development Standards. SWFs are subject to those design and development standards and conditions of approval set forth in the SWF Regulations. The city’s grant of a WTFP for an SWF does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge any FCC orders or rules related to small cell facilities, or any modification to those FCC orders or rules.

     B.     Eligible Facilities Request Design and Development Standards. Approved eligible facilities requests for which the findings set forth in Section 8.03.060 have been made are subject to the following conditions, unless modified by the approving authority:

     1.     WTFP subject to conditions of underlying permit. Any WTFP granted in response to an application qualifying as an eligible facilities request shall be subject to the terms and conditions of the underlying permit and all such conditions that were applicable to the facility prior to approval of the subject eligible facility request.

     2.     No permit term extension. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit constitutes a federally-mandated modification to the underlying permit or approval for the subject tower or base station. Notwithstanding any permit duration established in another permit condition, the city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request permit will not extend the permit term for the underlying permit or any other underlying regulatory approval, and its term shall have the same term as the underlying permit or other regulatory approval for the subject tower or base station.

     3.     No waiver of standing. The city’s grant or grant by operation of law of an eligible facilities request does not waive, and shall not be construed to waive, any standing by the city to challenge Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, any FCC rules that interpret Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act, or any modification to Section 6409(a) of the Spectrum Act.

     C.     Major WTFP Design and Development Standards. All wireless telecommunications facilities subject to a Major WTFP that are located within the PROW shall be designed and maintained as to minimize visual, noise and other impacts on the surrounding community and shall be planned, designed, located, and erected in accordance with the following standards:

     1.     General Guidelines.

     a.     The applicant shall employ screening, undergrounding and camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in order to ensure that the facility is as visually screened as possible, to prevent the facility from dominating the surrounding area and to minimize significant view impacts from surrounding properties and public views, all in a manner that achieves compatibility with the community and in compliance with this code.

     b.     Screening shall be designed to be architecturally compatible with surrounding structures using appropriate techniques to camouflage, disguise, and/or blend into the environment, including landscaping, color, and other techniques to minimize the facility’s visual impact as well as be compatible with the architectural character of the surrounding buildings or structures in terms of color, size, proportion, style, and quality.

     c.     Wireless telecommunications facilities shall be located consistent with Section 8.03.080 (Location Restrictions) unless an exception is granted.

     2.     Traffic Safety. All facilities shall be designed and located in such a manner as to avoid adverse impacts on traffic safety.

     3.     Blending Methods. All facilities shall have subdued colors and non-reflective materials that blend with the materials and colors of the surrounding area, infrastructure and structures.

     4.     Equipment. The applicant shall use the least visible equipment for the provision of wireless telecommunications services that is technically feasible. Antenna elements shall be flush mounted, to the extent feasible, with all cables and wires clipped-up or otherwise out of public view. All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators or carriers. Unless otherwise provided in this section, antennas shall be situated as close to the ground as technically feasible.

     5.     Support Structures.

     a.     Pole-Mounted Only. Only pole-mounted antennas (excepting wooden poles per subparagraph 5.b below) shall be permitted in the public right-of-way. Mountings to all other forms of support structure in the public right-of-way are prohibited unless an exception pursuant to Section 8.03.080 is granted.

     b.     Utility Poles. Wireless telecommunications facilities shall not be located on wooden poles unless an exception pursuant to Section 8.03.080 is granted. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches above the height of an existing utility pole, nor shall any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole be less than twenty-four (24) feet above any drivable road surface. All installations on utility poles shall fully comply with the California Public Utilities Commission general orders, including, but not limited to, General Order 95, as may be revised or superseded.

     c.     Light Poles. The maximum height of any antenna shall not exceed four feet above the existing height of a light pole. Any portion of the antenna or equipment mounted on a pole shall be no less than sixteen and one half (16½) feet above any drivable road surface.

     d.     Replacement Poles. If an applicant proposes to replace a pole that is an eligible support structure to accommodate the proposed facility, the replacement pole shall be designed to resemble the appearance and dimensions of existing poles near the proposed location, including size, height, color, materials and style to the maximum extent feasible.

     e.     Equipment mounted on a support structure shall not exceed four cubic feet in dimension.

     f.      No new guy wires shall be allowed unless required by other laws or regulations.

     g.     An exception pursuant to Section 8.03.080 shall be required to erect any new support structure (non-eligible support structure) that is not the replacement of an existing eligible support structure.

     h.     As applicable to all new support structures (non-eligible support structures), regardless of location, the following requirements shall apply:

     i.      Such new support structure shall be designed to resemble existing support structures of the same type in the right-of-way near that location, including size, height, color, materials and style, with the exception of any existing structural designs that are scheduled to be removed and not replaced.

     ii.     Such new support structures that are not replacement structures shall be located at least ninety (90) feet from any eligible support structure to the extent feasible.

     iii.    Such new support structures shall eliminate or minimize adverse impacts on views, and shall be located to the extent feasible in an area where there is existing natural or other feature that obscures the view of the new support structure. The applicant shall further employ concealment techniques to blend the new support structure with said features including, but not limited to, the addition of vegetation if feasible.

     iv.    A justification analysis shall be submitted for all new support structures that are not replacements to demonstrate why an eligible support facility cannot be utilized and demonstrating the new structure is the least intrusive means possible, including a demonstration that the new structure is designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed wireless telecommunications facility.

     i.      All cables, including, but not limited to, electrical and utility cables, shall be run within the interior of the support structure and shall be camouflaged or hidden to the fullest extent feasible. For all support structures wherein interior installation is infeasible, conduit and cables attached to the exterior shall be mounted flush thereto and painted to match the structure.

     6.     Space. Each facility shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

     7.     Wind Loads. Each facility shall be properly engineered to withstand wind loads as required by this code or any duly adopted or incorporated code. An evaluation of high wind load capacity shall include the impact of modification of an existing facility.

     8.     Obstructions. Each component part of a facility shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, incommode the public’s use of the right-of-way, or cause safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists.

     9.     Public Facilities. A facility shall not be located within any portion of the public right-of-way interfering with access to a fire hydrant, fire station, fire escape, water valve, underground vault, valve housing structure, or any other public health or safety facility.

     10.   Screening. All ground-mounted facility, pole-mounted equipment, or walls, fences, landscaping or other screening methods shall be installed at least eighteen (18) inches from the curb and gutter flow line.

     11.   Accessory Equipment. Not including the electric meter, all accessory equipment shall be located underground, except as provided below:

     a.     Unless city staff determines that there is no room in the public right-of-way for undergrounding, or that undergrounding is not feasible, an exception pursuant to Section 8.03.080 shall be required in order to place accessory equipment above-ground and concealed with natural or manmade features to the maximum extent possible.

     b.     When above-ground is the only feasible location for a particular type of accessory equipment and will be ground-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure, and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total footprint of fifteen (15) square feet, and shall be fully screened and/or camouflaged, including the use of landscaping, architectural treatment, or acceptable alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be screened and/or camouflaged. Also, while pole-mounted equipment is generally the least favored installation, should pole-mounted equipment be sought, it shall be installed as required in this chapter.

     c.     In locations where homes are only along one side of a street, above-ground accessory equipment shall not be installed directly in front of a residence. Such above-ground accessory equipment shall be installed along the side of the street with no homes.

     12.   Landscaping. Where appropriate, each facility shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs. Additional landscaping shall be planted, irrigated and maintained by applicant where such landscaping is deemed necessary by the city to provide screening or to conceal the facility.

     13.   Signage. No facility shall bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning or other signage required by law or permitted by the city.

     14.   Lighting.

     a.     No facility may be illuminated unless specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency. Beacon lights are not permitted unless required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other government agency.

     b.     Legally required lightning arresters and beacons shall be included when calculating the height of facilities such as towers, lattice towers and monopoles.

     c.     Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.

     d.     Unless otherwise required under FAA or FCC regulations, applicants may install only timed or motion-sensitive light controllers and lights, and must install such lights so as to avoid illumination impacts to adjacent properties to the maximum extent feasible. The city may, in its discretion, exempt an applicant from the foregoing requirement when the applicant demonstrates a substantial public safety need.

     e.     The applicant shall submit a lighting study which shall be prepared by a qualified lighting professional to evaluate potential impacts to adjacent properties. Should no lighting be proposed, no lighting study shall be required.

     15.   Noise.

     a.     Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of seven p.m. and seven a.m.

     b.     At no time shall equipment noise from any facility exceed the noise levels permitted by Chapter 5.02 of this code.

     16.   Security. Each facility shall be designed to be resistant to, and minimize opportunities for, unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions that would result in hazardous situations, visual blight or attractive nuisances. The director or the approving city body, as applicable, may require the provision of warning signs, fencing, anti-climbing devices, or other techniques to prevent unauthorized access and vandalism when, because of their location and/or accessibility, a facility has the potential to become an attractive nuisance. Additionally, no lethal devices or elements shall be installed as a security device.

     17.   Modification. Consistent with current state and federal laws and if permissible under the same, at the time of modification of a wireless telecommunications facility, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

     18.   The installation and construction approved by a wireless telecommunications facility permit shall begin within one year after its approval or it will expire without further action by the city.

     19.   Conditions of Approval. All Major WTFPs shall be subject to such conditions of approval as reasonably imposed by the director or the approving city body, as applicable, as well as any modification of the conditions of approval deemed necessary by the director or the approving city body. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.080 Location restrictions—Exceptions for noncompliant major wireless telecommunications facilities.
     A.    Locations Requiring an Exception. Major WTFPs are strongly disfavored in certain areas and on certain support structures. Therefore the following locations are permitted only when an exception has been granted pursuant to subsection B hereof:

     1.     Public right-of-way within those zones as identified in the general plan as residential zones;

     2.     Public right-of-way within those zones as identified in the general plan as historic districts, or within one hundred (100) feet of designated historic buildings.

     B.     Required Findings for an Exception on Major WTFPs. For any Major WTFP requiring an “exception” under this chapter, no such exception shall be granted unless the applicant demonstrates with clear and convincing evidence all of the following:

     1.     The proposed wireless facility qualifies as a “personal wireless services facility” as defined in U.S.C., Title 47, Section 332(c)(7)(C)(ii);

     2.     The applicant has provided the city with a clearly defined significant gap (as established under state and federal law) and a clearly defined potential site search area.

     a.     In the event the applicant seeks to install a wireless telecommunications facility to address service coverage concerns, full-color signal propagation maps with objective units of signal strength measurement that show the applicant’s current service coverage levels from all adjacent wireless telecommunications facilities without the proposed facility, predicted service coverage levels from all adjacent facilities serving applicant with the proposed facility, and predicted service coverage levels from the proposed facility without all adjacent facilities.

     b.     In the event the applicant seeks to address service capacity concerns, a written explanation and propagation maps identifying the existing facilities with service capacity issues together with competent evidence to demonstrate the inability of those facilities to meet capacity demands.

     3.     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why any alternative location(s) or design(s) suggested by the city or otherwise identified in the administrative record, including, but not limited to, potential alternatives identified at any public meeting or hearing, are not technically feasible or reasonably available; and

     4.     The applicant has provided the city with a meaningful comparative analysis that includes the factual reasons why the proposed location and design deviates is the least noncompliant location and design necessary to reasonably achieve the applicant’s reasonable objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law).

     5.     The applicant has demonstrated that strict compliance with any provision in this chapter for a Major WTFP would effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services.

     C.     Scope. The Public Works and Traffic Commission or director, as applicable, shall limit an exemption for a Major WTFP to the extent to which the applicant demonstrates such exemption is necessary to reasonably achieve its objectives of covering an established significant gap (as established under state and federal law). The Public Works and Traffic Commission or director, as applicable, may adopt conditions of approval as reasonably necessary to promote the purposes in this chapter and protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.090 Operation and maintenance standards.
All wireless telecommunications facilities must comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

     A.    The permittee shall at all times maintain compliance with all applicable federal, state and local laws, regulations and other rules, including, without limitation, those applying to use of the PROW. The permittee shall ensure that all equipment and other improvements to be constructed and/or installed in connection with the approved WTFP are maintained in a manner that is not detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, and general welfare and that the aesthetic appearance is continuously preserved, and substantially the same as shown in the approved plans at all times relevant to the WTFP.

     B.     Unless otherwise provided herein, all necessary repairs and restoration shall be completed by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent at its sole cost within forty-eight (48) hours:

     1.     After discovery of the need by the permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent; or

     2.     After permittee, owner, operator or any designated maintenance agent receives notification from the city.

     C.     Insurance. The permittee shall obtain and maintain throughout the term of the permit a type and amount of insurance as specified by city’s risk management. The relevant policy(ies) shall name the city, its elected/appointed officials, commission members, officers, representatives, agents, and employees as additional insured. The permittee shall use its best efforts to provide thirty (30) days prior notice to the director of the cancellation or material modification of any applicable insurance policy.

     D.    Indemnities. The permittee and, if applicable, the owner of the property upon which the wireless facility is installed shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its agents, officers, officials, and employees: (1) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and from any and all claims, demands, law suits, writs of mandamus, and other actions or proceedings brought against the city or its agents, officers, officials, or employees to challenge, attack, seek to modify, set aside, void or annul the city’s approval of the permit; and (2) from any and all damages, liabilities, injuries, losses, costs, and expenses, and any and all claims, demands, law suits, or causes of action and other actions or proceedings of any kind or form, whether for personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with the activities or performance of the permittee or, if applicable, the private property owner or any of each one’s agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors, or independent contractors. In the event the city becomes aware of any such actions or claims the city shall promptly notify the permittee and, if applicable, the private property owner and shall reasonably cooperate in the defense. The city shall have the right to approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld, the legal counsel providing the city’s defense, and the property owner and/or permittee (as applicable) shall reimburse the city for any costs and expenses directly and necessarily incurred by the city in the course.

     E.     Performance Bond. Prior to issuance of a wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall file with the city, and shall maintain in good standing throughout the term of the approval, a performance bond or other surety or another form of security for the removal of the facility in the event that the use is abandoned or the permit expires, or is revoked, or is otherwise terminated. The security shall be in the amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the cost of removal of the facility as specified in the application for the WTFP or as that amount may be modified by the director in the permit based on the characteristics of the installation. The permittee shall reimburse the city for staff time associated with the processing and tracking of the bond, based on the hourly rate adopted by the city council. Reimbursement shall be paid when the security is posted and during each administrative review.

     F.     Adverse Impacts on Adjacent Properties. Permittee shall undertake all reasonable efforts to avoid undue adverse impacts to adjacent properties and/or uses that may arise from the construction, operation, maintenance, modification, and removal of the facility. All facilities, including each piece of equipment, shall be located and placed in a manner so as to not interfere with the use of the PROW, impede the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, impair the primary use and purpose of poles/signs/traffic signals or other infrastructure, interfere with outdoor dining areas or emergency facilities, or otherwise obstruct the accessibility of the PROW.

     G.    Contact Information. Each permittee of a wireless telecommunications facility shall provide the director with the name, address and twenty-four (24)-hour local or toll free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator and the agent responsible for the maintenance of the facility (“contact information”). Contact information shall be updated within seven days of any change.

     H.    All facilities, including, but not limited to, telecommunication towers, poles, accessory equipment, lighting, fences, walls, shields, cabinets, artificial foliage or camouflage, and the facility site shall be maintained in good condition, including ensuring the facilities are reasonably free of:

     1.     Subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to city streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems (water, sewer, storm drains, gas, oil, electrical, etc.) that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation and/or maintenance of a wireless facility in the PROW;

     2.     General dirt and grease;

     3.     Chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint;

     4.     Rust and corrosion;

     5.     Cracks, dents, and discoloration;

     6.     Missing, discolored or damaged artificial foliage or other camouflage;

     7.     Graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris. All graffiti on facilities must be removed at the sole expense of the permittee within forty-eight (48) hours after notification from the city.

     8.     Broken and misshapen structural parts; and

     9.     Any damage from any cause.

     I.      All trees, foliage or other landscaping elements approved as part of the facility shall be maintained in neat, safe and good condition at all times, and the permittee, owner and operator of the facility shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping. No amendment to any approved landscaping plan may be made until it is submitted to and approved by the director.

     J.      The permittee shall replace its facilities, after obtaining all required permits, if maintenance or repair is not sufficient to return the facility to the condition it was in at the time of installation.

     K.    Each facility shall be operated and maintained to comply at all conditions of approval. The permittee, when directed by the city, must perform an inspection of the facility and submit a report to the director on the condition of the facility to include any identified concerns and corrective action taken. Additionally, as the city performs maintenance on city-owned infrastructure, additional maintenance concerns may be identified. These will be reported to the permittee. The city shall give the permittee thirty (30) days to correct the identified maintenance concerns after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which could include revocation of the permit. The burden is on the permittee to demonstrate that it complies with the requirements herein. Prior to issuance of a permit under this chapter, the owner of the facility shall sign an affidavit attesting to understanding the city’s requirement for performance of annual inspections and reporting.

     L.     All facilities permitted pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

     M.    The permittee is responsible for obtaining power to the facility and for the cost of electrical usage.

     N.    Failure to comply with the city’s adopted noise standard after written notice and reasonable opportunity to cure have been given shall be grounds for the city to revoke the permit.

     O.    Interference.

     1.     The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement, or property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement, or property. No structure, improvement, or property owned by the city shall be moved to accommodate a permitted activity or encroachment, unless the city determines that such movement will not adversely affect the city or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the city’s structure, improvement, or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to a wireless encroachment permit, the permittee shall provide the city with documentation establishing to the city’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement, or property within the PROW or city utility easement to be affected by permittee’s facilities.

     2.     The facility shall not damage or interfere in any way with city property, the city’s operations or the operations of prior-existing, third party installations. The city will reasonably cooperate with the permittee and/or carrier to carry out such activities as are necessary to correct the interference.

     a.     Signal Interference. The permittee shall correct any such interference within twenty-four (24) hours of written notification of the interference. Upon the expiration of the twenty-four (24)-hour cure period and until the cause of the interference is eliminated, the permittee shall cease operation of any facility causing such interference until such interference is cured.

     b.     Physical Interference. The city shall give the permittee thirty (30) days to correct the interference after which the city reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, which could include revocation of the permit.

     3.     The city at all times reserves the right to take any action it deems necessary, in its sole discretion, to repair, maintain, alter, or improve the sites. Such actions may temporarily interfere with the operation of the facility. The city will in all cases, other than emergencies, give the applicant thirty (30) days written notification of such planned, non-emergency actions.

     P.     RF Exposure Compliance. All facilities must comply with all standards and regulations of the FCC and any other state or federal government agency with the authority to regulate RF exposure standards. After transmitter and antenna system optimization, but prior to unattended operations of the facility, the permittee or its representative must conduct on-site post-installation RF emissions testing to demonstrate actual compliance with the FCC Office of Engineering and Technology Bulletin 65 RF emissions safety rules for general population/uncontrolled RF exposure in all sectors. For this testing, the transmitter shall be operating at maximum operating power, and the testing shall occur outwards to a distance where the RF emissions no longer exceed the uncontrolled/general population limit.

     1.     Testing of any equipment shall take place on weekdays only, and only between the hours of eight-thirty a.m. and four-thirty p.m., except that testing is prohibited on holidays that fall on a weekday. In addition, testing is prohibited on weekend days.

     Q.    Records. The permittee must maintain complete and accurate copies of all permits and other regulatory approvals issued in connection with the facility, which includes, without limitation, this approval, the approved plans and photo simulations incorporated into this approval, all conditions associated with this approval and any ministerial permits or approvals issued in connection with this approval. In the event that the permittee does not maintain such records as required in this condition or fails to produce true and complete copies of such records within a reasonable time after a written request from the city, any ambiguities or uncertainties that would be resolved through an inspection of the missing records will be construed against the permittee.

     R.     Attorney’s Fees. In the event the city determines that it is necessary to take legal action to enforce any of these conditions, or to revoke a permit, and such legal action is taken, the permittee shall be required to pay any and all costs of such legal action, including reasonable attorney’s fees, incurred by the city, even if the matter is not prosecuted to a final judgment or is amicably resolved, unless the city should otherwise agree with permittee to waive said fees or any part thereof. The foregoing shall not apply if the permittee prevails in the enforcement proceeding. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.100 No dangerous condition or obstructions allowed.
     No person shall install, use or maintain any wireless telecommunications facility that in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public right-of-way, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers or is reasonably likely to endanger the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other governmental use, or when such facility unreasonably interferes with or unreasonably impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic including any legally parked or stopped vehicle, the ingress into or egress from any residence or place of business, the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes, permitted sidewalk dining, permitted street furniture or other objects permitted at or near said location. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.110 Nonexclusive grant—No possessory interests.
     A.    No permit or approval granted under this chapter shall confer any exclusive right, privilege, license or franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the city for any purpose whatsoever. Further, no approval shall be construed as a warranty of title.

     B.     No possessory interest is created by a WTFP. However, to the extent that a possessory interest is deemed created by a governmental entity with taxation authority, the permittee acknowledges that the city has given to the applicant notice pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 107.6 that the use or occupancy of any public property pursuant to a WTFP may create a possessory interest which may be subject to the payment of property taxes levied upon such interest. Wireless telecommunications facility operators shall be solely liable for, and shall pay and discharge prior to delinquency, any and all possessory interest taxes or other taxes, fees, and assessments levied against their right to possession, occupancy, or use of any public property pursuant to any right of possession, occupancy, or use created by the WTFP.

     C.     The permission granted by a WTFP shall not in any event constitute an easement on or an encumbrance against the PROW. No right, title, or interest (including franchise interest) in the PROW, or any part thereof, shall vest or accrue in permittee by reason of a wireless encroachment permit or the issuance of any other permit or exercise of any privilege given thereby. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.120 Permit expiration—Abandonment of applications.
     A.    Permit Term. Unless Government Code Section 65964, as may be amended, authorizes the city to issue a permit with a shorter term, a permit for any wireless telecommunications facility shall be valid for a period of ten years, unless pursuant to another provision of this code it lapses sooner or is revoked. At the end of ten years from the date of issuance, such permit shall automatically expire.

     B.     A permittee may apply for a new permit within one hundred eighty (180) days prior to expiration. Said application and proposal shall comply with the city’s current code requirements for wireless telecommunications facilities.

     C.     Timing of Installation. The installation and construction authorized by a WTFP shall begin within one year after its approval, or it will expire without further action by the city. The installation and construction authorized by a WTFP shall conclude, including any necessary post-installation repairs and/or restoration to the PROW, within thirty (30) days following the day construction commenced.

     D.    Commencement of Operations. The operation of the approved facility shall commence no later than ninety (90) days after the completion of installation, or the WTFP will expire without further action by the city. The permittee shall provide the director notice that operations have commenced by the same date. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.130 Cessation of use or abandonment.
     A.    A wireless telecommunications facility is considered abandoned and shall be promptly removed as provided herein if it ceases to provide wireless telecommunications services for ninety (90) or more consecutive days unless the permittee has obtained prior written approval from the director which shall not be unreasonably denied. If there are two or more users of a single facility, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the facility.

     B.     The operator of a facility shall notify the director in writing of its intent to abandon or cease use of a permitted site or a nonconforming site (including unpermitted sites) within ten days of ceasing or abandoning use. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, the operator of the facility shall provide written notice to the director of any discontinuation of operations of thirty (30) days or more.

     C.     Failure to inform the director of cessation or discontinuation of operations of any existing facility as required by this section shall constitute a violation of any approvals and be grounds for:

     1.     Litigation;

     2.     Revocation or modification of the permit;

     3.     Acting on any bond or other assurance required by this article or conditions of approval of the permit;

     4.     Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

     5.     Any other remedies permitted under this code or by law. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.140 Removal and restoration—Permit expiration, revocation, or abandonment.
     A.    Upon the expiration date of the permit, including any extensions, earlier termination or revocation of the WTFP or abandonment of the facility, the permittee, owner or operator shall remove its wireless telecommunications facility and restore the site to the condition it was in prior to the granting of the WTFP, except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city. Removal shall be in accordance with proper health and safety requirements and all ordinances, rules, and regulations of the city. Expired, terminated or revoked wireless telecommunications facility equipment shall be removed from the site at no cost or expense to the city.

     B.     Failure of the permittee, owner or operator to promptly remove its facility and restore the property within ninety (90) days after expiration, earlier termination or revocation of the WTFP, or abandonment of the facility, shall be a violation of this code. Upon a showing of good cause, an extension may be granted by the director where circumstances are beyond the control of the permittee after expiration. Further failure to abide by the timeline provided in this section shall be grounds for:

     1.     Prosecution;

     2.     Acting on any security instrument required by this chapter or conditions of approval of permit;

     3.     Removal of the facilities by the city in accordance with the procedures established under this code for abatement of a public nuisance at the owner’s expense; and/or

     4.     Any other remedies permitted under this code or by law.

     C.     Summary Removal. In the event any city director or city engineer determines that the condition or placement of a wireless telecommunications facility located in the public right-of-way constitutes a dangerous condition, obstruction of the public right-of-way, or an imminent threat to public safety, or determines other exigent circumstances require immediate corrective action (collectively, “exigent circumstances”), such director or city engineer may cause the facility to be removed summarily and immediately without advance notice or a hearing. Written notice of the removal shall include the basis for the removal and shall be served upon the permittee and person who owns the facility within five business days of removal and all property removed shall be preserved for the owner’s pick-up as feasible. If the owner cannot be identified following reasonable effort or if the owner fails to pick-up the property within sixty (60) days, the facility shall be treated as abandoned property.

     D.    Removal of Facilities by City. In the event the city removes a wireless telecommunications facility in accordance with nuisance abatement procedures or summary removal, any such removal shall be without any liability to the city for any damage to such facility that may result from reasonable efforts of removal. In addition to the procedures for recovering costs of nuisance abatement, the city may collect such costs from the performance bond posted and to the extent such costs exceed the amount of the performance bond, collect those excess costs in accordance with this code. Unless otherwise provided herein, the city has no obligation to store such facility. Neither the permittee, owner nor operator shall have any claim if the city destroys any such facility not timely removed by the permittee, owner or operator after notice, or removal by the city due to exigent circumstances. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.150 Effect on other ordinances.
     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not relieve a person from complying with any other applicable provision of this code. In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and other sections of this code, this chapter shall control. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.160 State or federal law.
     The implementation of this chapter and decisions on applications for placement of wireless telecommunications facilities in the PROW shall, at a minimum, ensure that the requirements of this chapter are satisfied, unless it is determined that the applicant has established that denial of an application would, within the meaning of federal law, prohibit or effectively prohibit the provision of personal wireless services, or otherwise violate applicable laws or regulations. If that determination is made, the requirements of this chapter may be waived, but only to the minimum extent required to avoid the prohibition or violation. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

 

8.03.170 Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities in the right-of-way.
     A.    Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities are those facilities that existed but did not conform to this chapter on the date this chapter became effective.

     B.     Legal nonconforming wireless telecommunications facilities shall, within ten years from the date this chapter became effective, be brought into conformity with all requirements of this article; provided, however, that should the owner desire to expand or modify the facility, intensify the use, or make some other change in a conditional use, the owner shall comply with all applicable provisions of this code at such time, to the extent the city can require such compliance under federal and state law.

     C.     An aggrieved person may file an appeal to the city manager of any decision of the director, and appeal to the city council the decision of any other deciding body made pursuant to this section. In the event of an appeal alleging that the ten-year amortization period is not reasonable as applied to a particular property, the city council may consider the amount of investment or original cost, present actual or depreciated value, dates of construction, amortization for tax purposes, salvage value, remaining useful life, the length and remaining term of the lease under which it is maintained (if any), and the harm to the public if the structure remains standing beyond the prescribed amortization period, and set an amortization period accordingly for the specific property. (Ord. 482 § 5, 2019)

Chapter 8.04 DIGITAL INFRASTRUCTURE AND VIDEO SYSTEM FACILITIES IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY
8.04.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish standards for the placement, and manner of installation and construction of, digital infrastructure and video system facilities (“DIVS”) in the city’s public rights-of-way so as to maintain and enhance the city’s character as being a low-density, wooded, predominantly single-family residential and hillside community, while at the same time not unreasonably interfering with the development of the competitive cable television marketplace in the city. These standards and controls are intended to ensure that the location and manner of installation and construction of these related facilities are consistent with previously adopted policies of the city as set forth in the general plan; to guide the orderly development of the community; to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare of the city; to encourage DIVS operators to configure equipment location and manner of construction in a way that minimizes any adverse impacts; and to enhance the ability of DIVS operators to provide such services throughout the city quickly, effectively and efficiently. Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter to permit DIVS where they can be installed without creating adverse impacts on neighboring property owners and the overall community. This chapter shall be applied on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory basis to all applicants for DIVS within the public rights-of-way. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
     A.    For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases, and their derivations have the meanings given herein. Terms defined in the DIVCA Act shall have the same meanings herein unless expressly defined otherwise. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, and words in the singular number include the plural number.

     “1984 Cable Act” means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984.

     “1992 Cable Act” means the Cable Television Subscriber Protection and Competition Act of 1992.

 

     “Applicant” means a provider of digital infrastructure and video services who applies to the city to install DIVS in the public rights-of-way.

     “Abandonment” means inoperative or unused for a period of one hundred-eighty (180) days or more.

     “Cable Act” means the 1984 Cable Act, as amended by the 1992 Cable Act and by the Telecommunications Act.

     “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons (1) who provides DIVS over a DIVS system in the city and, directly or through one or more affiliates, owns a significant interest in that DIVS system; or (2) who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of a DIVS system in the city.

     “Cable system” or “cable communications system” or “DIVS system” or “system” means a facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide DIVS service, and which is provided to multiple subscribers within the city; but this term does not include: (1) a facility that serves one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers without using any PROW; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 U.S.C. Section 201 et seq.), except that the facility shall be considered a DIVS system (other than for purposes of Section 621(c) of the Cable Act) to the extent the facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of the use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (4) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act; or (5) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems.

     “California Public Utilities Commission” or “CPUC” means the California Public Utilities Commission.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge, California, acting by and through its city council, or a representative as the governing body may designate to act on DIVS matters on its behalf.

     “Construction plan” means a plan that describes in detail the designs, locations, and an estimated time schedule for construction of the DIVS.

     “Department” means the department of public works.

     “Digital infrastructure and video service facility” (DIVS) means a facility for the provision of DIVS services.

     “Director” means the director of the city’s department of public works or designee.

     “DIVS service” means (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming service; and (2) subscriber interaction which is required for the selection of or use of video programming or other programming service.

     “FCC” means the Federal Communications Commission.

     “Feasible” means capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account appropriate environmental, physical, legal, economical and technological factors.

     “Project site” means the location on which an applicant proposes to construct a DIVS, including any antenna, support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the DIVS.

     “PROWP” means a public right-of-way permit.

     “Public property” means all real property and improvements owned, operated or controlled by city, other than PROW, within the city’s jurisdiction. Public property includes, but is not limited to, city owned buildings/facilities, recreational facilities, parks, libraries, street trees, signs, medians and traffic signal facilities.

     “Public rights-of-way” or “right-of-way” or “PROW” means any public street, public way, public place or rights-of-way, now laid out or dedicated, and the space on, above or below it, and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, under the jurisdiction of city.

     “Site” means the public right-of-way location that contains a DIVS including any antenna, support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the DIVS.

     “Stealth” means: (1) not easily identifiable as a DIVS by a casual observer that is located on property other than the site, (2) is aesthetically compatible and blends with the site and immediate surroundings. Stealthing may be achieved by any state-of-the-art means or combination of means including, but not limited to, the use of camouflage, textures, screening, painting, or architectural integration with the surroundings.

     “Telecommunications Act” means the Telecommunications Act of 1996.

     “Traffic control plan” means a plan describing the manner in which applicant will manage vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian traffic along affected streets when installing or maintaining facilities.

     “Unlicensed wireless service” means the offering of telecommunications services using duly authorized devices, which do not require individual license, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services as defined in Section 303(v) of Title 47 of the United States Code.

     B.     Terms Not Defined. Words, terms, or phrases not defined herein shall first have the meaning as defined in the DIVS Act, and then the special meanings or connotations used in any industry, business, trade, or profession where they commonly carry special meanings. If those special meanings are not common, they will have the standard definitions as set forth in commonly used and accepted dictionaries of the English language. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.030 Applicability and prohibition.
     A.    The procedures and rules set forth in this chapter shall be applicable to all DIVS proposed to be installed and installed within the public rights-of-way that are not subject to a city franchise agreement or other city agreement, such as a license agreement. No DIVS subject to this chapter shall be installed, modified or added onto within the city’s public rights-of-way without first complying with the provisions of this chapter except as provided in subsections B and C of this section.

     B.     Notwithstanding anything stated herein, a PROWP shall not be required if, in the determination of the director, the proposed project relates solely to work on the inside of the DIVS without alteration to the enclosure itself. In lieu of the necessity of a PROWP, the applicant shall obtain all otherwise necessary city permits including, without limitation, building permits, electrical permits, and other permits which may be required by the code. Further, the applicant shall be responsible to coordinate with the director in regard to needed permits or determinations.

     C.     The director in his or her discretion may issue an annual PROWP to applicant to make extensions, routine maintenance and emergency repairs. Annual PROWPs shall be issued on a yearly basis. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.040 PROWP submittal requirements and application content.
     Applicants requesting approval for a DIVS within the public rights-of-way shall be required to apply for a public right-of-way permit (“PROWP”) using the city’s PROWP application. Applications shall include the following information:

     A.    Applicant’s name, address, phone number, and fax number. For informational purposes only, the owner or operator of any DIVS shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information on a form to be supplied by the city. Applicant shall notify city of any changes to the information within thirty (30) days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include the following:

     1.     Identity, including name, address and telephone number, and legal status of the owner of the DIVS including official identification numbers and FCC certification, and if different from the owner, the identity and legal status of the person or entity responsible for operating the DIVS;

     2.     Name, address and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies and type of service provided.

     B.     Location of the site, including the address and the names of two nearest cross streets.

     C.     Present zone designation of the site, and if not R-1 zone, if within fifty (50) feet of an R-1 zone.

     D.    Description of the site, including the current improvements within the general area of the project site.

     E.     Description of the proposed project. The applicant is not required to describe the proposed use of the facility to be constructed.

     F.     If the proposed project requires any grading, the applicant shall identify the number of cubic yards of materials to be moved.

     G.    Description of the facilities and/or equipment within the applicant’s project that are expected to induce noise.

     H.    DIVS site plan. Nine copies at a scale of 1″ = 20′ or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director of public works) and including the following:

     1.     The proposed DIVS;

     2.     Location of lot lines, streets (with street names), and all structures existing and proposed;

     3.     Identification of street names;

     4.     Slopes, contours, trees and other pertinent physical features existing and proposed;

     5.     All exterior lighting, existing and proposed; and

     6.     Location, use and approximate distance from property line of nearest structures on all properties abutting the site.

     I.      Stealthing. The applicant shall provide a written description of the stealthing measures the applicant proposes to use to aesthetically blend the DIVS to the immediate surroundings. This should include at minimum a description of proposed camouflage and screening techniques, and the textures and colors to be used in the stealthing process.

     J.      Notice requirements. Applicant shall submit a list of the names and addresses of all current owners (pursuant to assessor records) of each property within a four hundred (400) foot radius of the site, two sets of envelope labels for the property owners, and a notice list affidavit. The city shall give notice of the PROWP hearing at least ten days prior to the hearing to the property owners within a four hundred (400) foot radius of the site. The notice of public hearing shall include the DIVS simulation if provided by photosimulation, or otherwise by reference to the field mock-up which demonstrates the DIVS as constructed.

     K.    DIVS simulation. The applicant shall submit a DIVS simulation, which may include photosimulation, field mock-up or other techniques, which demonstrates the DIVS after installation and construction. All costs for the DIVS simulation shall be borne by the applicant.

     L.     Landscape plans. Nine copies at a scale of 1/8″ = 1′ or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     Existing trees with trunk diameter over six inches at four feet above grade and/or fifteen (15) feet in overall height within fifty (50) feet of the proposed installation;

     2.     Species, diameter and condition of all such trees;

     3.     Final disposition of all existing trees; and

     4.     Species, location and sizes of proposed vegetation.

     M.    Color photographs of the site and its surroundings.

     N.    A construction plan disclosing, at a minimum, construction schedule, final completion date, and specific construction benchmark dates as to identify portions of the project.

     O.    A traffic control plan in accordance with such guidelines established by the director.

     P.     Application fee. The amount is established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council.

     Q.    Waiver. Any application for a proposed DIVS, which has been identified as not meeting the general requirements or restrictions of this chapter may request a waiver as set forth in Section 8.04.080 of this Chapter. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.050 Location and manner of construction of DIVS.
     A.    No DIVS shall be installed, modified or added to unless it meets the following location and construction standards and requirements:

     1.     Lights, Signals and Signs. No DIVS shall bear any sign or advertising device other than those required by applicable law. DIVS signals, lights or signs shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for security and safety. Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts to the surrounding areas.

     2.     Ground Level Equipment and Structures. Ground level equipment and structures shall be screened from public view.

     a.     Except as provided in Section 8.04.050(A)(5), all ground level equipment associated with the operation of a DIVS shall be located inside an underground vault, within an above-ground stealth structure or within a stealthed above ground enclosure whenever and wherever feasible. The ground level equipment and structures shall be stealthed to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening, camouflage, color choice, architectural compatibility and other site characteristics. Ground level equipment and structures shall be screened from view by landscaping, fencing or other appropriate means.

     b.     The ground level equipment and structures shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility.

     c.     Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site on the surrounding area.

     d.     Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted where such vegetation is deemed necessary to provide screening or to block the line of sight between facilities and adjacent residential uses and residentially zoned properties.

     e.     Accessory equipment shall be equipped with tamperproof cabinets and/or locks to mitigate safety sitting issues. All DIVS shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances.

     3.     Building Codes. DIVS shall comply with all applicable building codes.

     4.     Signal/Power Cables. All DIVS cables, wires or similar electrical transmission devices must be placed underground or be placed within a structure or in cableways and properly stealthed to the maximum extent possible. Root protection shall be provided during all trenching operations.

     5.     The limitations on DIVS shall not apply to (a) an insubstantial modification, as determined by the director, to an existing DIVS; (b) to any new DIVS which, as determined by the director, does not produce a significant impact upon the PROW and/or public property and the environment surrounding it; and (c) to any installation specifically authorized pursuant to a pre-existing and valid local franchise agreement. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.060 Approval procedure.
     A.    Director Approval. Applications for DIVS to be located in the community planned development (CPD), residential multifamily (R-3), residential planned development (RPD), public/semi-public (PS), institutional (I), mixed use 1 (MU1), mixed used 2 (MU2) or park (P) zones and greater than fifty (50) feet from a residential single-family (R-1) zone shall be subject to approval by the director.

     B.     Public Works and Traffic Commission Approval. Applications for a DIVS located in the residential single-family (R-1) or open space (OS) zones, or fifty (50) feet or less from an R-1 zone shall be subject to approval by the public works and traffic commission following a public hearing, noticed as set forth in subsection 8.04.040(J). (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.070 Findings and decision.
     A.    Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, an application for a DIVS shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.

     B.     Applications Subject to Director Approval.

     1.     The director shall approve a DIVS unless the director finds, upon substantial evidence, that the placement or manner of installation of the DIVS violates this chapter based upon any of the following:

     a.     That the applicant has failed to provide information required in Section 8.04.040;

     b.     That proposed lighting, if applicable, impacts the surrounding area;

     c.     That proposed ground level equipment is not undergrounded or otherwise screened from public view in a stealth manner and properly secure;

     d.     That any other requirements of Section 8.04.050 are not met by the applicant;

     e.     That the location of the DIVS interferes with the usual and customary use by pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles, or negatively impacts vehicular parking, circulation, line-of-sight or safety; or

     f.      That the location of the DIVS results in an over-concentration of above-ground structures along the public rights-of-way.

     2.     The director may impose conditions of approval as deemed necessary in order to make the findings required by this subsection.

     3.     Appeals. The decision of the director is final, unless appealed as set forth herein. If the director denies the application, the applicant shall have fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of decision to file a written appeal of the decision to the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing for the appeal within sixty (60) calendar days from the date the appeal was filed. The appeal hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Section 8.04.040(J). If the director approves or conditionally approves the application, the city shall provide written notice to the applicant and to the owner of each property within a four hundred (400) foot radius of the project site. The notice shall include the DIVS simulation or reference to the field mock-up which demonstrates the DIVS as constructed. Within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of mailing notice of the decision, the applicant or any property owner within the noticed area may file a written appeal of the decision to the city council. The city council shall hold a public hearing for the appeal within sixty (60) calendar days from the date the appeal was filed. The appeal hearing shall be noticed as set forth in the Section 8.04.040(J). If the city council fails to hold a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar days of a filed appeal or to act upon the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days after the hearing is closed, then in that event, the previous decision shall be deemed affirmed. The decision of the city council is final.

     C.     Applications Subject to Public Works and Traffic Commission Approval.

     1.     The public works and traffic commission shall hold a public hearing, noticed as set forth in Section 8.04.040(J).

     2.     The public works and traffic commission shall approve a DIVS unless the commission finds, upon substantial evidence, that the placement or manner of installation of the DIVS violates this chapter based upon any of the following:

     a.     That the applicant has failed to provide information required in Section 8.04.040;

     b.     That proposed lighting, if applicable, impacts the surrounding area;

     c.     That proposed ground level equipment is not undergrounded or otherwise screened from public view in a stealth manner and properly secure;

     d.     That any other requirements of Section 8.04.050 are not met by the applicant;

     e.     That the location of the DIVS interferes with the usual and customary use by pedestrians, bicycles or vehicles, or negatively impacts vehicular parking, circulation, line-of-sight or safety; or

     f.      That the location of the DIVS results in an over-concentration of above-ground structures along the public right-of-way.

     3.     The public works and traffic commission may impose conditions of approval as deemed necessary in order to make the findings required by this subsection.

     4.     Appeals. The decision of the commission is final, unless appealed within fifteen (15) calendar days from the date of decision to the city council by the applicant or any owner of property within the noticed area. The city council shall hold a public hearing for the appeal within sixty (60) calendar days from the date the appeal was filed. The appeal hearing shall be noticed as set forth in Section 8.04.040(J). If the city council fails to hold a public hearing within sixty (60) calendar days of the filed appeal or to act upon the appeal within thirty (30) calendar days after the hearing is closed, then in that event, the previous decision shall be deemed affirmed. The decision of the city council is final. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.080 Standard conditions of approval.
     In addition to conditions of approval which may be imposed in order to make the findings required in this chapter, the following conditions shall be imposed on all PROWP approvals:

     A.    The applicant shall remove or relocate, at the applicant’s expense and without expense to the city, any of its DIVS installed under the approved PROWP when made necessary, as determined by the city, by reason of any change in grade, alignment or width of any public right-of-way, installation of services, water pipes, drains, storm drains, lift stations, power or signal lines, traffic control devices, public right-of-way improvements, or any construction, repair or improvement to the public rights-of-way.

     B.     The applicant shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its officers, agents or employees to attack, set aside, void or annul approval of the PROWP. The applicant shall further defend, indemnify and hold harmless the city, its officers, agents and employees from any damages, liabilities, claims, suits or causes of action of any kind or form, whether personal injury, death or property damage, arising out of or in connection with applicant’s, its agents, employees, licensees, contractors, subcontractors or independent contractors activities or performance pursuant to the approved PROWP. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.090 Waiver request.
     A.    Waiver. A waiver of any of the siting, design or other requirements or restrictions set forth in this chapter may be granted by the public works and traffic commission at a noticed hearing upon the request of the applicant where the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that such restriction or requirement violates then applicable law.

     B.     Independent Consultant. The city shall have the right to have an independent consultant, at the applicant’s expense, evaluate the issues raised by the waiver request. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.100 Periodic reviews and additional conditions.
     A.    Periodic Review. Each permit issued shall be subject to review by the city every five years. The director shall notify the owner/operator at their last known address at least thirty (30) days prior to the review hearing. The review shall be by the same body that approved the original application. The review is to insure that the facility is still in operation, that it has been properly maintained and that the original conditions of approval have been adhered to and whether they are to remain the same or need to be modified.

     B.     Additional Conditions. Pursuant to the review, the city may add conditions to any permit as necessary to advance a significant governmental interest related to health, safety or welfare, provided, however, that any added condition shall comply with applicable FCC and PUC regulations and standards, laws and decisions relating to DIVS issued by any legislative body, court or agency with competent jurisdiction over the matter, and that reasonable advance notice has been provided to all affected parties. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.110 Revocations.
     At any time, the director may initiate proceedings to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Grounds for revocation shall be limited to a finding that:

     A.    The owner or operator has abandoned the DIVS; or

     B.     The owner or operator has failed to bring the DIVS into compliance with the conditions of approval, or the requirements of this chapter, within the period of time provided in a written notice sent by the city requiring the DIVS to be brought into compliance.

     C.     Any decision of the director may be appealed to the public works and traffic commission and then to the city council pursuant to Chapter 2.08 of this code. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.120 Maintenance requirements.
     All DIVS shall comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

     A.    Equipment. All DIVS, including lighting, fences, cabinets and poles, shall be maintained by the owner or operator in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight.

     B.     Landscaping. Each DIVS which contains trees, foliage or other landscaping elements, whether or not used as screening, shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the owner or operator of the DIVS shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping as promptly as reasonably possible. If a landscape plan was required and approved, the site shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan at all times. Amendments or modifications to the plan shall be submitted for approval to the director.

     C.     Noise. Each DIVS shall be operated in such a manner so as to minimize any possible disruption caused by noise, as determined by the director.

     D.    Inspections. Each owner or operator of a DIVS shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.130 Abandonment.
     A.    Notice. At such time that an owner or operator plans to abandon, or is required to discontinue operation of a DIVS or portion thereof, the owner or operator will notify the city by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations and the date the DIVS shall be removed. The notice should be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment. Failure to give notice shall not affect the owner or operator’s obligation to remove an abandoned DIVS.

     B.     Removal. Upon abandonment, the owner or operator shall physically remove the DIVS or abandoned elements within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     Removal of antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers;

     2.     Transportation of the antennas, mount, equipment cabinets and security barriers to an appropriate repository;

     3.     Restoring the site of the DIVS to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city.

     C.     Stay. The city may stay the requirement to remove an abandoned DIVS upon written request and evidence submitted by the owner or operator that another carrier is in reasonable negotiation to acquire and use the DIVS.

     D.    Nuisance Abatement. If an owner or operator fails to remove a DIVS in accordance with this Chapter, the DIVS shall be deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

 

8.04.140 Penalty.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as set forth in this code. (Ord. 375 § 1, 2009)

Chapter 8.05 MEDIAN STRIP PARKING ON CERTAIN STREETS
8.05.010 Purpose of chapter.
     The purpose of this chapter is to authorize motor vehicle parking upon the median strips of certain city streets pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22503, in conjunction with other street and traffic control improvements in order to enhance the safety of travel on said streets. (Ord. 69 § 2, 1981)

 

8.05.020 Median strip parking.
     When street improvements and traffic signs are in place giving notice thereof, median strip parking of motor vehicles is authorized on the following streets or portions thereof:

     Gould Avenue, north of Knight Way, to a point four hundred forty (440) feet down from the center of the intersection of Gould Avenue and Knight Way.

     Notwithstanding the foregoing, no motor vehicle shall be parked upon any median strip parking area designate day this section between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 69 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 8.07 PARKING IN THE PUBLIC RIGHTS-OF-WAY FOR SLEEPING PROHIBITED
8.07.010 Parking for sleeping prohibited.
     Between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m., it shall be unlawful for any person to park any motor vehicle on any alley, street, public right-of-way, publicly owned and/or operated parking lot, other publicly owned property including, but not limited to, parks, school grounds or open space, or to park on any private parking lot without the expressed permission of the private property owner, for the purpose of sleeping in the motor vehicle. (Ord. 304 § 1, 2000)

 

8.07.020 Exceptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    Persons who engage in the activity due to medical emergency or need as determined by a responding emergency services provider or as confirmed, in writing, by a licensed physician;

     B.     Persons who are intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol, any controlled substance and/or any chemical condition and/or state of physical condition such that the person must engage in the activity in order to avoid being a threat to his or her own personal safety or the safety of others. (Ord. 304 § 1, 2000)

 

8.07.030 Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine as follows:

     A.    Fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;

     B.     One hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation;

     C.     Two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a third or more violations occurring within a twelve (12) month period following the first violation. (Ord. 304 § 1, 2000)

Chapter 8.10 RESTRICTED PARKING ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS
8.10.010 Purpose of chapter.
     The purpose of this chapter is to restrict the parking of vehicles on certain city streets pursuant to Vehicle Code Section 22507. (Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.10.020 Parking restrictions.
     The city council may, by resolution, prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles on specified streets or highways or portions thereof during all or certain hours of the day. Any such resolution shall become effective when signs or markings giving notice of such prohibition or restriction are placed on the curb, street or other appropriate location. Such signs or markings shall comply with all requirements of the California Vehicle Code, including, but not limited to, the color coding requirements set forth in California Vehicle Code Section 21458. (Ord. 124 § 1, 1985; Ord. 71 § 2, 1981)

 

8.10.030 Storage of vehicles on streets and public rights-of-way prohibited.
     A.    Prohibited. Any vehicle parked upon any street or public right-of-way in the same location in excess of twenty-four (24) consecutive hours shall be subject to a “notice of warning” issued by local law enforcement. A vehicle issued such notice of warning shall be prohibited from being parked on the street or public right-of-way within the proximate area (as defined herein) during the period between forty-eight (48) hours and seventy-two (72) hours following the issuance of the notice of warning (the “restriction period”). The issued notice of warning shall set forth the restriction period, including the dates and hours of parking restriction. A vehicle issued such notice of warning that is parked in violation of this section shall be subject to towing or citation. For purposes of this section, “proximate area” means upon a street or public right-of-way within two hundred (200) feet of the location where the subject vehicle was parked at the time of the issuance of the notice of warning.

     B.     Permit Exception. This section shall not apply to vehicles that have been issued a temporary parking permit by the city manager or designee. Temporary parking permits may be issued for periods not longer than two weeks each. The temporary parking permit must be displayed on the driver’s side rear window of the vehicle. The city manager or designee shall have discretion in determining whether the issuance of a temporary parking permit is warranted and such issuance is consistent with the goals of preventing vehicle storage on streets or within the public right-of-way. (Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

 

8.10.040 Enforcement and penalties.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of an infraction which shall be punishable by a fine and related penalties as defined in Section 1.04.010 of this code. (Ord. 371 § 1, 2008)

Chapter 8.11 AUTHORIZED PARKING ON CERTAIN CITY STREETS
8.11.010 Permit parking in front of garages.
     A.    The city council may, by resolution, authorize permit parking for properties on Hilldale Drive with garages less than twenty (20) feet from the edge of the paved roadway, allowing the owner or lessee of property to park a vehicle in front of the owner or lessee’s private driveway when the vehicle displays a permit issued by the city. A vehicle displaying the appropriate parking permit tag or decal shall be exempt from California Vehicle Code Section 22500(e) only, except that a vehicle with a valid permit and a valid disabled placard may park in front of the driveway during street sweeping restriction times.

     B.     Permits. The city manager or designee shall establish and administer appropriate regulations for the application, issuance and renewal of permits pursuant to this section in a manner similar to other permit parking areas in the city. (Ord. 415 § 1, 2013)

 

8.11.020 Parking of Recreational Vehicles.
     A.    Definitions. For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the following meanings:

     1.     “Loading or unloading” means the packing of food, clothing and supplies and preparing the vehicle’s refrigeration and unpacking the vehicle after the trip.

     2.     “Recreational vehicle” means a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle primarily designed for recreation, camping, animal transportation, human habitation, or similar uses. Examples of recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, any of the following: motor homes, trailers, boats, all-terrain vehicles, or similar vehicles. Pickup trucks with attached utility camper shells not designed for animal transportation, camping, or human habitation, and used primarily for transportation and/or commercial use are excluded from this definition.

     B.     Prohibited. For purposes of this chapter, the following items are prohibited:

     No person shall park or leave standing any recreational vehicle at any time upon any public street, highway or alley within the city.

     C.     Exceptions. The following are exceptions to subsection B above:

     1.     Temporary parking of a recreational vehicle is allowed without a permit for purposes of loading or unloading the vehicle for a maximum of two hours where parking is allowed.

     2.     Subject to the restrictions set forth in subsection D below, parking a recreational vehicle on a public street, highway or alley is allowed with a permit issued by the city.

     D.    Restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to any permit parking of a recreational vehicle provided in subsection (C)(2) above:

     1.     Permits shall only be issued to residents of the city.

     2.     Parking on the street shall only be allowed abutting the resident’s address or where permitted as incidental parking or storage subject to subsection 11.11.050(D)(4)(g).

     3.     Permits will be issued for a specific recreational vehicle tracked by vehicle license for a maximum of fourteen (14) days in any calendar year; and

     4.     The maximum fourteen (14) days in any calendar year for a specific recreational vehicle is the combined total amount of the days issued for a parking permit for any public street, highway or alley within the city including the days issued for a parking permit for a single-family residential lot in compliance with subsection 11.11.050(D)(4)(g). As an example, permits may be issued for up to fourteen (14) days in any calendar year on the public street, or up to fourteen (14) days in any calendar year within the front yard setback of a single-family residence, or any combination thereof.

     5.     Permits must be displayed in the front window bottom left corner of the driver’s side facing up. Any obstructed or incorrectly placed permits will result in a citation; and

     6.     There shall be no other activity except loading or unloading of a vehicle while parked on the street.

     F.     Penalty Provision. Violations of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with Title 1 of this code. Furthermore, pursuant to Section 22651 of the California Vehicle Code, any recreational vehicle parked or left standing on a public street or highway in violation of this chapter may be removed by a peace officer from the street or highway upon which the vehicle is parked or left standing. (Ord. 476 § 1, 2019)

Chapter 8.12 HOUSE NUMBERING
8.12.010 Title for citation.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter shall be known as and may be cited as “the house numbering ordinance.” (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 1 § 101, 1925)

 

8.12.020 Construction of provisions.
     Unless the provision or the context otherwise requires, the general provisions, rules of construction, and definitions in Sections 8.12.010 through 8.12.040, and 8.12.150 shall govern the construction of this chapter. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 1 § 102, 1925)

 

8.12.030 Definitions.
     “Board” means the La Cañada Flintridge city council.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Mobilehome” is a vehicle designed and equipped for human habitation, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.

     “Mobilehome park” means any area or tract of land where:

     1.     One or more mobilehome lots are rented or leased or held out for rent or lease to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation; or

     2.     Two or more mobilehome lots are in the lawful possession of separate persons and are used by such persons to accommodate mobilehomes used for human habitation.

     “Road” includes both a county highway and a private street.

     “Section” means a section of the ordinance codified in this chapter unless some other ordinance or a statute is specifically mentioned.

     “Shall” is mandatory; “may” is permissive. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 1 §§ 103—109, 1925)

 

8.12.040 Interpretation of language.
     The singular includes the plural and the plural the singular. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 1 § 110, 1925)

 

8.12.050 Districts established—City engineer authority.
     The city engineer shall divide the city into one or more districts in order that he or she may, whenever requested to do so by the board, establish numbers to be allotted along any road in any part of the city. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 2 § 201, 1925)

 

8.12.060 House numbers—Establishment.
     The city engineer, whenever so requested by the board, shall establish the house numbers along any road in the city, and the numbers so established, when adopted and approved by the board, shall be the official numbers for such road. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 2 § 202, 1925)

 

8.12.070 Notice of numbers assigned.
     A.    The city engineer shall notify all owners of property or persons in possession of property along any road upon which official numbers have been established pursuant to Sections 8.12.050 and 8.12.060 of this chapter of the numbers so assigned.

     B.     If the city engineer finds that no number has been affixed to any mobilehome in a mobilehome park for which a number has been assigned by an approved plan, or that the number affixed is not the number so assigned, he or she shall so notify the occupant of such mobilehome of the number assigned thereto. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 4 § 401, 1925)

 

8.12.080 Placement of numbers by owners or occupants.
     Within ten days after the owner or occupant of any property along a road for which official numbers have been assigned or the occupant of any mobilehome for which a number has been assigned has been notified as required by this chapter of the number so assigned he or she shall:

     A.    Remove any existing number which is not the number assigned;

     B.     Place the number assigned, in digits not less than three inches in height, upon the said property, residence, structure or mobilehome in such a position as to be plainly visible from the road or access way. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 4 § 402, 1925)

 

8.12.085 Address numbering in the public right-of-way prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to paint, draw, stencil, color or otherwise cause to be painted, drawn, stenciled or colored, commercial, institutional or residential address numbers in the public right-of-way unless expressly authorized to do so, in writing, by the director of public works. Violation of this provisions shall be an infraction punishable as set forth in this code. (Ord. 272 § 1, 1997)

 

8.12.090 Apartment houses—Posting of dwelling unit diagram.
     The owner or proprietor of an apartment house consisting of six or more dwelling units shall post at or near the primary entrance to the building or buildings a brief descriptive diagram which clearly indicates the numerical, alphabetical or identification pattern or layout, showing the location of each dwelling unit, including floor levels and access patterns. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 11172 § 1, 1975: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 5 § 501, 1925)

 

8.12.100 Mobilehome parks—Plan—Filing requirements.
     Prior to March 1, 1974, or not less than thirty (30) days after the establishment of a mobilehome park, whichever last occurs, the owner or proprietor of a mobilehome park shall file with the county engineer a plan (which may be a rough plan not drawn to scale) showing:

     A.    The mobilehome lots, including dimensions thereof;

     B.     The access ways thereto, including dimensions, angles and radii required to reconstruct the configuration of said access way;

     C.     The names or numbers of the access ways;

     D.    The number assigned to each mobilehome lot. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 3 § 301, 1925)

 

8.12.110 Mobilehome parks—Numbering system on access ways.
     On each access way odd numbers in consecutive order shall be assigned on one side and even numbers in consecutive order shall be assigned on the other side. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 3 § 302, 1925)

 

8.12.120 Mobilehome parks—Plan—Examination by city engineer.
     Upon receipt of the plan provided for by this chapter, the city engineer shall examine the same and determine whether or not the proposed numbering of mobilehome lots will facilitate the finding of the occupants of the mobilehomes parked thereon, and whether the names of the access ways will duplicate the names of nearby roads or other access ways to such an extent as to cause confusion. He or she may make such changes in the plan as he or she finds necessary in order that the location of occupants of the mobilehome park may be ascertained. He or she shall return the plan as submitted or as amended by him or her, as the case may be, showing his or her approval of the said plan to the owner or proprietor of the mobilehome park. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 3 § 303, 1925)

 

8.12.130 Mobilehome parks—Placement of numbers—Compliance time limit.
     Within ten days after receiving the approved plan from the city engineer, the owner or proprietor of the mobilehome park shall post legible signs in letters or figures not less than three inches in height at the ends of, and at each intersection of, the access ways, showing the names or numbers thereof, and either place the number assigned to each mobilehome in such a position on the mobilehome to be plainly visible from the access way, such number to be not less than three inches in height, or notify, in writing, the occupant of each mobilehome to do so. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 3 § 304, 1925)

 

8.12.140 Mobilehome parks—Directory and other signs required.
     The owner or proprietor of a mobilehome park shall:

     A.    Post at the entrance thereof a central directory which shall show the layout of the access ways and the numbering system of the mobilehome park;

     B.     Affix on the mobilehome, house, or other structure occupied by the manager of the mobilehome park, in such a position as to be clearly visible from the access way, a sign in letters not less than three inches in height, reading “Office,” “Manager,” or some other word indicating the same. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 3 § 305, 1925)

 

8.12.150 Violation—Penalty.
     Violation of this chapter is an infraction punishable by:

     A.    A fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00) for a first violation;

     B.     A fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a second violation within one year;

     C.     A fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for each additional violation within one year. (Ord. 140 § 3, 1986; LACC Ord. 12264 § 6, 1980: LACC Ord. 10763 § 1, 1973: LACC Ord. 1325 Art. 1 § 111, 1925)

Chapter 8.16 PROPERTY OWNER REPAIR RESPONSIBILITIES
8.16.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City engineer” means the city engineer of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Curb” means the raised edging along any public road, boulevard, street, avenue, lane or alley and includes the contiguous public gutter or channel for carrying off surface water.

     “Property owner” means any individual, firm, corporation, non-profit organization, collective, entity, or the agent or representative of any individual, firm, corporation, non-profit organization, collective or entity, holding ownership, title and/or property interest (including, but not limited to, tenancy interests) in private property.

     “Repair” includes the fixing, reconstruction, replacement, or restoration of any improvement in the public right-of-way or on private property.

     “Sidewalk” includes the public parkway or the public parkway strip maintained in the area between the property line and the curb line, and also includes a driveway approach, curbing, bulkhead, retaining wall or other works for the protection of any public sidewalk or any such parkway or parkway strip located in any public street, way or thoroughfare within the city.

 

     Words used in the plural include the singular and those used in the singular include the plural. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.020 Abutting property owner responsibility for repair of public infrastructure.
     Whenever any sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, abandoned driveway, driveway apron, or any public improvement constructed on or within the sidewalk area of any public right-of-way shall be in need of repair, or in a condition so as to endanger persons or individuals passing thereon or to interfere with public convenience in the use thereof, including damage caused by or resulting from city-owned or privately-owned tree or tree roots, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the abutting property owner to repair said sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, abandoned driveway, driveway apron or other public improvement. A permit approved by the director of public works shall be required for property owner repairs. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.030 Property owner responsibility for repair of private improvements.
     It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to repair any and all of the property owner’s improvements whether located upon private property or upon the public right-of-way including, without limitation, walls, fences, pillars, gates, mail boxes, lighting, or irrigation systems, as a result of damage from whatever reason, including, without limitation, damage caused by or resulting from city-owned trees or tree roots. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.040 Non-city liability for tree root damage.
     The city shall not have the duty, responsibility, obligation nor liability to repair any of property owner’s improvements on or within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way, or on or within private property, as a result of damage from or caused by city-owned or privately-owned tree roots. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the property owner to repair any and all of property owner’s improvements, whether located on or within the sidewalk area of the public right-of-way or on or within private property, damaged as a result of city-owned trees or tree roots. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.050 Failure to repair—Unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any property owner, after notice, to fail to repair any improvement set forth in Section 8.16.020 and/or Section 8.16.030 of this chapter when said improvement shall be in need of repair, or in a condition so as to endanger persons or individuals passing thereon or to interfere with public convenience in the use thereof. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.060 Notice to abutting property owner.
     In the event the city engineer becomes aware and determines that any portion of an improvement set forth in Section 8.16.020 and/or Section 8.16.030 of this chapter is in need of repair or in a condition so as to endanger persons or property, or in a condition so as to interfere with the public convenience in the use thereof, the city engineer, in the manner provided, shall notify the property owner of that portion of the improvement in need of repair, and to direct the repair of said improvement. Such notice shall include a reasonable timeline, given the gravity of the need, for the property owner to effectuate the repair(s). (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.070 Inspection required for permit clearance.
     In addition to any regular or special inspection which may occur, the city may inspect the condition of improvements abutting a particular piece of property prior to the issuance of any single-family or multifam-

ily occupancy permit or any building permit for work in excess of twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) pertaining to occupancy or construction on that property and issued after October 15th, 2008. All such permits, prior to final issuance, shall require a verification that an inspection was completed and that either the improvements are not in need of repair, that repair has been completed, or that repair has been bonded to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.080 Repair—City-owned trees.
     Any repair of improvements that may impact a city-owned tree shall comply with the protection requirements in Section 4.24.100 where applicable. (Ord. 426 § 1, 2014; Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.090 Abandoned driveways.
     Any driveway approach which leads to private property where the driveway or parkway area has been abandoned, fenced off, or otherwise is not used as a legal off-street parking or delivery area, is hereby declared to constitute a sidewalk out-of-repair and in a condition so as to interfere with the public convenience in the use of the sidewalk. Any such driveway approach shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and shall be closed by the property owner upon order of the city engineer as provided herein. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.100 Notice—Form.
     The notice to repair shall describe the work to be done, designate the materials to be used, if appropriate, and specify the manner in which the work shall be done and shall be substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE TO REPAIR

        The owner of the property described as follows _______________, commonly known as _____________, is hereby ordered to repair the [sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, abandoned driveway, private-property improvement, etc.], abutting said property in accordance with [specifications No. _____ on file in the office of the City Engineer of the City of La Cañada Flintridge, and] all ordinances of the City of La Cañada Flintridge pertaining thereto within ________ (___) days from the date hereof, or summit a written appeal to the City Manager of the City of La Cañada Flintridge within ten days of the posting date of this notice, and show cause why said work should not be done or why the time therefor should be extended. If the work herein indicated is not commenced within the time fixed herein, or any extension thereof granted by said City Manager, the said City Engineer and/or Superintendent of Streets will cause the work to be done, and the cost thereof, including any incidental expenses, will be made a lien upon said property pursuant to Ordinance No. ____.

        A permit approved by the Director of Public Works shall be required for property owner repairs.

        Estimated Cost of Repair $_______

        Dated _________

        ____________________

        City Engineer of the City of La Cañada Flintridge.

 

     The title to the notice shall be in letters not less than one inch in height and the body of the notice shall be printed in not less than twelve (12) point type. All words in brackets [ ] above, except that or those to be covered by the notice, shall be lined out. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.110 Notice—Posting on property.
     The notice to repair shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each parcel of property abutting the improvement in need of repair. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.120 Notice—Mailed to property owner.
     Within three days after posting of the notice, as provided in Section 8.16.110, the city engineer shall cause a notice similar in form and substance thereto to be mailed postage prepaid to the property owner, as his or her name and address appear on the records in the office of the Los Angeles County assessor. Failure of the property owner to accept or otherwise receive said mail shall not affect the validity of any proceeding pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.130 Appeal to city manager.
     The property owner may appeal to the city manager and show cause why the work should not be done or why the time therefor should be extended. Such appeal shall be in writing and shall be filed with the city clerk within ten days after the date of posting said notice and such appeal shall be heard by the city manager or designee within twenty (20) days after the date of appeal provided, however, that the city manager or designee may continue the hearing from time to time. The city manager or designee shall hear and pass upon such appeal and his or her determination thereon shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.140 Repair by city.
     Unless the repair required in the notice shall be commenced by the property owner within the time provided in the notice and diligently prosecuted to completion, or in case of an appeal to the city manager, by the date of the determination thereof, unless such appeal is sustained, the city engineer may forthwith make said repairs. If, upon appeal to the city manager, the requirements of the original notice are modified, in making such repair, the city engineer shall be governed by such modification. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.150 Records kept by city engineer.
     A.    The city engineer shall cause to be kept in his or her office, a record containing:

     1.     The description of each parcel of property upon which a notice to repair has been posted, as herein provided;

     2.     Photographs of said sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, abandoned driveway or private property improvement prior to and after repair;

     3.     The name of the property owner, if known;

     4.     The date on which the notice was posted;

     5.     The charges incurred by the city in causing the repair to be made and all incidental expenses in connection therewith; and

     6.     All penalties for delinquencies in the payment thereof as hereinafter provided.

     Each such entry shall be made as soon as practicable after completion of such act.

     B.     In the event that the city makes the repair or causes it to be made, the charges incurred therefor shall be determined by the city engineer and he or she or she shall prepare and mail an invoice for the same to the last known address of the property owner of the posted property. Failure to pay the invoice shall result in a lien being placed upon the property. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.160 Repair by city—Costs become lien.
     A.    From and after the date of entry in the permanent record of the charges incurred by the city for said repair, the charges shall become a lien against the posted property.

     B.     The lien shall be enforced in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.170 Filing of report.
     Upon the completion of the repair, the city engineer shall prepare and file with the city manager or designee a report specifying the work which has been done, the cost thereof, a description of the real property abutting the work that has been done, and the assessment against the lot or parcel of land proposed to be levied to pay the cost thereof. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.180 Notice of hearing on report of city engineer.
     If the repair is done or caused to be done by the city engineer, he or she or she shall cause notice of the costs thereof, upon completion of same, to be given in the manner specified in this chapter for the giving of notice to repair, which notice shall specify the day, hour and place when the city council will hear and pass upon report by the city engineer the cost of the repair together with any objects or protests, if any, which may be raised by the property owner liable to be assessed for the cost of such work and any other interested person. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.190 Procedure for hearing.
     Upon the day and hour fixed for the hearing, the city council shall hear and pass upon the report of the city engineer together with any objections or protests to the cost of said work. Thereupon, the city council may make such revision, correction or modification to the report as the council may deem just, after which the report, as submitted or revised, shall be confirmed by motion. The decisions of the city council on all protests and objections which may be made shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.200 Assessment of cost against property.
     If the property owner does not pay the cost of the repair within thirty (30) calendar days after the costs have been confirmed by the city council, the costs shall become a special assessment against the real property upon which the notice of lien shall be filed. The assessment shall continue until it is paid, together with interest at the legal maximum rate computed from the date of confirmation of the statement until payment. The assessment may be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All acts applicable to levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes shall apply to this special assessment. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.210 Filing notice of lien.
     The city engineer shall deliver to the county auditor a notice of lien substantially in the following form, to wit:

 

NOTICE OF LIEN

        Pursuant to the authority vested in me by Chapter 8.16 of Title 8 of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code, I did on the____day of _____ , 20__, cause the [sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway, abandoned driveway, private-property improvement, as the case may be] abutting the real property hereinafter described to be, to be repaired or improved, and the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge did on the ____, day of _____, 20__ , by motion, assess the cost of such work upon the real property hereinafter described and the same, nor any part thereof, has been paid and the City of La Cañada Flintridge does hereby claim a lien on said real property in the sum of ________ ($____) and the same shall be a lien upon said real property until the said sum, with interest at the rate of___ percent (___%) per annum from the _____ day of ____ 20__, (date of confirmation of assessment) has been paid in full and discharged of record, and said sum shall be collected in the same manner and at the same time as are the taxes for said City on said real property and subject to the same penalties and procedures to foreclose.

        The real property herein mentioned and upon which a lien is claimed is that certain piece or parcel of land in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, County of Los Angeles, State of California, and particularly described as follows, to-wit:

 

[description of property]

 

DATED this day of _____, 20__.

 

City Engineer _____________

 

(Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

 

8.16.220 Effect of informality.
     No charge, or any act relating to such charge or the collection of the same hereunder, shall be illegal on account of informality, or because the same was not completed within the time required by law. (Ord. 373 § 2, 2008)

Title 9 SANITATION AND HEALTH*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 494. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 9.12 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
This topic has been modified. View the section for details. Chapter 9.14 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS
Chapter 9.16 SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Chapter 9.17 SEWER SERVICE FEES
Chapter 9.18 ESTABLISHMENT OF REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
Chapter 9.20 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 9.21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 9.22 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS

Chapter 9.12 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT AND CONTROL
9.12.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “Authorized recycling agent” means any waste collector, including but not limited to any municipal collection service, private refuse hauler, private recycling enterprise, private commercial entity or private nonprofit corporation or association, recognized by the city of La Cañada Flintridge by its waste collector permit as having authority to collect recyclable materials within the city.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of La Cañada Flintridge and any other person designated by the city manager to perform the functions set forth in this chapter.

     “Commercial entity” means any business, including, without limitation, any retail outlet, financial establishment, commercial warehouse, manufacturing facility, professional office, hotel or motel, hospital or other health care facility, and any private nonprofit organization, including, without limitation, any church or club.

     “Composting” means the process of controlling biological decomposition of organic wastes that have been deliberately separated from the solid waste stream for the purpose of creating a reusable product.

     “Composting center, station or facility” means any facility whose principal function is to receive and to process green and/or organic waste through composting.

     “Designated collection location” means the place where an authorized recycling agent has been permitted by or contracted with the city to pick up recyclable materials. The location will customarily be, but is not limited to, the curbside of a residential neighborhood or the service alley, or trash pick-up location, of a commercial entity.

     “Disposal site” means the place, location, tract of land, area or premises in use, or intended to be used, for the landfill disposal of solid waste.

     “Green waste” means noncontaminated material composed of organic matter or plant matter which is the result of seasonal variations or landscape and gardening activities. Green waste includes, without limitation, grass clippings, shrubbery, leaves, tree trimmings, branches, flowers, plant stalks, garden prunings, and other plant material. Green waste does not include items such as food, fruits and vegetables, dirt or rocks, sod, stumps or logs, pet waste, yucca leaves, palm fronds or other fibrous materials, recyclables or trash.

     “Institutional entity” means and includes any governmental agency, including city, county, state and/or federal, public or private school, library, college or university, utility, special district and/or public nonprofit or not-for-profit organizations.

     “Multiresidential complex” means any residential building, boardinghouse, apartment building, condominium complex, stock cooperative complex or flats consisting of more than two independent dwelling units. Multiresidential complex does not include motel, hotel or automobile court.

     “Permit” means a waste collector permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, syndicate, the United States, this state, any country, city or county municipality, district, or other political subdivision of the state or any other group combination acting as a unit.

     “Recyclable materials or recyclables” means material having an economic value in the secondary material market, including, but not limited to aluminum and bi-metal cans, newspapers, glass containers and plastics. The city manager may expand the definition to include green wastes, paper, cardboard, used motor oil, ferrous metal, textiles or other materials upon thirty (30) day written notice to the waste collectors and/or authorized recycling agents.

     “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw materials for new, reused or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace. Recycling does not include transformation, defined as incineration, pyrolysis, distillation, gasification or biological conversion other than composting.

     “Recycling center, station or facility” includes facilities whose principal function is to receive, store, convert, separate and/or transfer recyclable materials for processing.

     “Scavenging” means the unauthorized collection, removal of, or possession of recyclable materials intended for collection by an authorized recycling agent.

     “Segregated recyclables from other waste materials” shall be defined as the placement of recyclable materials in designated recycling containers or any other container visibly marked with the word “recycle” or any other such word, words or wording which reasonably conveys the intent that the container is being used for the specific purpose of holding recyclable materials; or the binding of recyclable materials separately from the other waste materials; or the physical separation of recyclable materials from other waste materials.

     “Single-family residence” means a residence or multiple residence consisting of two units or less.

     “Solid waste” means all putrescible and nonputrescible solid, semisolid and liquid wastes, including garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, recyclable material, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, abandoned vehicles and parts thereof, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid and semisolid wastes, sewage sludge and other discarded solid and semisolid wastes. “Solid waste” does not include hazardous waste, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40141 or low level radioactive waste regulated under Chapter 7.6 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code, or medical waste, not disposed of at a solid waste facility, regulated under Chapter 6.1 of Division 20 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Solid waste facility” means and includes a disposal facility, disposal site and/or solid waste transfer/processing station.

     “Solid waste management” means a planned program for effectively controlling the generation, storage, collection, transportation, processing and refuse conversion or disposal of solid wastes in a safe, sanitary,

 

     aesthetically acceptable, environmentally sound and economical manner. It includes all administrative, financial, environmental, legal and planning functions as well as the operational aspects of solid waste handling, disposal and resource recovery systems necessary to achieve established objectives.

     “Transfer/processing station or station” means facilities utilized to receive solid wastes; temporarily store, separate, convert or otherwise process solid wastes; and/or transfer the solid wastes directly from smaller to larger vehicles for transport.

     “Waste collection vehicle” means any truck, trailer, semi-trailer, conveyance or vehicle used by a waste collector to collect, haul or transport solid waste across public highways.

     “Waste collector” means any person operating one or more waste collection vehicles for the purpose of collecting, transporting, conveying, hauling and/or disposing of any solid waste. (Ord. 301 § 1, 2000; Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.020 Waste collector permit.
     A.    No waste collector shall operate within the city of La Cañada Flintridge without a valid waste collector permit issued pursuant to this chapter and clearly displayed in the front window of every waste collection vehicle operating within the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     B.     Application for a waste collector permit shall be made on a form provided by the city, accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The information provided in the application shall be certified by the applicant as being true and accurate. The city manager may require additional information as authorized by law.

     C.     Upon its receipt, the city manager shall examine each application for conformity with the requirements of this chapter. If it is found to conform to the requirements of this chapter, the application shall be accepted and approved and such approval shall be so noted upon the face of the application. If the city manager determines that the application does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the application shall be rejected and the applicant shall be notified of the grounds for the rejection.

     D.    Each waste collector shall remit a solid waste management fee in an amount equal to ten percent of its gross receipts generated by solid waste collection, transfer or disposal from customers within the city of La Cañada Flintridge, to the city clerk on a quarterly basis. Payments for the preceding calendar quarter will be due on April 15th, July 15th, October 15th and January 15th of each calendar year. The first payment shall be due on April 1, 1992 for the calendar quarter beginning January 1, 1992. The city manager may waive the solid waste management fee in instances where the waste collector documents that at least fifty (50) percent of the solid waste it collects is recycled in a manner consistent with the city’s source reduction and recycling element and mandates set forth by the state of California. Unless waived by the city manager, the failure of a waste collector to submit the solid waste management fee on or before the dates stipulated in this section shall constitute just cause for revocation of the waste collector permit.

     E.     All applicants and/or permittees shall notify the city manager of any change in the information provided in the application including, but not limited to, changes in routing and/or changes in services offered that are initiated by the waste collector. Notice shall be given not less than thirty (30) days prior to the date the change is effective and shall be given on a form provided by the city.

     F.     The city manager may deny a waste collector permit when he or she or she determines that the proposed waste collection operation is not consistent with either the city’s or the county’s solid waste management plan, or cannot conform to state standards, or to any provision of this chapter.

     G.    Upon denial of a permit, the city manager shall give written notice of the denial to the applicant and any other person who has requested in writing that such notice be given. The applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision of the city manager to the city council by filing with the city manager within ten days of any such decision a written appeal specifying the decision complained of and the reasons for the appeal. The decision of the city council shall be final.

     H.    A waste collector permit shall be valid from the date of issuance until January 1st of the subsequent year. It shall be renewable thereafter for periods of one year at a time. Applications for renewal shall be submitted by December 1st preceding the year applied for and shall be approved following confirmation by the city manager that all requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled.

     I.      If a waste collector permit has been revoked or not renewed, it may be reinstated by application. Such an application shall be made in the manner specified in this chapter and shall be handled in the same manner as an application for a new permit. However, nothing in this chapter is intended to preclude the city from considering the revocation or nonrenewal and grounds therefor in reviewing the application. The waste collector must be able to demonstrate that the reasons for permit revocation or nonrenewal have been rectified. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.030 Waste collector qualifications.
     A.    Before a waste collector permit may be issued, proof must be submitted to the city manager to establish that the waste collector has adequate financial resources and experience to properly conduct the operation(s) authorized. Information required shall include, but not be limited to, the filing of a twenty-five thousand dollar ($25,000.00) performance bond or equivalent security to remain in effect for the term of the permit; and evidence submitted to the city that the waste collector has experience sufficient to meet the needs of waste collection activities.

     B.     Before any permit is issued, evidence of liability insurance shall be provided in such form as is approved by the city attorney. Such insurance shall name the city, its officers, employees and representatives and citizens as an additional named insured against liability arising from activities under the permit, with the limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for bodily injuries, including accidental death to any person and subject to the same limit for each person in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) on account of any one occurrence, and an amount of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) for property damage on account of any one occurrence. The policy shall provide for and the certificate of insurance shall indicate that a thirty (30) day prior written notice of any cancellation shall be provided to the city.

     C.     Each waste collector operating within the city shall provide the city with evidence that it has workers’ compensation insurance in the amounts required by law; and shall certify that he or she is in compliance with SB 198 (Title 8 of the California Code of Regulations Section 3203).

     D.    Before a waste collector permit shall be issued, a report must be submitted to the city manager that indicates the type(s) of services provided, rates, route schedules, description of standard type service, holiday schedules and other related information required by the city.

     E.     Every waste collector shall maintain a telephone for the purpose of responding to inquiries and for the receipt of complaints. The waste collector’s telephone number shall be listed in the telephone directory in the firm’s name. There shall be a person or a personal answering service or recording service available for the receipt of telephone calls between eight a.m. and five p.m., Monday through Friday, holidays excepted. The waste collector shall maintain a written record of complaints received and the written record of each complaint shall be retained for at least ninety (90) days. The record shall contain the date of complaint, the complainant’s name, address and telephone number, the nature of complaint, and the date of action and the action taken pursuant thereto or the reason for nonaction. The record of complaints and other records pertaining to solid waste collection and disposal shall be open to the inspection of the city at all reasonable times. In the event the waste collector maintains no office, the location of the record of complaints and other records of the waste collector shall be made known to the city. All inquiries and complaints and other records of the waste collector shall be made known to the city.

     F.     The city manager may waive one or more of the requirements of this section for an applicant for a waste collector permit when the waste collector is an institutional entity and/or provides service for limited locations and/or types of solid waste, if the city manager determines such requirement(s) would effectuate an unnecessary hardship on the applicant and are not required to preserve the public health, safety and welfare. In such a situation, the city manager may impose additional or different conditions on the applicant to effectuate the purpose of this chapter. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.040 Routing.
     The city manager may require that waste collection services be provided on certain streets and/or in certain sections of the city on specific days of the week by giving thirty (30) days’ written notice to all affected waste collectors. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.050 Required waste collection services.
     A.    The required waste collection services described herein only prescribe a minimum level of service, and do not preclude a waste collector from providing a higher level of service.

     B.     Collection of recyclables shall occur on the same day and during the same hours specified for solid waste collection, unless otherwise approved by the city manager.

     C.     Waste collectors shall not roughly handle or in any way break, damage or cause to be broken or damaged any container.

     D.    Waste collectors shall not collect solid waste or recyclables within a residential area between the hours of eight p.m. of one day and six a.m. of the following day. Commercial and institutional waste collectors may provide collection services at any time; provided, however, that for commercial or institutional waste collection within five hundred (500) feet of residential areas, collection shall be limited to the times specified in this subsection for residential waste collection. The city manager may waive such time limitations upon written application of a waste collector when such waiver is necessitated by conditions beyond the control of the waste collector.

     E.     Each waste collector shall mail to each of its customers at least once a year a notice specifying recommended container size and the telephone number(s) at which the waste collector may be reached.

     F.     If a waste collector does not collect the contents from a customer’s container which has been placed in the location agreed upon for collection, the waste collector shall affix a notice to the container with an explanation of the reason(s) why the contents were not collected and the telephone number of the waste collector.

     G.    The city manager may require waste collectors to provide a public awareness program for their customers, including, but not limited to, literature and other information designed to promote public participation and awareness of the need and benefits for solid waste management programs and of the availability of services provided by the waste collector. Such public awareness programs may be required up to twice each calendar year and must be approved by the city manager. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.055 Mandatory green waste collection and recycling program.
     A.    On or before April 1, 2000, all waste collectors that provide waste collection service to one or more single-family residences in the city shall implement a manual green waste collection and recycling program as described herein. Manual green waste collection services shall be provided to all single-family residences in the city from which a waste collector collects solid waste. Waste collectors shall provide each residence with labels for placement on the resident’s containers identifying the container for green waste collection. Waste collectors shall provide all labor and equipment required to conduct the manual green waste collection and recycling program, except for the provision of containers for the green waste.

     B.     On or before March 1, 2000, for current waste collectors, and within thirty (30) days for new waste collectors, each waste collector shall submit to city a draft public education package which shall include a draft brochure and a draft newspaper ad for placement in at least two local newspapers. City will provide waste collector with comments on the draft public education package within fifteen (15) working days. Waste collectors shall produce the final brochure and deliver it to residents, and prepare the final newspaper ads and submit them to the local papers. Said ads shall run a minimum of two times during the first thirty (30) days of the green waste collection and recycling program. Said ads shall be a minimum of one-sixteenth of a newspaper page in size.

     C.     Waste collectors shall record the cost, productivity, tons collected, person hours, number of stops, number of participating homes, number of routes, and all other data on the manual green waste collection program in a format approved by city and shall submit said data on the fifteenth day of each quarter beginning in June 2000. City may request any and all additional information from waste collectors as needed by city and its consultants to evaluate the productivity and cost of the green waste collection program and to report data to state and federal agencies as required by law. City may, in its sole discretion, conduct efficiency and/or time and motion field studies of the green waste collection program at any time and for any duration. City may request, and waste collectors shall supply data more frequently than quarterly should city so request.

     D.    All green waste collected by waste collectors shall be delivered to a facility for recycling, mulching, composting or use as alternative daily cover (as defined in state regulations). If it becomes known that a green waste processing facility utilized by one or more waste collectors is not recycling, mulching or composting the green waste collected in city, or is out of compliance with local, state or federal operating permits, laws or regulations, or is processing and/or using green waste in such a way that the green waste collected from within city will not count as solid waste diverted for purposes of AB 939, and any other applicable state or federal law, city reserves the right to direct waste collectors to deliver the green waste to another processing facility.

     E.     All single-family residences shall participate in the green waste collection and recycling program by separating all green waste into a container with a label supplied by the waste collector, uncontaminated by solid waste unacceptable under the green waste program. No person shall mix green waste with other forms of solid waste nor shall any person contaminate green waste with any other substances. Containers shall be of suitable strength and durability, should be watertight, tight seamed, with a lid or cover. Plastic bags, paper bags and cardboard containers shall not be used for disposal of green waste. If a single-family residence sets out green waste in violation of this section, the waste collector shall issue a warning to the residence, along with a green waste brochure and two labels. After three warnings, any person violating this subsection shall be guilty of an infraction punishable as set forth in Section 9.12.120 of this code. The waste collector shall report to the city all warnings issued to single-family residences on a semimonthly basis.

     F.     The maximum fee to be paid by single-family residences to waste collectors for providing and making available a manual green waste collection and recycling program may be as set forth in a city council resolution. (Ord. 301 § 2, 2000)

 

9.12.060 Roll-off containers.
     A.    If solid waste will be disposed of as a result of building activities, the building permit applicant shall be responsible for ensuring that all waste is disposed of by a waste collector possessing a valid waste collector permit. As evidence, the building permit applicant must provide the city with the name, address and phone number of the waste collector before a building permit is issued. The building permit applicant may not change waste collectors to be utilized on any job without notifying the city in writing five days prior to such change.

     B.     This section does not apply to a property owner who hauls waste generated as a result of building activities he or she performs him or herself, except that the property owner must report the quantity of waste, type of waste, and the location to which the waste was delivered to the city. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.070 Required reporting.
     A.    Waste collectors shall prepare monthly service collection reports. The report shall include information on the total number of customers served by regular solid waste collection; total tonnage of solid waste collected; number of single-family residences, multiresidential complexes and commercial and institutional entities participating in recycling and/or green waste programs; tonnage of total recyclables collected; tonnage of each individual type of recyclable material and green waste collected, identified separately by single-family residence, multiresidential complex, commercial and institutional categories; total operation costs; revenues derived from the sale of recyclable and green waste; destination and/or disposal site locations of all recyclable, green waste and all solid waste; and any other pertinent information as identified in any waste collector agreement or permit issued by the city. All such reports are to be submitted to the city on a monthly basis on forms provided by the city, and must be received by the city no later than fifteen (15) days after the end of the month being reported.

     B.     Failure of a waste collector to comply with the requirements of this section shall constitute a cause for the city manager to revoke or not to renew the waste collector permit issued by the city.

     C.     The city reserves the right to conduct an audit that verities the waste collector’s financial records. This audit shall be performed by auditors selected by the city and whose fees and costs shall be paid by the city. The city shall have the right to inspect the financial records of the waste collector relating to this section during business hours at the waste collector’s place of business, but such inspection shall not be so conducted as to unreasonably interfere with the waste collector’s necessary use of its financial records. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.080 Disposal of collected materials.
     A.    All solid waste collected or transported upon or along any public highway in the city of La Cañada Flintridge shall be disposed of at a solid waste facility where such waste can legally be accepted; provided, however, that waste collectors shall sell, give or otherwise transfer recyclable materials to a recycling center, station or facility, and shall sell, give or otherwise transfer green waste to a composting center, station or facility or to a landfill permitted to accept green wastes. In no event shall any waste collector dispose of any recyclable material(s) in a disposal site unless otherwise approved by the city manager.

     B.     The city may stipulate the recycling center, station or facility, or the solid waste facility to be utilized by any waste collector. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.090 Inspections.
     A.    The city, in issuing or reviewing any waste collector permit or in connection with any action relating thereto or with any authorized enforcement activity, may investigate the operation of any waste collector operating within its jurisdiction. The city may require that any person who is, or proposes to become, a waste collector shall furnish, upon penalty of perjury, such technical or monitoring program reports or other reports as the city may specify. In such an investigation, the city may inspect the facilities, equipment or vehicles used for storage, collection, transportation, processing or disposal of solid waste or recyclables, as necessary to ensure compliance with this chapter.

     B.     All waste collectors shall have each waste collection vehicle inspected as per the requirements of the California Highway Patrol. The city manager shall have the authority to require additional inspections as he or she deems necessary to insure that the public health, safety and welfare are adequately protected. All costs of such inspections shall be the responsibility of the waste collector. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.100 Collection by unauthorized person prohibited.
     A.    All ownership and title rights to recyclable materials shall be vested in the city once such recyclable materials have been placed at the designated collection location by the resident, institutional or commercial entity. All ownership and title rights to recyclable materials shall be transferred to the authorized recycling agent(s) at the time that the authorized recycling agent(s) remove the material from the designated collection location unless otherwise stipulated in writing by the city manager.

     B.     Scavenging is prohibited in the city. No person, other than the authorized recycling agent, shall remove recyclable materials which have been segregated from other waste materials and placed at the designated collection location for the purposes of collection and recycling. Unless otherwise authorized by the city in writing, recyclable materials may not be removed from such location by anyone other than an authorized recycling agent(s).

     C.     Nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of his or her own recyclable materials. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.110 Solid waste collection procedures.
     A.    No person shall place any recyclable or solid waste, or any waste container, at any place of collection before five p.m. of the day preceding the scheduled collection of said waste, or leave any such container at the place of collection after eight p.m. on the day of actual collection, or more than two hours after actual collection, whichever is later.

     B.     Waste collectors shall replace all containers where found, in an upright position. Containers or lids shall not be deposited in the roadway by any person unless no ground or other position located within ten feet of said roadway, but located out of the roadway, exists upon which such containers may practically be placed; provided, however, that containers so placed in the roadway are placed as far from the centerline as is physically possible; and provided, further, that no bin or other container capable of holding three cubic yards or more of solid waste may be placed in the roadway for more than four hours in any one day. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.115 Unauthorized dumping.
     A.    No person shall place any solid waste on any private property without the written permission of the property owner.

     B.     No person shall place any solid waste on any public property without the written permission of the city manager. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

 

9.12.120 Penalties.
     A.    Any waste collector not in possession of a valid permit shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

     B.     Violations of Sections 9.12.100 and 9.12.110 shall be punishable as follows:

     1.     Any person violating any of the provision of such sections not more than once in any twelve (12) month period shall be deemed guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00).

     2.     Any person having been found guilty of violating the provisions of such sections who, within a period of twelve (12) months, commits a second violation of the same provisions of such section, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed two hundred dollars ($200.00).

     3.     Any person having been found guilty of violating the provisions of such section who, within a period of twelve (12) months, commits a third or more violation(s) of the same provisions of such section, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each such occurrence.

     C.     Violations of Section 9.12.115 shall be punishable as a misdemeanor. (Ord. 215 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 9.14 RECYCLING AND DIVERSION OF CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION DEBRIS *
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 494. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.010 Findings and purpose.
     The city council of the city of La Cañada Flintridge finds and determines that the city is committed to protecting the public health, safety, welfare and environment; that in order to meet these goals it is necessary that the city promote the reduction of solid waste and reduce the stream of solid waste going to landfills; that under California law as embodied in the California Waste Management Act (California Public Resources Code Section 40000, et seq.), La Cañada Flintridge is required to prepare, adopt and implement source reduction and recycling elements to reach reduction goals and is required to make substantial reductions in the volume of waste materials going to landfill(s), under the threat of penalties of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) per day; that debris from demolition and construction of buildings represents a large portion of the volume presently coming from La Cañada Flintridge, and that much of the debris is particularly suitable for recycling; that La Cañada Flintridge’s commitment to the reduction of waste and to compliance with state law requires the establishment of programs for recycling and salvaging construction and demolition materials; the city council recognizes that requiring demolition and construction debris to be recycled and reused may in some respects add modestly to the cost of demolition and in other respects may make possible some cost recovery and cost reduction; and that it is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety and welfare that the following regulations be adopted. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Applicant” means any individual (single and plural; male and female), firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity whatsoever who applies to the city for the applicable permits to undertake any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city.

     “Building debris management report” means a completed “report” form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered or noncovered project.

     “Construction” means the building of any facility or structure or any portion thereof including any tenant improvements to an existing facility or structure.

     “Construction and demolition debris” means used or discarded materials removed from property during construction or renovation of a structure, or improvement resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on any pavement, commercial or residential building, or other structure.

     “Covered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 9.14.030 of this chapter.

     “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

     “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty (50) percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an impossibility exemption pursuant to Section 9.14.070 of this chapter, in which case the diversion requirement shall be the maximum diversion rate attainable, established by the city official for the project.

     “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

     “Noncovered project” shall have the meaning set forth in Section 9.14.030 of this chapter.

     “Performance security” means any performance bond, surety bond, money order, letter of credit, or certificate of deposit submitted to the city pursuant to Section 9.14.050 of this chapter.

     “Project” means any activity that requires an application for a demolition or building permit or any similar permit from the city.

     “Recycling” means the process of collecting, sorting, cleansing, treating, and reconstituting materials that would otherwise become solid waste, and returning them to the economic mainstream in the form of raw material for new, reused, or reconstituted products which meet the quality standards necessary to be used in the marketplace.

     “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification in an existing structure.

     “Reuse” means further or repeated use of construction or demolition debris.

     “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.030 Threshold for covered projects.
     A.    Covered Projects. All construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city that are two thousand (2,000) square feet or greater (“covered projects”) shall comply with this chapter. Beginning January 1, 2002, all construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city that are one thousand (1,000) square feet or greater (“covered projects”) shall comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with any of the terms of this chapter shall subject the applicant to the full range of enforcement set forth in Section 9.14.080 of this chapter.

     B.     Noncovered Projects. Applicants for construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city under two thousand (2,000) square feet (“noncovered projects”) shall be exempt from this chapter but, nevertheless encouraged, to divert at least fifty (50) percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris. Beginning January 1, 2002, all construction, demolition, and renovation projects within the city that are less than one thousand (1,000) square feet (“noncovered projects”) shall be exempt from this chapter, but, will be similarly encouraged, to divert at least fifty (50) percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris.

     C.     City-Sponsored Projects. All city-sponsored construction, demolition, and renovation projects, shall be considered “covered projects” for the purposes of this chapter.

     D.    Compliance as a Condition of Approval. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.040 Building debris management report.
     A.    All applicants for demolition or building permits involving any covered project shall submit a properly completed building debris management report (“report”) on a form provided by the city as part of the application packet for the permit.

     B.     The report shall require first that applicant identify all debris to the best of applicant’s ability to be generated from demolition and construction on the project work site.

     C.     The report shall then require applicant to provide documentation that verifies a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the debris or material generated was diverted from a landfill. Documentation shall include receipts of disposal, reuse or recycling of generated materials stating where the materials were taken, the date they were received, the amount received, and the type of material received.

     D.    Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all construction and demolition debris diverted or landfilled are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all construction and demolition material shall be weighed by measurement on scales and reported in tons or cubic yards. Such scales shall be in compliance with all regulatory requirements for accuracy and maintenance. For construction and demolition debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement may be used.

     E.     Applicant must return the completed report to the city prior to a request for final inspection. Final inspection shall not be completed until review and approval of the report and its documentation.

     F.     A fee determined by city council resolution may be charged for the administration and review of the building debris management report. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.050 Performance security.
     The applicant for any covered project shall submit a performance security. The amount of the performance security shall be calculated as the lesser of three percent of total project cost or ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). Acceptable forms of performance security include the following: performance bonds, surety bonds, money orders, letters of credit, and certificates of deposit. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.060 Determination of compliance and release of performance security.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no final inspection by the building and safety department may be completed unless and until the information submitted under Section 9.14.040 of this chapter have been determined to be in compliance with the diversion requirement of this chapter.

     A.    Full Compliance. If the city determines that all conditions have been met, the report shall be marked “Approved” and a copy of the “Approved Report” document shall be provided to both the applicant and building department for the project file. Final inspection may then be completed. Full performance security shall then be released to the applicant.

     B.     Incomplete. If the city determines that the report is incomplete, the report will be:

     1.     Returned to the applicant marked “Denied,” including a statement of reasons, and so notify the building and safety department, which shall then immediately stop processing the demolition or building permit application; and

     2.     The applicant will be requested to provide documentation that meets the requirements of this chapter.

     C.     Noncompliance. If the city determines that the report fails to indicate that at least fifty (50) percent of all construction and demolition debris generated by the project was reused or recycled, the applicant shall have thirty (30) days to provide further documentation that the requirements of this chapter have been met, or applicant shall be subject to Section 9.14.080. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.070 Exemption.
     A.    Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption prior to undertaking any disposal activities for that specific project. The applicant shall indicate on the “report” the maximum rate of diversion he or she believes is feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that he or she believes make it infeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

     B.     Meeting with Compliance Official. The compliance official or designee shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

     C.     Granting of Exemption. If the compliance official determines that it is infeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, he or she shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the report submitted by the applicant. The compliance official shall return a copy of the report to the applicant marked “Approved for Exemption” and shall notify the building department that the report has been approved.

     D.    Denial of Exemption. If the compliance official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, he or she shall so inform the applicant in writing. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days to resubmit the report in full compliance with Section 9.14.040 of this chapter. If the applicant fails to resubmit the report, or if the resubmitted report does not comply with Section 9.14.040 of this chapter, the compliance official shall deny the report in accordance with Section 9.14.060 of this chapter. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

 

This topic has been modified. View the section for details. 9.14.080 Violation, penalties and declaration of nuisance.
     A.    Applicants for any covered project that violate any provision of this chapter shall forfeit the performance security for the project. A second violation by the same applicant in a calendar year, for any covered project, shall be subject to forfeiture of the performance security and a fine of two hundred dollars ($200.00). A third violation, in addition to forfeiting the performance security, shall be cause for suspension, after an administrative hearing, of the applicant’s business license for a period of twelve (12) months.

     B.     In addition to the penalties set forth in subsection A of this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code or any statute or ordinance adopted by reference to this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by the city in any manner authorized by law.

     C.     Violation of any provision of this chapter may be enforced by civil action including an action for injunctive relief. In any civil enforcement action, administrative or judicial, the city shall be entitled to recover its attorneys’ fees and costs from a person who is determined by a court of competent jurisdiction to have violated this chapter. (Ord. 313 § 1, 2001)

Chapter 9.16 SANITARY SEWERS AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ord. 47.

 

9.16.010 Adopted.
     Except as hereinafter may be provided, the 1989 Edition of Title 20 of the Los Angeles County Code regulating sanitary sewers and industrial waste is adopted and shall be and become the sanitary sewer and industrial waste ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 234 § 2, 1994)

 

9.16.030 Definitions.
     Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in the said Title 20, each name or term shall be deemed and construed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

     “Director” means the director of public works for the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 234 § 2, 1994)

 

9.16.040 Septic permit prohibited.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no permit shall be issued for any septic system to be installed, enlarged, repaired or replaced when such septic system is located on a lot or parcel which has access at the property line of such lot or parcel to a sewer line within the right-of-way (whether publicly or privately owned). The provisions of this section shall not be deemed to prohibit the issuance of any permit which may be required for ordinary maintenance of any septic system. (Ord. 239 § 1, 1995)

 

9.16.050 Connection to sewer required.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any lot or parcel which has access at the property line of such lot or parcel to a sewer line within the right-of-way (whether publicly or privately owned) shall be required to be connected to such sewer line upon the earlier of either of the following circumstances:

     A.    Transfer of title to the lot or parcel to any person other than the owner of such property occurring not less than six months after the recordation of a notice of completion of the sewer line. For purposes of this section, transfer of title shall include transfer pursuant to a sale for any monetary amount, or a trade for any other real or personal property, but shall not include transfer of title resulting from: (1) foreclosure of any security interest; (2) termination of any owner’s interest in the property due to death or dissolution of marriage; or (3) donation or gift of the property from the record owner(s) to any other person;

     B.     The passage of five years from the date of recordation of a notice of completion for the sewer line. (Ord. 239 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 9.17 SEWER SERVICE FEES
9.17.010 Establishing Sewer Service Fees.
     A.    In addition to other fees, assessments, or charges provided by ordinance or the municipal code, the owner of any parcel of real property for which no other sewer service fee is provided, and which parcel of real property is connected with and discharges sewage into the city’s sewer system, shall pay a sewer service fee as established from time to time by ordinance of the city council. All owners of parcels of real property connecting to the city’s sewer system shall pay for such service at the rates and the times and under the rules hereinafter set forth.

     B.     Sewer service fees shall be established by ordinance in accordance with California Constitution, Article XIII D, Section 6 and California Health and Safety Code Section 5471, as the same may be amended or renumbered from time to time.

     C.     The record owner of any parcel of real property (“property owner”) for which a sewer service fee has been imposed shall be responsible for payment of the sewer service fee. Any agreement between a property owner and a third party, including a tenant, to the contrary will not relieve the property owner of the responsibility to pay the sewer service fee.

     D.    Sewer service fees may be collected in the following manner:

     1.     Through the property tax roll of the County of Los Angeles in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Sections 5473 through 5473.4, as the same may be amended and renumbered from time to time; or

     2.     By issuing a manual bill for payment to the property owner.

     E.     If collected on the property tax roll, such sewer service fee shall constitute a lien against the parcel of real property upon which it is imposed and be subject to the levy, collection, and enforcement provisions of California Health and Safety Code Sections 5472.5 through 5473a, as the same may be amended and renumbered from time to time.

     F.     If a city sewer-sewage disposal permit, or such other permit as may be required by the city in order for a property to connect to the city’s sewer system, is submitted to the city after June 30th of any fiscal year, the sewer service fee shall be manually billed to the property owner and prorated for the then current fiscal year based on the date the permit is issued. A time credit of one month shall be allowed when computing the prorated amount of the sewer service fee due and owing by the property owner in order to account for any time necessary for the property owner to connect to the city’s sewer system. The sewer service fee for that fiscal year shall be paid by the property owner at the time the property owner submits the city sewer-sewage disposal permit, or such other permit as may be required by the city in order for a property to connect to the city’s sewer system, to the city.

     G.    The sewer service rate to be imposed upon a parcel of real property connecting to the city’s sewer system shall be determined on the basis of the land use classification for that parcel as such classifications are determined and established by ordinance of the city council pursuant to Section 9.17.010(A) and (B). (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

9.17.020 Changes in use resulting in different rates and sewer service fees, and back charges.
     A.    Whenever the land use classification of any parcel of real property connected to the city’s sewer system is changed, the rate of the sewer service fee to be imposed upon the parcel of real property shall be adjusted in the following fiscal year and imposed in accordance with the rate of the sewer service fee then in effect for that land use classification.

     B.     If a parcel of real property connects to the city’s sewer system without payment of a sewer service fee, the city engineer is authorized to require back charges in the event that the parcel of real property has been discharging into the city’s sewer system. The back charges may be imposed for up to four years in arrears. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

 

9.17.030 Sewer revenue fund established.
     A.    There is hereby established a “sewer revenue fund.” All revenues from the operation of the city’s sewer system shall be paid into the sewer revenue fund.

     B.     All revenues of the sewer system shall be used for the following purposes only:

     1.     Paying the costs and expenses of operating and maintaining the city’s sewer system, including, but not limited to, costs and expenses incurred in receiving, transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage through the city’s sewer system, and any fees or charges paid to another entity for transporting, pumping, treating, and disposing of sewage from the city’s sewer system, and the costs and expenses of billing, collecting and administering the sewer service fees;

     2.     Paying all or any portion of the costs and expenses of extending, constructing, reconstructing, or improving the city’s sewer system or any part thereof;

     3.     Paying the costs and expenses of complying with state or federal law relating to the city’s sewer system; and

     4.     Paying any other costs or expenses incurred by the city as a result of providing sewer services to real property within the city. (Ord. 363 § 1, 2007)

Chapter 9.18 ESTABLISHMENT OF REIMBURSEMENT DISTRICTS
9.18.010 Purpose.
     The city council regulates and requires public improvements as conditions of orderly development. Permitting the formation of a reimbursement district for public improvements protects the public health, safety and welfare. The city council may establish a reimbursement district for the purpose of reimbursing a subdivider or property owner for a portion of their costs in the construction of public improvements. Public improvement reimbursement districts enable the city to charge a property owner the cost of public improvements attributable to their development. A reimbursement district permits development to proceed, while enabling future property owners to take advantage of the existing public improvements and pay their proportionate costs of those improvements. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     “Public improvements” means streets, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street lights, storm drains and sanitary sewers required to be constructed by the contractor as a condition of developing property.

     “Reimbursement agreement” means a contract entered into between the city and any other person, hereinafter called “contractor,” providing for the construction of public improvements and for the collection by the city of a fee or charge for the connection with such public improvements by any other person and for reimbursement to the contractor out of the proceeds of such charges.

     “Reimbursement district” means that territory which may benefit from utilization of further or additional public improvements constructed or agreed to be constructed at the expense of the contractor. The exterior boundaries of such reimbursement district may be hereafter established and may be reflected in a reimbursement map placed on file with the city.

     “Reimbursement fees” means those charges which the city council approves and which are imposed on territory within reimbursement districts, to recoup the cost of public improvements constructed by the contractor and which benefit territory.

     “Reimbursement map” means a map on file with the city designating the exterior boundaries of a reimbursement district and reflecting the reimbursement fees chargeable to include territory as a condition of utilization of the public improvements which the contractor installed. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.030 Reimbursement agreements—Execution.
     Whenever a person has been required by the city to install public improvements as a condition precedent to the issuance of a building permit and such person has, at his or her own expense, constructed such public improvements in accordance with the requirements of the city, and it is found by the city council that such public improvements will be for the benefit of, or useable by, other persons or properties in the city, the city council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with such person whereby the city will collect from any other person using or connecting with such public improvements within a period of ten years from the dedication of such public improvements to the city for public use, a charge for making such connection. The amount of the charge made shall be the amount set forth in such reimbursement agreement. No such agreement may be entered into unless the other party agrees thereby to dedicate the public improvements to the city for public use. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.040 Reimbursement agreement—District establishment.
     Upon the execution of a reimbursement agreement, there shall be established a reimbursement district consisting of those properties that the city council finds will be benefitted by such public improvements. Charges shall be made only on those persons desiring to connect to such public improvements with property lying in whole or in part within such reimbursement district. A reimbursement map shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk for examination by the public. There shall be indicated thereon the amounts or charges necessary to make connection with such public improvements and a reference to the reimbursement agreement establishing such charge. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.050 Reimbursement agreement—Connection to public improvements.
     After the execution of a reimbursement agreement and the filing of the necessary reimbursement map, no other person shall connect to such public improvements indicated thereon without payment of the charges provided for in such reimbursement agreement. No building permit shall be issued by any city or county department, officer or employee until the city clerk has certified that the payment has been made as required; provided, that no charge may be made unless and until such public improvements have been dedicated to the city for public use, and that no such charge shall be made after ten years from the dedication of such public improvements to the city for public use have elapsed. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.060 Reimbursement fees—Payment.
     No permit shall be issued for the connection of property lying within a reimbursement district to the public improvements until the applicant shall have first paid to the city all reimbursement fees attributable to the connecting property as indicated on the reimbursement map. Reimbursement fees shall be paid to the city engineer and payments so made shall become the property of the city. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.070 Public improvement reimbursement fund established.
     There is established a public improvements fund in the city treasury and all charges made and received in accordance with such reimbursement agreement shall be deposited in such fund to be transferred semi-annually to the contractor, together with a description of properties for which the payments have been made. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

 

9.18.080 Nonliability of city.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as requiring the city to enter into any reimbursement agreement even though it may have required the installation of public improvements, nor shall the city be liable for reimbursement of the cost of such public improvements except from the proceeds of such charges. (Ord. 293 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 9.20 LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 266, 316, 332, 333 and 346.

 

9.20.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be known as the Low Impact Development Ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2015)

 

9.20.020 Adoption by reference.
     A.    Except as amended in Section 9.20.030 below, Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code, which chapter is entitled “Low Impact Development Standards,” is hereby adopted in its entirety by reference and expressly incorporated herein. Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby made a part of this Chapter 9.20 as if, for all intents and purposes, fully set forth in this chapter. This adoption by reference shall include any subsequent amendments to Chapter 12.84 unless modified in this chapter.

     B.     A certified copy of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is on file in the office of the city clerk for public record and inspection.

     C.     If there is any inconsistency between any provisions of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code and other provisions of this municipal code, such other provisions of this municipal code shall prevail. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2015)

 

9.20.030 Amendments.
     Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended as follows:

     A.    Section 12.84.420 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to add the following definition:

 

        “Single-family hillside residence” means any lot or parcel of land, residentially zoned and in residential use, which has an average slope of fifteen (15) percent or greater.

 

     B.     Section 12.84.420 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to amend the following definition:

 

        “County” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

 

 

     C.     Section 12.84.420 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to modify the following definition:

 

        “Director” means the director of public works of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

 

     D.    Section 12.84.420 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to modify the following definition:

 

        “Public works” means the public works division of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

 

     E.     Section 12.84.430.A of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to add the following designated project:

 

        10.      New single-family hillside residences.

 

     F.     Section 12.84.430.E.2 of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

        2.        Any development project for which a complete discretionary or non-discretionary permit application was filed with the city of La Cañada Flintridge prior to January 1, 2009.

 

     G.    Section 12.84.440.B of Chapter 12.84 of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

        B.       Low impact development plans shall be submitted in accordance with the Low Impact Development Standards Manual issued by the county of Los Angeles department of public works, a copy of which shall be located in the office of the director.

(Ord. 433 § 1, 2015)

 

9.20.040 Responsibility for administration.
     This chapter shall be administered by the director of public works of the city of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2015)

 

9.20.050 Mitigation measures for hillside homes.
     A new single-family hillside home development shall include mitigation measures to:

     A.    Conserve natural areas; and

     B.     Protect slopes and channels; and

     C.     Provide storm drain system stenciling and signage; and

     D.    Divert roof runoff to vegetated areas before discharge unless the diversion would result in slope instability; and

     E.     Direct surface flow to vegetated areas before discharge, unless the diversion would result in slope instability. (Ord. 433 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 9.21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
9.21.010 Purpose.
     The purposes of this chapter are to:

     A.    Protect and enhance the water quality of the city’s watercourses, water bodies, and wetlands in a manner consistent with the Clean Water Act and California Regional Water Quality Control Board Order No. R4-2012-0175, and any amendment, revision, or reissuance thereof; and

     B.     Ensure the future health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city by:

     1.     Controlling non-stormwater discharges to the storm drain system.

     2.     Eliminating discharges to the storm drain system from spills, dumping, or disposal of materials other than stormwater.

     3.     Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges, including those pollutants taken up by stormwater as it flows over urban areas, to the maximum extent practicable.

     4.     Reducing pollutants in stormwater discharges in order to achieve applicable water quality objectives for surface waters in the city and the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.020 Construction and application.
     This chapter shall be construed to assure consistency with the requirements of the Federal Clean Water Act, as amended and supplemented, applicable implementing regulations, and existing or future NPDES permits and any amendment, revision or re-issuance thereof. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.030 Responsibility for administration.
     This chapter shall be administered by the director. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.040 Definitions.
     The following words, as used in this chapter, shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     “Automotive service facilities” mean facilities with any one of the following Standard Industrial Classification Codes: 5013, 5014, 5511, 5541, 7532-7534, or 7536-7539.

     “Best management practices” or “BMPs” means practices or physical devices or systems designed to prevent or reduce pollutant loading from stormwater or non-stormwater discharges to receiving waters, or designed to reduce the volume of stormwater or non-stormwater discharged to the receiving water.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Clean Water Act” or “CWA” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, enacted in 1972 by Public Law 92-500 and amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987, which prohibits the discharge of pollutants to receiving waters unless the discharge is in accordance with an NPDES permit.

     “Director” means the city’s director of public works or designee.

     “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, dumping, or disposal of any liquid, semi-solid, or solid substance.

     “Infiltration” means capturing and infiltrating the stormwater runoff into in-situs soils or amended on-site soils.

     “MS4” means municipal separate storm sewer systems.

     “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System” or “NPDES” means the national program for issuing, modifying, revoking and reissuing, terminating, monitoring and enforcing permits, and imposing and enforcing pretreatment requirements, under CWA Sections 307, 402, 318, and 405.

     “Non-stormwater discharge” means any discharge to a municipal storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater.

     “Parking lot” means land area or facility for the parking or storage of motor vehicles used for businesses, commerce, industry, or personal use, with a lot size of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of surface area, or with twenty-five (25) or more parking spaces.

     “Person” means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity.

     “Pollutant” means any “pollutant” defined in Section 502(6) of the Federal Clean Water Act or incorporated into the California Water Code Section 13373.

     “Receiving water” means “water of the United States” into which waste and/or pollutants are or may be discharged.

     “Regional Board” means the California Regional Water Quality Control Board, Los Angeles Region.

     “Storm drain system” means any facility or any parts of the facility, including streets, gutters, conduits, natural or artificial drains, channels and watercourse that are used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater and are located within the city.

     “Stormwater” means runoff and drainage related to precipitation events.

     “SUSMP” means standard urban stormwater mitigation plan. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.050 General requirements for elimination of pollutants in stormwater.
     A.    Any person engaged in activities which will or may result in pollutants entering the city’s MS4 shall undertake all practicable measures to eliminate such pollutants.

     B.     The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the city in front of which there is a paved sidewalk, shall maintain the sidewalks free of dirt or litter to the maximum extent practicable. Sweepings from the sidewalk shall not be swept or otherwise made or allowed to go into the gutter or roadway, but shall be disposed of in receptacles maintained on the property as required for the disposal of refuse.

     C.     Persons owning or operating a parking lot, automotive service facility, paved private street or road or similar structure, shall clean these structures as frequently and thoroughly as practicable in a manner that eliminates the discharge of pollutants to the MS4 to the maximum extent practicable.

     D.    The city council may, by resolution, adopt regulations establishing controls on the volume and rate of stormwater runoff as may be appropriate to minimize the discharge and transport of pollutants. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.060 Prohibited discharge.
     A.    Except as specified by this chapter, discharging any material other than stormwater into the storm drain system is prohibited.

     B.     The following non-stormwater discharges are exempt from the prohibition set forth in subsection A:

     1.     Any discharge regulated under a NPDES permit issued to the discharger and administered by the state of California pursuant to Chapter 5.5, Division 7 of the California Water Code under authority of the United States Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in compliance with all requirements of the permit and other applicable laws and regulations.

     2.     Discharges from the following activities will not be considered a source of pollutants to receiving waters when properly managed:

     a.     Water line flushing and other discharges from potable water sources subject to a written agreement with the city;

     b.     Landscape irrigation and lawn watering using potable water;

     c.     Rising ground waters;

     d.     Uncontaminated ground water infiltration as defined by the MS4 permit;

     e.     Water from crawl space pumps;

     f.      Air conditioning condensation;

     g.     Natural springs;

     h.     Noncommercial washing of vehicles by a non-profit organization, which has provided written notice to the city at least five business days prior to the event, or by a resident at his or her residence provided the non-profit organization or resident, as applicable:

     i.      Implements BMPs and ensures discharge avoids potential sources of pollutants in the flow path to prevent introduction of pollutants prior to discharge to the MS4 or receiving water,

     ii.     Minimizes the amount of water used by employing water conservation practices such as turning off nozzles or kinking the hose when not spraying a car, and using a low volume pressure washer,

     iii.    When possible, use biodegradable, phosphate free detergents and non-toxic cleaning products,

     iv.    Where possible, wash cars on a permeable surface where wash water can percolate into the ground (e.g., gravel or grassy areas), and/or

     v.     Empty buckets of soapy or rinse water into the sanitary sewer system (e.g., sinks or toilets);

     i.      Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands;

     j.      Dechlorinated/ debrominated swimming pool and dewatering of decorative fountain discharges, provided:

     i.      The discharger implements BMPs and ensures discharge avoids potential sources of pollutants in the flow path to prevent introduction of pollutants prior to discharge to the MS4 and receiving water,

     ii.     The discharge is dechlorinated or debrominated using holding time, aeration, and/or sodium
thiosulfate. Chlorine residual in the discharge shall not exceed 0.1 mg/L,

     iii.    The discharge does not contain any detergents, wastes, or algaecides, or any other chemicals including salts from pools commonly referred to as “salt water pools” in excess of applicable water quality objectives,

     iv.    The discharge has a pH adjusted, if necessary, to be within the range of 6.5 and 8.5 standard units,

     v.     The discharge is volumetrically and velocity controlled to promote evaporation and/or infiltration, and

     vi.    For discharges of one hundred thousand (100,000) gallons or more, require the authorization of the director and verification that the discharge pathway to the MS4 inlet is cleared of debris and mobilization of pollutants;

     k.     Flows from emergency fire fighting activities;

     l.      Street/sidewalk wash water resulting from use of high pressure, low volume spray washing using only potable water with no cleaning agents at an average usage of 0.006 gallon per square feet of sidewalk area; and

     m.    Waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code Section 13050(d) and the California Health and Safety Code Section 25117.

     3.     With written concurrence of the Regional Board, the city may exempt, in writing, other discharges that are not a source of pollutants to the storm drain system or watercourses.

     4.     Any discharge that would result in or contribute to a violation of Regional Board Order No. R4-2012-0175, issued on November 8, 2012, either separately considered or when combined with other discharges, is prohibited. Liability for any such discharge is the responsibility of the person(s) causing or responsible for the discharge.

     5.     It is unlawful for any person to throw, deposit, leave, maintain, keep, or permit to be thrown, deposited, kept, or maintained, in or upon any public or private driveway, parking area, street, alley, sidewalk, or component of the storm drain system or watercourse, any refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, accumulations, and/or pollutants so that the same may cause or contribute to pollution. The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor, of any real property in the city failing to remove pollutants is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.070 Requirements for all properties.
     The occupant or tenant, or in the absence of occupant or tenant, the owner, lessee or proprietor of any real property in the city, shall comply with the following requirements:

     A.    Runoff of water used for irrigation purposes shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable. In addition, washing down of paved areas is prohibited unless necessary for health or safety purposes as determined by the director, and not in violation of any other provision of this chapter. Runoff of water from the permitted washing down of paved areas shall be minimized to the maximum extent practicable.

     B.     Storage of Materials, Machinery and Equipment.

     1.     Objects, such as motor vehicle parts, containing grease, oil or other hazardous substances, and unsealed receptacles containing hazardous materials, shall not be stored in areas susceptible to runoff.

     2.     Any machinery or equipment which is to be repaired or maintained in areas susceptible to runoff shall be placed on a pad of absorbent material to contain leaks, spills or small discharges.

     C.     The discharge of graywater to street or storm drain is prohibited. Graywater is water that is discharged from sinks, showers, tubs, washing machines, dishwashers and garbage disposals. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.080 Maintenance of structural BMPs.
     Structural BMPs required by the city, county of Los Angeles, or state or federal agency shall be properly operated and maintained, consistent with the approved SUSMP, low impact development plan as provided in Chapter 9.20 of this code, or other equivalent plan or program, or otherwise determined by the director. Records and documentation of such maintenance shall be provided to the director upon reasonable request. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.090 Inspections.
     A.    The director may, upon seventy-two (72) hour written notice, unless exigent circumstances justify a shorter time period, enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter. Such inspection may include, but is not limited to:

     1.     Identifying products produced, processes conducted, chemicals and materials used, stored or maintained on the subject premises;

     2.     Identifying points of discharge of all wastewater, non-stormwater, processed water systems and pollutants;

     3.     Investigating the natural slope of the premises, including drainage patterns and man-made conveyance systems;

     4.     Establishing location of all points of discharge from the premises, whether by surface runoff or through a storm drain system;

     5.     Locating any illicit connection or illicit discharge;

     6.     Investigating and inspecting a vehicle, truck, trailer, tank or other mobile equipment;

     7.     A review and inspection of all records of the owner or occupant of public or private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously stored or occurring on the property, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, and any and all records relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, or any other source of contribution or potential contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system;

     8.     Inspecting, sampling and testing any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials with any waste storage area (including any container contents), and/or treatment system discharges for the purpose of determining the potential for contribution of pollutants to the storm drain system;

     9.     Inspecting the integrity of the MS4, any connection to other pipelines on the property, including the use dye and smoke tests, video surveys, photographs or videotapes, and the taking of measurements, drawings or any other records reasonably necessary to document conditions as they exist on the premises;

     10.   The installation and maintenance of monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the storm drain system;

     11.   Evaluating compliance with this chapter or the Clean Water Act.

     B.     The director may enter upon and inspect any private premises for the purposes of verifying compliance with the terms and conditions of this chapter by any other lawful means including, but not limited to, obtaining an inspection warrant issued by a court. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.100 Fees.
     Fees to be charged inspection, enforcement, and other activities carried out by the city under this chapter shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

 

9.21.110 Enforcement.
     A.    Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, an infraction, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, and/or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code.

     B.     As a part of any sentence or other penalty imposed or the award of any damage, the court may also order that restitution be paid to the city or an injured person, or, in the case of a violator who is a minor, by the minor’s parent or lawfully designated guardian or custodian. Restitution may include the amount of any reward.

     C.     Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall reimburse the city for any and all costs incurred by the city in responding to, investigating, assessing, monitoring, treating, cleaning, removing, or remediating any illicit discharge or pollutant from the MS4; rectifying any illicit connection; or remediating any violation of this chapter. Such costs to be paid to the city include all administrative expenses and all legal expenses, including costs and attorneys’ fees, in obtaining compliance, and in litigation including all costs and attorneys’ fees on any appeal. The costs to be recovered in this section shall be recoverable from any and all persons violating this chapter.

     D.    In the event any violation of this chapter constitutes an imminent danger to public health, safety, or the environment, the director may enter upon the premises from which the violation emanates, abate the violation and danger created to the public safety or the environment, and restore any premises affected by the alleged violation, without notice to or consent from the owner or occupant of the premises. An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the discharge of pollutants, where such discharge presents a significant and immediate threat to the public health or safety, or the environment. The city shall be reimbursed for all costs identified in subsection C.

     E.     Violations of this chapter may further be deemed to be a public nuisance which may be abated by administrative or civil or criminal action in accordance with the terms and provisions of this code and state law.

     F.     All costs and fees incurred by the city as a result of any violation of this chapter which constitute a nuisance, including all administrative fees and expenses and legal fees and expenses, shall become a lien against the subject premises from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner, in accordance with Government Code Sections 38773.1 and 38773.5. The owner of record of the premises subject to any lien shall receive notice of the lien prior to recording, as required by Government Code Section 38773.1. The city attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for money judgment, or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the premises in accordance with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 38773.5.

     G.    Any person acting in violation of this chapter may also be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the California Porter-Cologne Act (California Water Code Section 13000 et seq.) and the regulations thereunder, and other laws and regulations, and may be subject to damages, fines and penalties, including civil liability under such other laws. The city attorney is authorized to file a citizens suit pursuant to the Clean Water Act, seeking penalties, damages, and orders compelling compliance and appropriate relief.

     H.    In addition to any other remedies provided in this chapter, any violation of this chapter may be enforced by civil action brought by the city. In any such action, the city may seek any or all of the following remedies:

     1.     A temporary and/or permanent injunction;

     2.     Assessment of the violator for the costs of any investigation, inspection, monitoring, treatment, abatement, removal or remediation undertaken by or at the expense of the city;

     3.     Reasonable costs of preparing and bringing legal action under this chapter;

 

     4.     Costs incurred in removing, correcting or terminating the adverse effects resulting from violation;

     5.     Compensatory damages for loss or destruction to water quality, wildlife, fish and aquatic life.

     I.      In addition to the other enforcement powers and remedies established by this chapter, the director has the authority to utilize the following administrative remedies:

     1.     Cease and Desist Orders. When a Discharge has taken place or is likely to take place in violation of this chapter, the director may issue an order to cease and desist such discharge, or practice or operation likely to cause such discharge and direct that those persons not complying shall:

     a.     Comply with the requirement; and

     b.     Comply with a time schedule for compliance; and

     c.     Take appropriate remedial or preventive action to prevent the violation from recurring.

     2.     Notice to Clean. Whenever the director finds any oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or any other material of any kind, in or upon the sidewalk abutting or adjoining any parcel of land, or upon any parcel of land or grounds, which may result in pollutants entering the MS4 or a non-stormwater discharge to the MS4, he or she may give notice to the owner or occupant of the adjacent property to remove such oil, earth, debris, grass, weeds, dead trees, tin cans, rubbish, refuse, waste or other material, in any manner that he or she may reasonably provide. The recipient of such notice shall undertake the activities as described in the notice.

     J.      To the extent the city makes a provision of this chapter or any identified BMP a condition of approval to the issuance of a permit or license, any person in violation of such condition is subject to the permit revocation procedures set forth in this code.

     K.    In an enforcement action, the burden of proof shall be on the person who is the subject of such action to establish that the reduction or elimination of the discharge to the maximum extent practicable has been accomplished through compliance with the best management practices available, including applicable monitoring, notifications and reporting requirements.

     L.     Each separate discharge in violation of this chapter and each day a violation of this chapter exists, without correction, shall constitute a new and separate violation punishable as a separate infraction, misdemeanor and/or civil violation.

     M.    Remedies under this chapter are in addition to and do not supersede or limit any and all other available remedies, civil or criminal. The remedies provided for in this chapter shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.120 Taking.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not operate to deprive any property owner of substantially all of the market value of such owner’s property or otherwise constitute an unconstitutional taking without compensation. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

 

9.21.130 Disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific, engineering and other relevant technical considerations. The standards set forth herein are minimum standards and this chapter does not imply that compliance will ensure that there will be no unauthorized discharge of pollutants into receiving waters. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, for any damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 447 § 1, 2016)

Chapter 9.22 ONSITE WASTEWATER TREATMENT SYSTEMS
9.22.010 Adopted.
     Except as herein provided, County of Los Angeles Ordinance No. 2018-0037, known as the Local Agency Management Program (LAMP), as contained in Title 8 (Consumer Protection, Business and Wage regulations) and Title 11 (Health and Safety) of the Los Angeles County Code is hereby incorporated by reference and shall regulate conventional and non-conventional onsite wastewater treatment systems (OWTS) within the city, including review, siting, permitting and operational requirements for OWTS, and providing for collections of fees associated with the monitoring and enforcement of OWTS. (Ord. 477 § 2, 2019)

Title 10 PUBLIC UTILITIES
Chapter 10.04 UNDERGROUND UTILITY
Chapter 10.08 GAS SERVICE
FRANCHISE APPENDIX

Chapter 10.04 UNDERGROUND UTILITY
10.04.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships, and their agents and employees.

     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located aboveground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires, and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 10.04.030.

     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.020 Public hearing.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication, or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least ten days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.030 Underground utility districts.
     A.    If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. The resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby.

     B.     The council shall also, by resolution, make one or more of the following findings:

     1.     That such undergrounding will avoid or eliminate an unusually heavy concentration of overhead electric facilities;

     2.     The street or road right-of-way is extensively used by the general public and carries a heavy volume of pedestrian or vehicular traffic;

     3.     The street or road right-of-way adjoins or passes through a civic area or public recreation area or an area of unusual scenic interest to the general public. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.040 Unlawful acts.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 10.04.030, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except as the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 10.04.030 and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after the work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.050 Exception, emergencies or unusual circumstances.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the city manager in order to provide emergency service. The city may grant special permission, on such terms as the city may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility, to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.060 Other exceptions.
     In any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.04.030 hereof, the city may authorize any or all of the following exceptions:

     A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     B.     Poles, or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

     D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;

     E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

     G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.070 Notice.
     A.    Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.04.030 hereof, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by the adoption of the resolution hereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication, or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location.

     B.     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.04.030 together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such are shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.080 Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.04.030, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the commission. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.090 Responsibility of property owners.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his or her property between the facilities referred to in Section 10.04.080 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being served. If the above is not accomplished by any person within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 10.04.030, the city engineer shall give notice in writing to the person in possession of such premises, and a notice in writing to the owner thereof as shown on the last equalized assessment roll, to provide the required underground facilities within ten days after receipt of such notice.

     B.     The notice to provide the required underground facilities may be given either by personal service or by mail. In case of service by mail on either of such persons, the notice must be deposited in the United States mail in a sealed envelope with postage prepaid, addressed to the person in possession of the premises at the premises, and the notice must be addressed to the owner thereof as the owner’s name appears, and must be addressed to the owner’s last known address as the same appears on the last equalized assessment roll, and when no address appears, to General Delivery, City of La Cañada Flintridge. If notice is given by mail, such notice shall be deemed to have been received by the person to whom it has been sent within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof. If notice is given by mail to either the owner or occupant of the premises, the city engineer shall, within forty-eight (48) hours after the mailing thereof, cause a copy thereof, printed on a card not less than eight inches by ten inches in size, to be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises.

     C.     The notice given by the city engineer to provide the required underground facilities shall particularly specify what work is required to be done, and shall state that if the work is not completed within thirty (30) days after receipt of the notice, the city engineer will provide such required underground facilities, in which case the cost and expense thereof will be assessed against the property benefitted and become a lien upon the property.

     D.    If upon the expiration of the thirty (30) day period, the required underground facilities have not been provided, the city engineer shall forthwith proceed to do the work, provided, however, if such premises are unoccupied and no electric or communications services are being furnished thereto, the city engineer shall in lieu of providing the required underground facilities, have the authority to order the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. Upon completion of the work by the city engineer, he or she shall file a written report with the city council setting forth the fact that the required underground facilities have been provided and the cost thereof, together with a legal description of the property against which such cost is to be assessed. The council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing protests against the assessment of the cost of such work upon such premises, which said time shall not be less than ten days thereafter.

     E.     The city engineer shall forthwith, upon the time for hearing such protests having been fixed, give a notice in writing to the person in possession of the premises, and a notice in writing thereof to the owner thereof, in the manner hereinabove provided for the giving of the notice to provide the required underground facilities, of the time and place that the council will pass upon the report and will hear protests against such assessment. The notice shall also set forth the amount of the proposed assessment.

     F.     Upon the date and hour set for hearing of protests, the council shall hear and consider the report and all protests, if there be any, and then proceed to affirm, modify or reject the assessment.

     G.    If any assessment is not paid within five days after its confirmation by the council, the amount of the assessment shall become a lien upon the property against which the assessment is made by the city engineer, and the city engineer is directed to turn over to the assessor and tax collector a notice of lien on each of the properties on which the assessment has not been paid, and the assessor and tax collector shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular bill for taxes levied against the premises upon which the assessment was not paid. The assessment shall be due and payable at the same time as the property taxes are due and payable, and if not paid when due and payable, shall bear interest at the rate of six percent per annum. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.100 City contribution.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 10.04.090, the city may, if it finds and determines that the general public would benefit by so doing, contribute some or all of the funds necessary to underground utilities and otherwise comply with the responsibilities of the property owner as set forth in Section 10.04.090. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.110 Responsibility of city.
     City shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or use of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 10.04.030. (Ord. 27, 1977)

 

10.04.120 Extension of time.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 10.04.030 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience, or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 27, 1977)

Chapter 10.08 GAS SERVICE
10.08.010 Disconnected gas outlet must be plugged immediately.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to disconnect, or cause or permit to be disconnected, any gas stove, gas heater, or fixture or gas appliance from any gas service pipe, house pipe, outlet or connection, without immediately thereafter capping, plugging or closing such service pipe, house pipe, outlet or connection by means of a hosecock, stopcock, valve or cap.

     Each such hosecock, stopcock, valve or cap shall be of iron or brass, shall be threaded with standard iron pipe threads, and shall be securely installed on such service pipe, outlet or connection and shall be capable of withstanding the pressure test provided for in Section 10.08.040. (LACC Ord. 1803 § 1, 1930)

 

10.08.020 Supplier must post notice.
     It shall be the duty of each person, firm or corporation supplying gas to any building or structure or to any gas stove, gas heater, gas fixture or gas appliance to attach to the riser pipe adjacent to the meterdock at the time of installing any gas meter or the turning on or turning off of gas service pipe, house pipe, outlet or connection thereof will be capped, plugged or closed, as herein in this chapter provided, whenever any gas stove, gas heater, gas fixture or gas appliance is removed or disconnected therefrom. (LACC Ord. 1803 § 2, 1930)

 

10.08.030 Turning on gas—Prohibition.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation, other than a duly authorized agent or employee of a person, firm or corporation furnishing or applying gas to, and whose service pipe supplies or connects with, any particular premises to turn on or reconnect, or to use or permit to be turned on or reconnected, gas service in or on any premises where and when gas service is not at the time being metered or furnished.

     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to turn on or connect, or to cause or permit to be turned on or connected, in or on any premises unless each outlet is properly and securely connected to a gas stove, heater, fixture or appliance, or is capped, plugged or closed by a hosecock, stopcock, valve cap so connected or installed as to be capable of withstanding pressure test provided for in Section 10.08.040. (LACC Ord. 1803 § 3, 1930)

 

10.08.040 Safety requirements.
     Each hosecock, stopcock, valve or cap required by the provisions of this chapter shall be so constructed and installed as to render the portion of the pipe line whereon the same is installed capable of withstanding without leaking, an air pressure of not less than ten pounds per square inch, sustained without diminishing for a period of not less than five minutes.

     Provided, that where any gas piping upon which the same is installed is intended to or does carry a greater pressure than the normal pressure in gas supply mains, such installation shall be capable of withstanding, without leaking, an air pressure of not less than twice the pressure intended to be carried thereby, sustained without diminishing, for a period of not less than five minutes. (LACC Ord. 1803 § 4, 1930)

FRANCHISE APPENDIX
ORDINANCE NO. 14
 

     ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE, CALIFORNIA, GRANTING TO SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA EDISON COMPANY, ITS SUCCESSORS AND ASSIGNS, A FRANCHISE TO USE AND TO CONSTRUCT AND USE, FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING ELECTRICITY FOR ANY AND ALL PURPOSES, POLES, WIRES, CONDUITS AND APPURTENANCES, INCLUDING COMMUNICATION CIRCUITS NECESSARY OR PROPER THEREFOR, IN, ALONG, ACROSS, UPON, OVER AND UNDER THE PUBLIC STREETS, WAYS, ALLEYS AND PLACES WITHIN THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE.

 

     The City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge does ordain as follows:

 

     Section 1: Whenever in this Ordinance the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, it is intended that they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):

     (a)    The word “grantee” shall mean the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this Ordinance is granted and its lawful successors or assigns;

     (b)    The word “City” shall mean the City of La Cañada Flintridge, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form;

     (c)    The word “streets” shall mean the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said City;

     (d)    The phrase “poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances” shall mean poles, towers, supports wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cur-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances and any other property located or to be located in, along, across, upon, over or under the streets of said City, and used or useful, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of transmitting or distributing electricity;

     (e)    The phrase “construct and use” shall mean to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace or relocate.

     Section 2: The franchise to use and to construct and use, for transmitting and distributing electricity for any and all purposes, poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances, including communication circuits, necessary or proper therefor, in, along, across, upon, over and under the streets within the City of La Cañada Flintridge, is hereby granted to Southern California Edison Company, its lawful successors and assigns, under and in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise Act of 1937.

     Section 3: Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, the same shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by the grantee, or until the State or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the grantee.

     Section 4. The grantee of said franchise, during the life thereof, will pay to said City two percent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of said grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent (1%) of the gross annual receipts derived by grantee from the sale of electricity within the limits of said City.

     Section 5: The grantee shall file with the City Clerk of said City, within three (3) months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of this franchise, and within three (3) months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of said grantee derived during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within the limits of said City. The grantee shall pay to said City within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing said statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, covered by said statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file said verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall constitute grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder.

     Section 6: This Ordinance shall become effective thirty (30) days after its final passage, unless suspended by referendum petition filed as provided by law.

     Section 7: The grantee of this franchise shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of this franchise; said payment to be made within thirty (30) days after the City shall have furnished said grantee with a written statement of such expenses.

     Section 8: The franchise granted hereby shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee with the City Clerk of said City.

     Section 9: The City Clerk shall cause this Ordinance to be posted within fifteen (15) days after its passage in three (3) public places within said City.

     First read at a regular meeting of the City Council of said City held on the 6th day of June, 1977, and finally adopted and ordered posted at a regular meeting of the City Council held on the 20th day of June, 1977 by the following vote:

 

     AYES: Councilmen: Hillgren, Krause, Smith, Mayor Pro Tem Mount and Mayor Parrish

 

     NOES:Councilmen: None

     ABSENT:Councilmen: None

 

     Mayor, City of La Cañada Flintridge

 

     ATTEST:

 

     City Clerk

 

Chapter 10.01

ELECTRICITY FRANCHISE

 

10.01.010         Grant of Franchise.

     The franchise to use and to construct and use, for transmitting and distributing electricity for any and all purposes, poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances, including communication circuits, necessary or proper therefor, in, along, across, upon, over and under the streets within the City of La Cañada Flintridge, is hereby granted to Southern California Edison Company, its lawful successors and assigns, under and in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise Act of 1937.

 

10.01.020         Definitions.

     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, it is intended that they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):

     (a)    The word “grantee” shall mean the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this chapter is granted and its lawful successors or assigns.

     (b)    The word “City” shall mean the City of La Cañada Flintridge, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form.

     (c)    The word “streets” shall mean the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said City.

     (d)    The phrase “poles, wires, conduits and appurtenances” shall mean poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, cables, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, conduits, ducts, vaults, manholes, meters, cut-outs, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments, appurtenances and any other property located or to be located in, along, across, upon, over or under the streets of said City, and used or useful, directly or indirectly, for the purpose of transmitting or distributing electricity.

     (e)    The phrase “construct and use” shall mean to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace or relocate.

 

10.01.030         Duration.

     (a)    The franchise granted hereby shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee with the City Clerk.

     (b)    Said franchise shall be indeterminate, that is to say, said franchise shall endure in full force and effect until, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, the same shall be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by the grantee, or until the State or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of said franchise and situate within the territorial limits of the state, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until said franchise shall be forfeited for noncompliance with its terms by the grantee.

 

10.01.040         Duties of Grantee.

     (a)    The grantee of said franchise, during the life thereof, will pay to the City two percent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of said grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one percent (1%) of the gross annual receipts derived by grantee from the sale of electricity within the limits of the City.

     (b)    The grantee shall file with the City Clerk, within three (3) months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the granting of this franchise, and within three (3) months after the expiration of each calendar year thereafter, a verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of said grantee derived during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of electricity within the limits of the City. The grantee shall pay to the City within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing said statement, in lawful money of the United States, the aforesaid percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, covered by said statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file said verified statement, or to pay said percentage at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall constitute grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights of grantee hereunder.

     (c)    The grantee shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of this franchise; said payment to be made within thirty (30) days after the City shall have furnished said grantee with a written statement of such expenses.

 

ORDINANCE NO. 36
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE GRANTING TO SOUTHERN CALIFORNIA GAS COMPANY, A CORPORATION, THE RIGHT, PRIVILEGE AND FRANCHISE TO LAY AND USE PIPES AND APPURTENANCES FOR TRANSMITTING AND DISTRIBUTING GAS FOR ANY AND ALL PURPOSES UNDER, ALONG, ACROSS OR UPON THE PUBLIC STREETS, WAYS, ALLEYS AND PLACES, AS THE SAME NOW OR MAY HEREAFTER EXIST, WITHIN SAID MUNICIPALITY.

 

     The City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge does ordain as follows:

 

SECTION ONE

 

     Whenever in this ordinance the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions (unless, in the given instance, the context wherein they are used shall clearly import a different meaning):

     (a)    The word “Grantee” shall mean the corporation to which the franchise contemplated in this ordinance is granted and its lawful successors or assigns;

     (b)    The word “City” shall mean the City of La Cañada Flintridge, a municipal corporation of the State of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated or reincorporated form;

     (c)    The word “streets” shall mean the public streets, ways, alleys and places as the same now or may hereafter exist within said City;

     (d)    The word “Engineer” shall mean the City Engineer of the City;

     (e)    The word “Gas” shall mean natural or manufactured gas, or a mixture of natural and manufactured gas;

     (f)    The Phrase “Pipes and Appurtenances” shall mean pipe, pipeline, main, service, trap, vent, vault, manhole, meter, gauge, regulator, valve, conduit, appliance, attachment, appurtenance and any other property located or to be located in, upon, along, across, under or over the streets of the City, and used or useful in transmitting and distributing gas.

     (g)    The phrase “lay and use” shall mean to lay, construct, erect, install, operate, maintain, use, repair, replace, or remove.

 

SECTION TWO

 

     That the right, privilege and franchise, subject to each and all of the terms and conditions contained in this ordinance, and pursuant to the provisions of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California, known as the Franchise Act of 1937, be and the same is hereby granted to Southern California Gas Company, a corporation organized and existing under and by virtue of the laws of the State of California, herein referred to as the “Grantee”, to lay and use pipes and appurtenances for transmitting and distributing gas for any and all purposes, under, along, across or upon the streets, of the City, for a forty (40) year period from and after effective date hereof, that is to say, this franchise shall endure in full force and effect until the same shall, with the consent of the Public Utilities Commission of the State of California, be voluntarily surrendered or abandoned by its possessor, or until the State of California or some municipal or public corporation thereunto duly authorized by law shall purchase by voluntary agreement or shall condemn and take under the power of eminent domain, all property actually used and useful in the exercise of this franchise, and situate within the territorial limits of the State, municipal or public corporation purchasing or condemning such property, or until this franchise shall be forfeited for non-compliance with its terms by the possessor thereof.

 

SECTION THREE

 

     The Grantee shall pay to the City at the times hereinafter specified, in lawful money of the United States, a sum annually which shall be equivalent to two per cent (2%) of the gross annual receipts of grantee arising from the use, operation or possession of said franchise; provided, however, that such payment shall in no event be less than one per cent (1%) of the gross annual receipts of the grantee derived from the sale of gas within the limits of the City under this franchise.

     (b)    In the event that California state law is amended at any time during the life of this franchise to allow the payment by Grantee of a greater percentage than herein provided, Grantee agrees to pay the City of La Cañada Flintridge in lawful money of the United States a sum equal to said greater percentage.

     The grantee of this franchise shall file with the Clerk of the City within three (3) months after the expiration of the calendar year, or fractional calendar year, following the date of the grant of this franchise, and within three (3) months after the expiration of each and every calendar year thereafter, a duly verified statement showing in detail the total gross receipts of the grantee, its successors or assigns, during the preceding calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, from the sale of the utility service within the City for which this franchise is granted. It shall be the duty of the grantee to pay to the City within fifteen (15) days after the time for filing such statement in lawful money of the United States, the specified percentage of its gross receipts for the calendar year, or such fractional calendar year, covered by such statement. Any neglect, omission or refusal by said grantee to file such verified statement, or to pay said percentage, at the times or in the manner hereinbefore provided, shall be grounds for the declaration of a forfeiture of this franchise and of all rights thereunder.

 

SECTION FOUR

 

     This grant is made in lieu of all other franchises owned by the grantee, or by any successor of the grantee to any rights under this franchise, for transmitting and distributing gas within the limits of the City, as said limits now or may hereafter exist, and the acceptance of the franchise hereby granted shall operate as an abandonment of all such franchises within the limits of this City, as such limits now or may hereafter exist, in lieu of which this franchise is granted.

 

SECTION FIVE

 

     The franchise granted hereunder shall not become effective until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed by the grantee thereof with the Clerk of the City. When so filed, such acceptance shall constitute a continuing agreement of the grantee that if and when the City shall thereafter annex or consolidate with, additional territory, any and all franchise rights and privileges owned by the grantee therein shall likewise be deemed to be abandoned within the limits of such territory.

 

SECTION SIX

 

     The franchise granted hereunder shall not in any way or to any extent impair or affect the right of the City to acquire the property of the grantee hereof either by purchase or through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, and nothing herein contained shall be construed to contract away or to modify or to abridge, either for a term or in perpetuity, the City’s right of eminent domain in respect to the Grantee or any public utility. Nor shall this franchise ever be given any value before any court or other public authority in any proceeding of any character in excess of the cost to the grantee of the necessary publication and any other sum paid by it to the City therefor at the time of the acquisition thereof.

 

SECTION SEVEN

 

     The grantee of this franchise shall

     (a)    construct, install and maintain all pipes and appurtenances in accordance with and in conformity with all of the ordinances, rules and regulations heretofore, or hereafter adopted by the legislative body of this City in the exercise of its police powers and not in conflict with the paramount authority of the State of California, and, as to State highways, subject to the provisions of general laws relating to the location and maintenance of such facilities.

     (b)    pay to the City, on demand, the cost of all repairs to public property made necessary by any operations of the grantee under this franchise;

     (c)    indemnify and hold harmless the City and its officers from any and all liability for damages proximately resulting from any operations under this franchise; and be liable to the City for all damages proximately resulting from the failure of said grantee well and faithfully to observe and perform each and every provision of this franchise and each and every provision of Division 3, Chapter 2 of the Public Utilities Code of the State of California; and

     (d)    remove or relocate, without expense to the City, any facilities installed, used and maintained under this franchise if and when made necessary by any lawful change of grade, alignment or width of any public street, way, alley or place, including the construction of any subway or viaduct by the City, subject to existing and future legislation regarding the Grantee’s right to recover such removal or relocation expenses; and

     (e)    file with the legislative body of the City within thirty (30) days after any sale, transfer, assignment or lease of this franchise, or any part thereof, or of any of the rights or privileges granted thereby, written evidence of the same, certified thereto by the grantee or its duly authorized officers.

 

SECTION EIGHT

 

     The Engineer shall have power to give the grantee such directions for the location of any pipes and appurtenances as may be reasonably necessary to avoid sewers, water pipes, conduits or other structures lawfully in or under the streets; and before the work of constructing any pipes and appurtenances is commenced, the grantee shall file with said Engineer plans showing the location thereof, which shall be subject to the approval of said Engineer (such approval not to be unreasonably withheld); and all such construction shall be subject to the inspection of said Engineer and done to his or her reasonable satisfaction. All street coverings or openings of traps, vaults, and manholes shall at all times be kept flush with the surface of the streets; provided, however, that vents for underground traps, vaults and manholes may extend above the surface of the streets when said vents are located in parkways, between the curb and the property line.

     Where it is necessary to lay any underground pipes through, under or across any portion of a paved or macadamized street, the same, where practicable and economically reasonable shall be done by a tunnel or bore, so as not to disturb the foundation of such paved or macadamized street; and in the event that the same cannot be so done, such work shall be done under a permit to be granted by the Engineer upon application therefor.

 

SECTION NINE

 

     If any portion of any street shall be damaged by reason of defects in any of the pipes and appurtenances maintained or constructed under this grant, or by reason of any other cause arising from the operation or existence of any pipes and appurtenances constructed or maintained under this grant, said grantee shall, at its own cost and expense, immediately repair any such damage and restore such street, or portion of street, to as good a condition as existed before such defect or other cause of damage occurred, such work to be done under the direction of the Engineer, and to his or her reasonable satisfaction.

 

SECTION TEN

 

     (a)    If the grantee of this franchise shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions or conditions hereof, and shall not, within ten days after written demand for compliance, begin the work of compliance, or after such beginning shall not prosecute the same with due diligence to completion, then the City, by its legislative body, may declare this franchise forfeited.

     (b)    The City may sue in its own name for the forfeiture of this franchise, in the event of non-compliance by the grantee, its successors or assigns, with any of the conditions thereof.

 

SECTION ELEVEN

 

     The grantee of this franchise shall pay to the City a sum of money sufficient to reimburse it for all publication expenses incurred by it in connection with the granting of this franchise; such payment to be made within thirty (30) days after the City shall furnish such grantee with a written statement of such expenses.

 

SECTION TWELVE

 

     Not later than thirty (30) days after the publication of this ordinance, the grantee shall file with the City Clerk a written acceptance of the franchise hereby granted, and an agreement to comply with the terms and conditions hereof.

 

SECTION THIRTEEN

 

     The City Clerk shall certify to the adoption of this ordinance and shall cause the same to be published once in the La Cañada Valley Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the City.

 

     Attest

     City Clerk Mayor

 

     I hereby certify that the foregoing ordinance was adopted by the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge on the 20th day of March, 1978, by the following votes:

 

     Ayes:

     Council Members Parrish, Pieper, Mayor Pro Tem Mount, Mayor Hillgren

 

     Noes:

     Council Member Krause

 

     Deputy City Clerk

 

ORDINANCE NO. 67
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE APPROVING THE EXPANSION OF THE FRANCHISE AREA OF FALCON CABLE TV

 

     WHEREAS, Falcon Communications (“Falcon”) has been providing Cable TV service to a portion of this City; this by reason of a franchise previously approved by the County of Los Angeles; and

     WHEREAS, Falcon has filed an application with this City to expand their approved franchise area; and

     WHEREAS, the proposed new franchise area permits cable TV service to be provided to an additional 800+ homes; and

     WHEREAS, the City Public Works Commission has reviewed the proposed request and recommended that it be approved;

     NOW, THEREFORE, the La Cañada Flintridge City Council does hereby ordain as follows:

     1.     Falcon Cable TV is authorized to provide cable TV service to those homes within the boundaries shown on Exhibit A which is attached hereto and incorporated herein by reference; and

     2.     All of the provisions of Los Angeles County Ordinance 11,280 granting a community antenna television franchise to Falcon Communications are hereby incorporated into this approval.

     3.     A nonexclusive franchise is granted on the condition that:

     a.     Construction of the cable TV trunk lines will be completed within 15 months of the effective date of this ordinance.

     b.     If the balance of the utilities within the area are underground, then the cable lines shall likewise be underground.

     c.     Falcon shall cooperate with Pasadena City College to provide local access programming to and for the benefit of this community.

     d.     The application for expansion of franchise which was filed with the City is incorporated herein and Falcon agrees to abide by all of the terms and conditions therein; except that Falcon agrees that the 35% requirement provided in Section G and F of said application is waived.

     e.     Falcon shall comply with all provisions of the laws of this State which now exist or which may hereinafter be approved and which apply to cable TV, and all similar laws, or regulations which the Federal Communications Commission may adopt.

     4.     Publication. A copy of this ordinance, or a summary thereof shall be published in the manner required by law.

 

     PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 7th day of July, 1980.

 

     Mayor

 

     ATTEST:

 

     Deputy City Clerk

 

 



 

 

ORDINANCE NO. 152
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE GRANTING A FRANCHISE TO SAMMONS COMMUNICATIONS, INC., TO OWN, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE, CALIFORNIA, SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF FRANCHISE, AND PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND USE OF SAID SYSTEM.

 

     WHEREAS, it is the mutual desire of the City of La Cañada Flintridge and Sammons Communications, Inc. to adopt a cable television franchise on the terms and conditions set forth herein.

     NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge hereby ordains as follows:

     SECTION 1: Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known and my be cited as the “Sammons Communications, Inc. Franchise Ordinance.”

     SECTION 2: Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the singular number and words in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

     (a)    “City” is the City of La Cañada Flintridge in the State of California.

     (b)    “Company” is the grantee of rights under this Ordinance awarding a franchise, being Sammons Communications, Inc., a Delaware corporation.

     (c)    “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

     (d)    “Cable Television System” or “System” shall mean a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals located in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     (e)    “Gross Subscriber Revenues” shall mean all revenues derived by the Company from its operations in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     (f)    “Basic Subscriber” shall mean a resident of the City who is subscribing to Company’s lowest tier of service received by all subscribers to Company’s System.

     SECTION 3: Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority. A public hearing concerning the franchise herein granted to the Company was held on August 3, 1987 at 7:00 p.m. at Descanso Gardens Education and Exhibition Building, 1418 Descanso Drive, La Cañada Flintridge, California. Public notice of said hearing was given in the La Cañada Valley Sun on July 2, 9, 16 and 23, 1987, which notice invited interested parties to participate in said hearing and comment upon the legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the Company to operate a Cable Television System in the City. Said hearing having been held on the date and place stated hereinabove, and said hearing having been fully open to the public, and the City having received at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this franchise, the City hereby finds that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and that the Company’s construction arrangements are adequate and feasible, and that therefor the City hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon, along, across, above and over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a Cable Television System for the purpose of distributing television and radio programs, and various communications and other electronic services to the public. The right so granted includes the right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth.

 

     SECTION 4: Franchise Term. The Franchise granted the Company herein shall terminate fifteen (15) years from date of grant. Renewal may be had pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, provided such Act or successor there to is applicable to City at the time renewal is proposed.

     SECTION 5: Payments to the City. The Company shall, during the operation under this Franchise, pay to the City a franchise fee in the maximum rate established by Federal Law as a percentage of the annual Gross Subscriber Revenues received by the Company for services rendered within the City. Such percentage is set at five (5%) percent as of the date of adoption of this ordinance. Such payments shall be made quarterly. Annually, the Company shall furnish the City with a report showing the Company’s annual Gross Subscriber Revenues during the preceding year. Each payment will be made to the City within 30 days after the end of the quarter. Interest on any delinquent amount shall be paid to the City from the date due to the date of payment at the rate of two interest points above the prime rate of interest charged in the Los Angeles area, as calculated by the City.

     SECTION 6: Records and Reports. The Company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account, which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the City’s designee at all reasonable times.

     SECTION 7: Rates. Attached hereto and made a part of this franchise as Exhibit A is a schedule of rates currently charged by Company for basic cable television service.

     SECTION 8: Local Office; Complaint Procedures. During the term of this Franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company shall maintain in the proximity of the City a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers during normal business hours Monday through Friday. A 24 hour telephone number shall be available and any service complaints from subscribers shall be investigated and acted upon within 24 hours. The Company shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the time, date and response thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City and the records shall be kept for a period of five years. The Company shall be obligated to credit customer’s account if service is disrupted more than forty-eight (48) hours.

     SECTION 9: Liability and Indemnification. The Company shall indemnify and defend the City, its officers, agents and employees from all liability, claims, damages and/or penalties resulting from the installation, operation or maintenance by Company of the Cable Television System authorized herein. The City shall notify the Company’s representative within fifteen (15) days after the presentation of any claim or demand to the City, either by suit or otherwise, made against the City on account of any act as aforesaid on the part of the Company. The Company further agrees as follows:

     (a)    Company shall carry Worker’s Compensation insurance, with statutory limits, and Employer’s Liability insurance with limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which shall cover all operations to be performed by Company as a result of this Ordinance.

     (b)    Company shall carry Comprehensive General Liability and Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and property damage limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). City, its officers, agents and employees shall be an additional named insured on such policies.

     (c)    Company agrees to furnish City with certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide that such insurance shall not be cancelled unless thirty (30) days’ prior written notice shall first be given to City.

 

     SECTION 10: System Construction, Maintenance and Procedures. (a) Upon grant of this Franchise to construct and maintain a community television system in the City, the Company may enter into contracts with Light, Gas and Water divisions of the City, any Public Utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located within or without the City to whatever extent such contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage to the Company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation of the System, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate state, county and federal officials necessary to cross highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the Company’s receiving antennae, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennae suitable to the needs of the System and its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a city, county, state or federal agency may require. In the construction, installation and maintenance of its System, the Company will use steel, cable and electronic devices, all of specialized and advanced design and type. In the operation of its System, the Company will employ personnel with training, skill and experience in electronics and communications. Neither material nor personnel of this sort will be available to the Company for its System in the event of a war or other similar national emergency.

     (b)    The Company’s system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the City my deem proper to make, or hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public property.

     (c)    All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the City shall be subject to prior City approval, and so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

     (d)    In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before said work was commenced.

     (e)    In the event that at any time during the period of this Franchise the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the Company upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.

     (f)    The Company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual traffic on said streets, alleys and public ways.

     (g)    The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the same, and the Company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Company shall be given not less than forty-eight (48) hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

     (h)    The Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company in accordance with current City of La Cañada Flintridge tree trimming specifications.

 

     SECTION 11: Line Extension. (a) To provide for a reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the City, which policy was subject to public review in the public proceeding leading to the award of this Franchise, Company shall extend service to new subscribers, at the normal installation charge and monthly rate for customers of that classification.

     Notwithstanding the forgoing, Company shall extend service to those areas within the City designated as Area 1 and Area 2 in Exhibit C, attached hereto and made a part of, within eighteen (18) months of franchise award and issuance of necessary clearances and permits.

     Upon completion of construction as outlined above, all existing residences of the City will be serviceable under standard rates and charges. Any future construction beyond the established system, the Line Extension Policy as outlined in Exhibit B will be applied. Franchisee shall provide to the City within 30 days after award of the franchise a proposed time line and construction schedule of the cable television system.

     SECTION 12: Service to Public Facilities. Franchisee shall, at no cost, provide and maintain one cable television drop to each City facility, law enforcement facility, fire station, public school or other public facility located within the authorized franchise service area upon request for service.

     SECTION 13: Service to Private Nonprofit Schools.

     1.     Franchisee shall, at no cost, provide and maintain one cable television drop to each private, nonprofit school site within the authorized franchise service area.

     2.     As used in this section, “private, nonprofit schools” means schools that satisfy the requirements of Section 12154 of the Education Code of the State of California, and which are exempt from taxation under Section 214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

     SECTION 14: Compliance with Standards. All facilities and equipment of Company shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the General Order Nos. 95 and 128 of the California Public Utilities Commission and such applicable ordinances and regulations set forth by the City and/or any other local, state or federal agencies.

     SECTION 15: Company Rules and Regulations. The Company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Company to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this Franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of federal and state laws.

     SECTION 16: Approval of Transfer. The Company shall not sell or transfer its System to another, nor transfer any rights under this Franchise to another without prior written approval by the City Council, provided that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed with the City information sufficient to demonstrate that such transferee can comply with the terms and conditions of this Franchise, and an instrument duly executed, reciting the fact of such proposed sale, assignment or lease, accepting the terms of this Franchise and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof.

     SECTION 17: Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations. The Company shall, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations governing CATV operations promulgated by the FCC. This shall include adherence by the Company to FCC rules regarding technical and engineering specifications involved in the construction of the CATV System and signal carriage therein.

     SECTION 18: Modification of FCC Rules. Any modification of FCC Rules resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of this Franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in this Franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the City within one (1) year from the effective date of the FCC’s amendment or at the time of renewal of this Franchise, whichever occurs first.

     SECTION 19: Publication Costs. The Company shall assume the costs of the publication of this Franchise as such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the Company by the appropriate City officials upon the Company’s filing of its acceptance of this Franchise and the said publication costs plus staff time shall be paid at that time by the Company.

     SECTION 20: Activities Prohibited. (a) The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor shall the System interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the City.

     (b)    The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this Franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled.

     (c)    The Company shall not monitor any subscriber terminal without specific written authorization of the subscriber. The Company shall be responsible for the protection of subscriber privacy, and shall prohibit the tapping and/or monitoring of cable, line, signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver except as provided in the Cable Policy Act of 1984. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company may test the functioning of its system where necessary to insure proper maintenance and to collect performance data for agencies regulating the quality of the signal.

     (d)    Lists of subscribers’ names and addresses may not be sold or otherwise released for any purpose, nor may any information concerning the viewing patterns of identifiable individual subscribers be sold or released to any person, agency, or entity except as provided in the Cable Policy Act of 1984 without specific written authorization of the individual subscriber.

     (e)    The Company shall not place on any property any equipment capable of two-way communications without the written consent of the occupants and/or users of such property, nor shall authorized two-way communications equipment be utilized for subscriber surveillance of any kind without the written consent of the subscriber.

     (f)    No cable, line, wire amplifier, converter or other pieces of equipment owned by the Company shall be attached to any residence or other private property by the Company unless the written permission of the owner or responsible occupant of the property is first obtained. If such permission is later revoked, whether by the original or subsequent owner or responsible occupant, the Company shall immediately remove such equipment and promptly restore the property to as near its original condition as possible.

     SECTION 21: Termination. (a) The City Council may terminate this Franchise in the event of the wilful failure, refusal or neglect by the Company to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this Franchise, or other applicable rule or regulation of the Council or City Manager, pursuant to the following procedure:

     (1)    Prior to the termination of this Franchise, the City Manager shall make written demand that the Company comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation within a reasonable period of time, specified in the demand.

     (2)    If the failure, refusal or neglect continues after the time set forth for compliance, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing by the City Council on the request for termination of the franchise. The City Manager shall cause to be served upon the Company, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, a written notice of his or her intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the hearing.

     (3)    The Council shall hear and consider any evidence presented by the City Manager, the Company, and any other persons interested in the matter, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the Company was with just cause. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the Company to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the Company was without just cause, then the Council may declare that the Franchise shall be terminated and forfeited.

     (b)    In the event of termination, the City may purchase, or require any successor franchise grantee to purchase the Company’s facilities at a cost not to exceed its then fair market value, with a reduction in price or payment to City of an amount for uncompensated damages incurred by the City in connection with the Company’s operation. If the franchise is terminated pursuant to this section the term “fair market value” shall not include the rights granted pursuant to the Franchise. In the event the parties are unable to agree on the fair market value of the Company’s system, the Company and the purchaser each shall select one qualified appraiser experienced in the evaluation of cable communications systems. The two selected appraisers shall select a third appraiser. The three appraisers shall be employed to determine the fair market value of Company’s system. The fair market value shall be the average of the three evaluations of the appraisers. The appraisers shall be directed to reach their determination within thirty (30) days. The Company and the purchaser shall each pay fifty percent of the costs of employing such appraisers. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the Company through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, nor any other of the rights of the City under this franchise or any provision of law.

     (c)    In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of this Franchise, the Company shall pay to the City all fees consistent with the provisions of the franchise agreement as if there had not been such holding over and as if the terms and conditions of this franchise continued in full force and effect. If the Company holds over in direct contravention of a final valid order of the City, issued upon notice, requiring the Company to cease and desist all operations upon a certain date, then and in that event, the Company shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages of not less than one hundred percent of its gross revenue derived from all sources within the City during the period of holding over.

     (d)    In the event the use of any of the Company’s property is permanently discontinued, or no franchise has been obtained therefor, or upon expiration of or within twelve (12) months after any termination of this franchise or any renewal thereof, the Company shall promptly remove all property involved, other than the City Council may, at its sole option, permit to be abandoned in place. A permit to abandon in place must thereafter be obtained from the City’s Director of Public Works. Property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the Council shall prescribe. Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the Company shall submit to the City Council an instrument, satisfactory to the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of such property.

     (e)    Any property of the Company remaining in place one hundred twenty (120) days after termination or expiration of this franchise or any renewal thereof shall be considered permanently abandoned. The City’s Director of Public Works may extend such time in thirty-day increments not to exceed two such extensions, for a total of one hundred eighty (180) days. Abandonment in place shall not be deemed a taking of the property of the Company and the Company shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of abandonment in place pursuant to this section.

     SECTION 22: Separability. (a) If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

     (b)    Should any provision of this Franchise be inconsistent or at variance with any rule, regulation or policy, in whole or in part, of the Federal Communications Commission or any other agency having jurisdiction, such provision shall be invalid, but the remaining provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.

 

     SECTION 23: Ordinances Repealed. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.

     SECTION 24: This Ordinance shall take effect within thirty (30) days after its final passage, and within fifteen (15) days after its passage, the City Clerk shall cause it to be published in the La Cañada Valley Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of La Cañada Flintridge and hereby designated for that purpose.

 

     PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 8th day of September, 1987.

 

     CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE

 

     Mayor

 

     ATTEST:

 

     Deputy City Clerk

 

EXHIBIT A

BASIC SERVICE RATES

 

     A.    Primary Outlet Installation

 

     1.     Standard Installation

 

     a.     Aerial $ 35.00

     b.     Underground 60.00

 

     A standard installation consists of a drop of 175 feet or less from the feeder line to the customer’s residence. In the case of an underground installation, a standard installation shall be less than 175 feet and shall not include those installations requiring conduit or cutting of streets, sidewalks or other paved areas.

 

     2.     Non-Standard Company’s cost of

     Installation labor and materials

     plus 10%

 

     B.     Basic Monthly Service $ 13.50

 

EXHIBIT B

LINE EXTENSION FORMULA

 

     Sammons will extend its trunk and distribution system to service new subscribers requesting service after the date hereof at the normal installation charge and monthly rate under the following terms and conditions.

 

     (a)    Where the new subscriber or subscribers requesting service are all located within 500 feet from the termination of the system, and

 

     (b)    Where the number of homes to be passed by such extension is equal to or greater than 50 homes per mile of such extension.

 

     In the event that the requirements set forth in (a) and (b) above are not met, Sammons will extend its cable television system based upon the following cost-sharing formula.

 

       1) Total Cost to Construct Extension* = Cost Per

       Miles of Extension Mile of

       Extension

 

       2) Total Cost Per Mile of Extension = Company’s

       50 Share Per

       Home

 

       3) Total Cost to Construct Extension = Cost Per

       Subscribers Requesting Service Subscriber

 

       4) Cost Per Subscriber minus Subscriber’s

       Company’s Share Per Home = Share

 

     * Total Cost to Construct Extension is defined as the actual turn-key cost to construct the entire extension including electronics, pole make-ready charges, labor and the cost of the house drops.

 

 



 

ORDINANCE NO. 169
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE GRANTING A NONEXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE TO FALCON COMMUNICATIONS, A CALIFORNIA LIMITED PARTNERSHIP dba CHOICE TELEVISION TO OWN, OPERATE AND MAINTAIN A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM IN THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE, CALIFORNIA, SETTING FORTH CONDITIONS ACCOMPANYING THE GRANT OF FRANCHISE, AND PROVIDING FOR THE REGULATION AND USE OF SAID SYSTEM

 

     WHEREAS, it is the mutual desire of the City of La Cañada Flintridge and Choice Television to adopt a cable television franchise on the terms and conditions set forth herein.

     NOW, THEREFORE, the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge hereby ordains as follows:

     SECTION 1. Short Title. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Choice Television Franchise Ordinance”.

     SECTION 2. Definitions. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in the single number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

     A.    “City” is the City of La Cañada Flintridge in the State of California.

     B.     “Company” is the grantee of rights under this Ordinance awarding a franchise, being Falcon Communications dba Choice Television, a California Limited Partnership.

     C.     “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

     D.    “Cable Television System” or “System” shall mean a system of antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, waveguides or other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed and constructed for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing audio, video and other forms of electronic or electrical signals located in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     E.     “Gross Subscriber Revenues” shall mean all revenues or receipts derived by the Company from its operations in the City of La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     F.     “Basic Subscriber” shall mean a resident of the City who is subscribing to Company’s lowest tier of service received by all subscribers to Company’s system.

     SECTION 3. Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority. A public hearing concerning the franchise herein granted to the Company was held on March 6, 1989 at 7:30 p.m., at Descanso Gardens, La Cañada Flintridge, California.

     Public notice of said hearing was given in the La Cañada Valley Sun of January 26, 1989 which notice invited interested parties to participate in said hearing and comment upon legal, character, financial and other qualifications of the Company to operate a Cable Television System in the City. Said hearing having been held on the date and place stated herein above, and said hearing having been fully open to the public, and the City having received at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the Company to receive this franchise, the City hereby finds that the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial and other qualifications and that the Company’s construction arrangements are adequate and feasible, and that therefor, the City hereby grants to the Company a non-exclusive franchise, right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify and maintain in, upon, along, across, above and over and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions thereto, in the City, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the maintenance and operation in the City of a Cable Television System for the purpose of distributing television and radio programs, and various communications and other electronic services to the public. The right so granted includes the right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public ways and public places and all manner of easements for the purposes herein set forth.

     SECTION 4. Franchise Term. The Franchise granted the Company herein shall terminate fifteen (15) years from the date of grant. Renewal may be had pursuant to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, provided such Act or successor thereto is applicable to the City at the time renewal is proposed.

     SECTION 5. Payments to the City. The Company shall during the operation under this Franchise, pay to the City a Franchise fee in the maximum rate established by Federal Law as a percentage of the annual Gross Subscriber Revenues received by the Company for services rendered within the City. Such percentage is set at five (5%) percent as of the date of adoption of this Ordinance. Such payments shall be made annually. The Company shall furnish the City with a report showing the Company’s annual Gross Subscriber Revenues during the preceding year three months after the expiration of the calendar year. Payment will be made to the City within fifteen days after the time for filing said statement. Interest on any delinquent amount shall be paid to the City from the date due to the date of payment at the rate of two interest points above the prime rate of interest charged in the Los Angeles area, as calculated by the city.

     SECTION 6. Records and Reports. The Company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account, which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying by the City’s designee at all reasonable times.

     SECTION 7. Rates. Attached hereto and made a part of this franchise as Exhibit A is a schedule of rates currently charged by Company for basic cable television service.

     SECTION 8. Local Office; Complaint Procedures. During the term of this Franchise, and any renewal thereof, the Company shall maintain in the proximity of the City a local business office or agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters. The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints from subscribers during normal business hours Monday through Friday. A 24 hour telephone number shall be available and any service complaints from subscribers shall be investigated and acted upon within 24 hours. The Company shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of each service complaint, the time, date and response thereof. This log shall be made available for periodic inspection by the City and the records shall be kept for a period of five years. The Company shall be obligated to credit customer’s account if all cable services are disrupted more than forty-eight (48) hours.

     SECTION 9. Liability and Indemnification. The Company shall indemnify and defend the City, its officers, agents and employees from all liability, claims, damages and/or penalties resulting from the installation, operation or maintenance by Company of Cable Television System authorized herein. The city shall notify the Company’s representative within fifteen (15) days after the presentation of any claim or demand to the City, either by suit or otherwise, made against the City on account of any act as aforesaid on the part of the Company. The Company further agrees as follows:

     A.    Company shall carry Worker’s Compensation insurance, with statutory limits, and Employer’s Liability insurance with limits of not less than one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00), which shall cover all operations to be performed by Company as a result of this Ordinance.

     B.     Company shall carry Comprehensive General Liability and Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance with bodily injury limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence, and property damage limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). City, its officers, agents and employees shall be an additional named insured on such policies.

     C.     Company agrees to furnish City with certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide that such insurance shall not be cancelled unless thirty (30) days’ prior written notice shall first be given to City.

     SECTION 10. System Construction, Maintenance and Procedures. A. Upon grant of this Franchise to construct and maintain a community television system in the City, the Company may enter into contracts with any Public Utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located within or without the City to whatever extent such contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage to the Company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation of the System, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate State, County and Federal officials necessary to cross highways or roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines from the Company’s receiving antennae, obtain permission from the Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennae suitable to the needs of the System and its subscribers and obtain whatever other permits a city, county, state or federal agency may require. In the construction, installation and maintenance of its System, the Company will use steel, cable and electronic devices, all of specialized and advanced design and type. In the operation of its System, the Company will employ personnel with training, skill and experience in electronics and communications. Neither material nor personnel of this sort will be available to the Company for its System in the event of a war or other similar national emergency.

     B.     The Company’s system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any improvements the City may deem proper to make, or hinder or construct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements or other public property. Nothing herein shall require company to remove lines and facilities from established utility poles or easements unless all users of utility poles and easements are required to remove lines and facilities.

     C.     All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment erected by the Company within the City shall be subject to prior City approval, and so located as to cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alley and other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.

     D.    In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other surfacing, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a manner approved by the City, replace and restore all paving, sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed in as good condition as before said work was commenced.

     E.     In the event that at any time during the period of this Franchise the City shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or other public way, the company upon reasonable notice by the City, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.

     F.     The Company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting on said alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual traffic on said streets, alleys and public ways.

     G.    The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving permit, issued by the City, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid in advance by the person requesting the same, and the Company shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Company shall be give not less than forty-eight (48) hours’ advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire changes.

     H.    The Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with the wires and cables of the Company in accordance with current City of La Cañada Flintridge tree trimming specifications.

     I.      In cases of new construction or property development where utilities are to be placed underground, City shall require the developer/property owner to install all conduits, pull boxes and pedestals, as are required to provide cable television system services within the development. City shall require the developer/property owner to post an improvement security (i.e. cash deposit, bond, letter of credit, etc.) to guarantee satisfactory installation of such material, and shall require developer/property owner to notify the Company upon approval of any final maps, parcel maps or precise plans for such construction or development. Such notification shall be within ten days by certified mail with return receipt or any other method of notification that verifies delivery. The Company shall furnish to the developer/property owner plans and specifications for all required trenching, backfill, conduits, pull boxes, and all other materials (substructure). Cost of trenching, backfill and all materials shall be borne by the developer/property owner. The Company shall inspect and approve of the substructure prior to City’s final inspection of the improvements. Such inspections shall be completed within ten days of notice from the City. Upon such approval, the developer/property owner shall be required to dedicate the substructure installation of that portion of the public right-of-way to the Company, who shall assume ownership thereof.

     SECTION 11. Line Extension. To provide for a reasonable and nondiscriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the City, which policy was subject to public review in the public proceeding leading to the award of this Franchise, Company shall extend service to new subscribers consistent with the Line Extension policy outlined in Exhibit B.

     SECTION 12. Service to Public Facilities. Franchisee shall, at no cost, provide and maintain one cable television drop to each City facility, law enforcement facility, fire station, public school or other public facility located within the authorized franchise service area upon request for service.

     SECTION 13. Service to Private Nonprofit Schools. A. Franchisee shall, at no cost, provide and maintain one cable television drop providing Basic Programming services which may be provided to public places to each private, nonprofit school site within the authorized franchise service area.

     B.     As used in this section, “private, nonprofit schools” means schools that satisfy the requirements of Section 12154 of the Education Code of the State of California, and which are exempt from taxation under Section 214 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

     SECTION 14. Compliance with Standards. All facilities and equipment of Company shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the General Order Nos. 95 and 128 of the California Public Utilities Commission and such applicable ordinances and regulations set forth by the City and/or any other local, state or federal agencies.

     SECTION 15. Company Rules and Regulations. The Company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules, regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Company to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under this Franchise, and to assure an uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. However, such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict with the provisions hereof or of federal and state law. Nothing herein shall limit Company’s right to select, acquire, produce, package, edit and distribute editorial and informational programming.

     SECTION 16. Approval of Transfer. The Company shall not sell or transfer its System to another, nor transfer any rights under this Franchise to another without prior written approval by the City Council, provided that such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed with the City information sufficient to demonstrate that such transferee can comply with the terms and conditions of this Franchise, and an instrument duly executed, reciting the fact of such proposed sale, assignment or lease, accepting the terms of this Franchise and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof. Nothing herein shall prohibit a reorganization of the Company provided there is no change in ownership or control.

     SECTION 17. Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations. The Company shall, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations governing CATV operations promulgated by the FCC. This shall include adherence by the Company to FCC rules regarding technical and engineering specifications involved in the construction of the CATV System and signal carriage therein.

     SECTION 18. Modification of FCC Rules. Any modification of FCC Rules resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC shall, to the extent applicable, be considered as a part of this Franchise as of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be incorporated in this Franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful action of the City within one (1) year from the effective date of the FCC’s amendment or at the time of renewal of this Franchise, which ever occurs first.

     SECTION 19. Publication Costs. The Company shall assume the costs of the publication of this Franchise as such publication is required by law. A bill for publication costs shall be presented to the Company by the appropriate City officials upon the Company’s filing of its acceptance of this Franchise and the said publication costs plus staff time shall be paid at that time by the Company.

     SECTION 20. Activities Prohibited. A. The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere with television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor shall the System interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner the operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the City.

     B.     The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules, regulations or in any other respect make or grant any preference or advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or disadvantage, provided that nothing in this Franchise shall be deemed to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such classification would be entitled.

     C.     The Company shall not monitor any subscriber terminal without specific written authorization of the subscriber. The Company shall be responsible for the protection of subscriber privacy, and shall prohibit the tapping and/or monitoring of cable, line, signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver except as provided in the Cable Policy Act of 1984. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Company may test the functioning of any of its equipment or of its system where necessary to ensure proper maintenance and to collect performance data for agencies regulating the quality of the signal, and to prevent unauthorized and illegal use, sale or theft of signals.

     D.    Lists of subscribers’ names and addresses may not be sold or otherwise released for any purpose, nor may any information concerning the viewing patterns of identifiable individual subscribers be sold or released to any person, agency, or entity except as provided in the Cable Policy Act of 1984 without specific written authorization of the individual subscriber.

     E.     The company shall not place on any property any terminal equipment capable of two-way communications without the written consent of the occupants and/or users of such property, nor shall authorized two-way communications equipment be utilized for subscriber surveillance of any kind without the written consent of the subscriber.

     F.     No cable, line, wire amplifier, converter or other pieces of equipment owned by the Company shall be attached to any residence or other private property by the Company unless the written permission of the owner or responsible occupant of the property is first obtained. If such permission is later revoked, whether by the original or subsequent owner or responsible occupant, the Company shall immediately remove such equipment and promptly restore the property to as near its original condition as possible.

     SECTION 21. Termination. A. The City Council may terminate this Franchise in the event of the willful failure, refusal or neglect by the Company to do or comply with any material requirement or limitation contained in this Franchise, or other applicable rule or regulation of the Council or City Manager, pursuant to the following procedure:

     1.     Prior to the termination of this Franchise, the City Manager shall make written demand that the Company comply with any such requirement, limitation, term, condition, rule or regulation within a reasonable period of time, specified in the demand.

     2.     If the failure, refusal or neglect continues after the time set forth for compliance, the City Manager shall schedule a hearing by the City Council on the request for termination of the franchise. The City Manager shall cause to be served upon the Company, at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing a written notice of his or her intent to request such termination, and the time and place of the hearing.

     3.     The Council shall hear and consider any evidence presented by the City Manager, the Company and any other persons interested in the matter, and shall determine, in its discretion, whether or not any failure, refusal or neglect by the Company was with just cause. If such failure, refusal or neglect by the Company was with just cause, the Council shall direct the Company to comply within such time and manner and upon such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If the Council shall determine such failure, refusal or neglect by the Company was without just cause, then the Council may declare that the Franchise shall be terminated and forfeited.

     B.     In the event of termination, the City may purchase, or require any successor franchise grantee to purchase the Company’s facilities at a cost not to exceed its then fair market value, with a reduction in price or payment to City of an amount for uncompensated damages incurred by the City in connection with the Company’s operation. If the franchise is terminated pursuant to this section, the term “fair market value” shall not include the rights granted pursuant to the Franchise. In the event the parties are unable to agree on the fair market value of the Company’s system, the Company and the purchasers each shall select one qualified appraiser experienced in the evaluation of cable communications systems. The two selected appraisers shall select a third appraiser. The three appraisers shall be employed to determine the fair market value of Company’s system. The fair market value shall be the average of the three evaluations of the appraisers. The appraisers shall be directed to reach their determination within thirty (30) days. The Company and the purchaser shall each pay fifty percent of the costs of employing such appraisers. Nothing herein shall be deemed or construed to impair or affect, in any way or to any extent, the right of the City to acquire the property of the Company through the exercise of the right of eminent domain, nor any other of the rights of the City under this franchise or any provision of law.

     C.     In the event of any holding over after expiration or other termination of this Franchise, the Company shall pay to the City all fees consistent with the provisions of the franchise agreement as if there had not been such holding over and as if the terms and conditions of this franchise continued in full force and effect. If the Company holds over in direct contravention of a final valid order of the City, issued upon notice, requiring the Company to cease and desist all operations upon a certain date, then and in that event, the Company shall pay to the City reasonable compensation and damages of not less than one hundred percent of its gross revenue derived from all sources within the City during the period of holding over.

     D.    In the event the use of any of the Company’s property is permanently discontinued, or no franchise has been obtained therefor, or upon expiration of or within twelve (12) months after any termination of this franchise or any renewal thereof, the Company shall promptly remove all property involved, other than the City Council may, at its sole option, permit to be abandoned in place. A permit to abandon in place must thereafter be obtained from the City’s Director of Public Works. Property to be abandoned in place shall be abandoned in such a manner as the Council shall prescribe. Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the Company shall submit to the City Council an instrument, satisfactory to the City Attorney, transferring to the City the ownership of the property.

     E.     Any property of the Company remaining in place one hundred twenty (120) days after termination or expiration of this franchise or any renewal thereof shall be considered permanently abandoned. The City’s Director of Public Works may extend such time in thirty-day increments not to exceed two such extensions, for a total one hundred eighty (180) days. Abandonment in place shall not be deemed a taking of the property of the Company and the Company shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of abandonment in place pursuant to this section.

     SECTION 22. Separability. A. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this Ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions hereof.

     B.     Should any provision of this Franchise be inconsistent or at variance with any rule, regulation or policy, in whole or in part, of the Federal Communications Commission or any other agency having jurisdiction, such provision shall be invalid, but the remaining provisions hereof shall not be affected thereby.

     SECTION 23. Ordinances Repealed. All ordinances or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby repealed.

     SECTION 24. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its final passage, and within fifteen (15) days after its passage, the City Clerk shall cause it to be published in the La Cañada Valley Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of La Cañada Flintridge and hereby designated for that purpose.

     PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED this 3rd day of April 1989.

 

     Mayor

 

     ATTEST:

 

     City Clerk

 

EXHIBIT A

BASIC SERVICE RATES

 

     A.    Primary Outlet Installation

     1.     Standard Installation

     A.    Aerial (150 feet) $29.95

     B.     Underground (75 feet)29.95

     2.     Non-Standard Installation Company’s cost of labor and materials plus 10%

     B.     Basic Monthly Service $14.95

 

     Note: A standards aerial installation is no more than 150 feet from a utility pole to the house attachment without any intermediate pole contacts.

 

     A standard underground installation is no more than 75 feet from distribution tap to the house attachment and requires no more than one sidewalk bore and no special construction conditions like fences, retaining walls or driveways.

 

EXHIBIT B

LINE EXTENSION POLICY

 

     Prior to June 1, 1989, the Company will extend and make available cable service to the following areas of the City at no cost to the customers/subscribers who have requested the service:

     A.    Greenridge Tract

     B.     104 Berkshire Place

 

     After June 1, 1989, the Company my extend cable service to any individual properties that are unserved under the following circumstances:

 

     A.    Areas primarily serviced by underground distribution cable:

     • The Company will contribute $1,000 to the construction and installation of each (confirmed) potential subscriber to the proposed cable system extension (exclusive of MDUs).

     • The amount by which actual costs to construct exceed $1,000, will be paid by subscriber.

     • When residents of unserved areas request cable service, the Company will perform an engineering study and submit the proposal to residents. If the proposal is fully accepted, the Company will commence construction process of the area within 60 days from acceptance.

     • Request for service from residents must be writing and all Company proposals must be in writing.

     B.     Areas primarily serviced by aerial distribution cable:

     • The company will contribute $430 to the construction and installation of each (confirmed) potential subscriber to the proposed cable system extension (exclusive of MDUs).

     • The amount by which actual costs to construct exceed $430 will be paid by subscriber.

 

     • When residents of unserved areas request cable service, the Company will perform an engineering study and submit proposal to residents. If proposal is fully accepted, the Company will commence construction process in the area within 60 days from acceptance.

     • Request for service from residents must be in writing and all Company proposals must be in writing.

 

     Policy does not apply to construction of Multiple Dwelling Units or businesses. Installation/construction costs in these cases are negotiated on a case by case basis.

 

     Per City limit boundaries as of the date of this ordinance, Company is responsible for the timely application for permits and pole applications. The Company is required to report the applications for such permits to the City Manager within ten days of their submission. The City may hold the Company responsible for the submission of such applications; however, the Company is not responsible for delays caused subsequent to the application of such permits.

 

     Note: Installation and monthly fees will be at the rates generally available in the community.

 

ORDINANCE NO. 289
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE AMENDING ORDINANCE NOS. 152 AND 169 BY REDEFINING THE AUTHORIZED CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE AREAS

 

     WHEREAS, on September 8, 1987, the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge adopted Ordinance No. 152 which granted a franchise extension to Sammons Cable Television, which was subsequently assigned to Marcus Cable Television; and,

 

     WHEREAS, on April 3, 1989, the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge adopted Ordinance No. 169 which granted a franchise extension to Falcon Cable Television, which was subsequently assigned to Charter Communications, Inc.; and,

 

     WHEREAS, the authorized cable television franchise areas for each respective cable television provider was defined thereto; and,

 

     WHEREAS, the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge has received a request from Gary Zentmyer Development to authorize an adjustment in the franchise boundary areas to allow Marcus Cable Television to serve the residential subdivision project commonly known as “Arroyo Summit”; and,

 

     WHEREAS, the Arroyo Summit project is presently located within the Charter Communications, Inc. franchise area and Charter Communications, Inc. has determined that it would create a financial hardship if it were required to provide service to the project; and,

 

     WHEREAS, Marcus Cable Television currently has cable television infrastructure in place which could readily serve the Arroyo Summit project and is willing to incorporate the project into its authorized cable television franchise area;

 

     NOW, THEREFORE, THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE DOES HEREBY ORDAIN:

 

     SECTION 1: Ordinance Nos. 152 and 169 are hereby amended by repealing all provisions which define the authorized cable television franchise boundary areas.

 

     SECTION 2: The authorized cable television franchise boundary areas are defined as those described in Exhibit A attached hereto and made a part of this ordinance.

 

     SECTION 3: Publication. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its final passage and within fifteen (15) days after its passage, the City Clerk shall cause it to be published in the La Cañada Valley Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of La Cañada Flintridge and hereby designated for that purpose.

 

     PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED THIS 17TH DAY OF November, 1997.

 

     Mayor

 

     ATTEST:

 

     City Clerk

 

 



 

ORDINANCE NO. 298
 

     AN ORDINANCE OF THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF LA CAÑADA FLINTRIDGE AMENDING ORDINANCE NO. 169 RELATING TO THE TERMINATION OF THE FRANCHISE FOR THE OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF A CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM BY CHARTER COMMUNICATIONS ENTERTAINMENT II, LLC AND TO PROVIDE FOR A GOVERNMENT CHANNEL TO BE USED BY THE CITY

 

     The City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge hereby ordains as follows:

 

     SECTION 1. Section 4 of Ordinance No. 169 of the City of La Cañada Flintridge is hereby amended to read as follows:

 

     “Section 4. Franchise Term. The Franchise granted the Company herein shall terminate on September 8, 2002.”

 

     SECTION 2. Ordinance No. 169 of the City of La Cañada Flintridge is hereby amended to add the following:

 

     “Government Channel. On or before December 20, 1999, Charter Communications Entertainment II, LLC and its successors and assigns, shall activate and maintain during the entire term of the Franchise, one analog government channel for the exclusive control of City and said channel shall be available to the City for government programming.”

 

     SECTION 3. This ordinance shall take effect thirty (30) days after its final passage, and within fifteen (15) days after its passage, the City Clerk shall cause it to be published in the La Cañada Valley Sun, a newspaper of general circulation in the City of La Cañada Flintridge and hereby designated for that purpose.

 

     PASSED, APPROVED AND ADOPTED THIS 4th DAY OF October , 1999.

 

     Mayor

 

     ATTEST:

 

     City Clerk

Title 11 ZONING*
* CodeAlert: This topic has been affected by Ordinance No. 495. To view amendments and newly added provisions, please refer to the CodeAlert Amendment List.


Chapter 11.01 GENERAL RULES
Chapter 11.02 BASIC PROVISIONS
Chapter 11.03 ZONING CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 11.04 CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PROJECT
Chapter 11.11 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
Chapter 11.12 RPD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Chapter 11.13 R-3 MULTIFAMILY ZONE
Chapter 11.14 CPD COMMUNITY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
Chapter 11.15 FOOTHILL COMMUNITY DISTRICT ZONE
Chapter 11.16 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE
Chapter 11.17 MIXED USE ZONE
Chapter 11.18 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC RESIDENTIAL USES
Chapter 11.19 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS
Chapter 11.20 ESOZ EMERGENCY SHELTER OVERLAY ZONE
Chapter 11.24 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONES—O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE
Chapter 11.26 PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE(S) FACILITIES
Chapter 11.32 ANIMAL KEEPING AND ANIMAL CLUBS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
Chapter 11.33 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
Chapter 11.34 SPORTS COURTS
Chapter 11.35 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
Chapter 11.36 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
Chapter 11.37 SIGN REGULATIONS
Chapter 11.38 PARKING AND VEHICLE STORAGE
Chapter 11.40 PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF DESIGNATED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
Chapter 11.41 APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS
Chapter 11.42 ZONE CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
Chapter 11.43 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
Chapter 11.44 VARIANCES
Chapter 11.45 DIRECTOR’S REVIEW, MODIFICATIONS AND SPECIAL REVIEWS
Chapter 11.46 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
Chapter 11.47 DESIGN REVIEW
Chapter 11.48 PUBLIC HEARINGS
Chapter 11.49 APPEAL AND CITY COUNCIL CALL-UP PROCEDURES
Chapter 11.50 REVOCATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS
Chapter 11.51 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
Chapter 11.52 PARKWAYS, MAJOR AND SECONDARY HIGHWAYS
Chapter 11.53 TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
Chapter 11.54 BONDS AND INSURANCE
Chapter 11.55 FLOOD CONTROL
Chapter 11.61 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 11.62 VESTING TENTATIVE MAP
Chapter 11.63 MERGER OF PARCELS
Chapter 11.64 CONVERSION TO CONDOMINIUMS
Chapter 11.70 COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED
Chapter 11.75 PERSONAL INDOOR MARIJUANA CULTIVATION
Chapter 11.80 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS

Chapter 11.01 GENERAL RULES
11.01.010 Short title.
     This code shall be known as, and may be cited as, “the zoning ordinance.” (LACC Ord. 1494 § 100, 1974)

 

11.01.020 Purpose.
     It is declared that in the creation by this code of the respective zones set forth herein, the city council has given due and special consideration to the peculiar suitability of each and every such zone herein created for the particular uses enumerated therefor, the area requirements, density of land occupancy, and the necessary, proper and comprehensive groupings and arrangements of the various industries, businesses and population of the city and in relation with established plans in the incorporated areas of said city in accordance with a well-considered general plan of land use for the development of the entire city. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 102, 1974)

 

11.01.030 Definitions.
     Whenever any of the following names or terms are used in this code, each such name or term shall be deemed and constructed to have the meaning ascribed to it in this section as follows:

     Abut or Abutting. See “Adjoining.”

     “Accessory building” means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, and which is located in the same or a less restrictive zone on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or use.

     “Accessory use” means a use customarily incidental, related and clearly subordinate to a principal use established on the same lot or parcel of land, which accessory use does not alter said principal use.

     “Adjacent” means two or more lots or parcels of land separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or two or more objects that lie near or close to each other.

     “Adjoining” means two or more lots or parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other. Lots or parcels of land which touch at corners only shall not be deemed adjoining. “Abut” or “abutting” and “contiguous” mean the same as adjoining.

     “Alley” means a public or private right-of-way less than forty (40) feet wide which affords a means of vehicular access to the side or rear of properties abutting a street or highway.

     “Alternative transportation” means the use of modes of transportation other than the single passenger motor vehicle, including but not limited to carpools, vanpools, buspools, public transit, walking and bicycling.

     “Angle-plane limit” means a limit to building bulk per ordinance for single-family residences.

     “Apartment house” means a building, or a portion of a building designed or used for occupancy by three or more families, living independently of each other and containing three or more dwelling units.

     “Appendage” means a portion of a letter extending beyond the block of text, as the tail on the lowercase letters “y” and “g.”

     “Applicable development” means any development project that is determined to meet or exceed the project size threshold criteria contained in Section 11.53.030.

     “Architectural extension” means a tower or other tall element serving an architectural purpose.

     Area, Floor. “Floor area” means the total area of all stories within the outside faces of exterior walls, including in the case of single-family residences all solid-roofed areas whether enclosed or not.

     Area, Lot. “Lot area” means the area of the subject parcel, excluding any public or private access easement such as an alley, highway, street, parkway, or similar right-of-way, or a private driveway serving another property, and excluding above-ground easements for paved flood control channels not available for use by the property owner.

     “Automobile parking space,” as used in this code, means any permanently maintained space not less than nine feet wide and not less than twenty (20) feet deep, on the same lot or parcel of land as is located the structure it is designed to serve, so located and arranged as to permit the storage of, and be readily accessible under its own power to, a passenger automobile.

     “Automobile storage space” means automobile parking space.

     “Awning” means a structure of malleable material which is designed to provide shelter and is attached to the underlying permanent structure.

     “Awning sign” means any sign attached to, painted on, or integral to an awning.

     “Balloons” means any inflated or inflatable object, with or without copy.

     Banners: see “Flags, pennants, banners, bunting or streamers.”

     “Basement” means that portion of the structure where perimeter walls and floor are completely below adjacent grade except for six inches of wall as measured from the bottom of the sole or bottom plate.

     “Bench sign” means a sign located on a bench or similar structure on the public right-of-way.

     “Berm” means a mound separating two lower areas.

     “Billboard” means an off-premises sign designed for changeable advertising copy and which is normally used for the advertisement of goods, products or services.

     “Bonus open space area” means encouraged open space which is counted as more than its actual area.

     “Box (size)” means the size of a tree’s container when sold, if boxed.

     “Building” is any structure built for the support, shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind.

     Building, Enclosed. “Enclosed building” means a building enclosed on all sides.

     “Building projection” means a horizontal element projecting from an exterior wall of the building.

     Bunting: see “Flags, pennants, banners, bunting or streamers.”

     “Buspool” means a vehicle carrying sixteen (16) or more passengers commuting on a regular basis to and from work with a fixed route according to a fixed schedule.

     “Canopy index” means a tree’s height multiplied by its canopy width.

     “Carpool” means a vehicle carrying two to six persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis.

     “The California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA)” means a statute that requires all jurisdictions in the state of California to evaluate the extent of environmental impact posed by proposed development.

     Center line. Where reference is made to the “center line” of any parkway, major or secondary highway such center line is deemed to be the center line established by the county engineer for any proposed or dedicated public way which, in whole or in part, is included in any such parkway, major or secondary highway. Said established center lines are those shown on a series of maps entitled County Surveyor’s Maps or County Surveyor’s Field Maps on file in the office of the county engineer, except that, where two or more such center lines are shown on any map in said series of maps, the center line labeled “proposed center line” is deemed to be the center line of the parkway, major or secondary highway.

     “Change of copy” means replacement of the copy, which may include the field but not the sign’s frame or supporting structure, of a sign.

     “Chapter” means a chapter of this code unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned.

     “City” means the geographical limit of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Civic event sign” means a sign posted to advertise, identify or provide direction to, a civic event sponsored by the city or another nonprofit agency or organization.

     “Clustered landscaping areas” means areas in which the major elements are clustered together.

     “Commercial” means retail or office use.

     “Commercial advertising statuary” means a statue or other three-dimensional object that identifies, advertises or otherwise directs attention to a product or business, whether or not permanently affixed to the site.

     “Commercial parking lot or building” means a parking area or structure established or operated as a business, providing off-street parking for a fee or charge.

     “Commercial zone,” as used in this code, means zone CPD.

     “Commission” means the planning commission of the city.

     “Communication equipment building” means a building housing operating electrical and mechanical equipment necessary for the conducting of a public utility communications business, with or without personnel.

     “Construction and trades sign” means a sign stating the name and address of those individuals or firms directly connected with a construction project and/or the name of the owner or ultimate user.

     “Convenience store” means a retail establishment that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of a limited inventory of commonly consumed prepackaged food and drink products not intended for home preparation and consumption, such as snack foods, toiletries, soft drinks, tobacco, magazines, and newspapers, where the gross floor area is less than five thousand (5,000) square feet of retail floor area and intended to provide quick service accessory. The sale of prepared foods for on-site or off-site consumption is limited to ten percent of total floor area. A convenience store shall be located on the same parcel with an automobile fueling station and may not be a stand-alone use.

     “Copy” means the words, graphics and/or letters contained within a sign.

     “County,” “county of Los Angeles” and “unincorporated territory of the county of Los Angeles” means the county of Los Angeles.

     “Court” means an open area enclosed on at least two sides by building walls.

     “Day care for children, family home” means any family residence, noninstitutional in character, providing nonresident day care only for not more than six children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Day care for children, special home” means any facility, noninstitutional in character, providing nonresident day care only for seven to ten children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Day nursery, children” means any facility, institutional in character, or providing nonresident day care and supervision for more than ten children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California. Day nursery, children includes all types of group day care programs including, but not limited to, day nurseries, nursery schools for children under the minimum age for admission to public schools, parent-cooperative nursery schools, play groups for preschool children and programs giving after school care to school age children.

     “Decorative block” means masonry units having significant texture, scoring and/or clay faces.

     “Density bonus” means a density increase over the otherwise allowable maximum residential density.

     “Design review” means review by the design review board, required of most commercial and institutional projects.

     “Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of Chapter 11.53 as determined by the property owner.

     “Development” means the construction or addition of new building square footage. Additions to buildings which existed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this code and which exceed the thresholds defined in Section 11.53.030 shall comply with the applicable requirements but shall not be added cumulatively with existing square footage; existing square footage shall be exempt from these requirements. All calculations shall be based on gross square footage.

     “Directional onsite sign” means a sign, within the subject property, which directs or controls the movement of pedestrians or vehicles.

     “Director” means the director of community development of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Director of community development” means the person with that title, or designee.

     “Directory monument sign” means a sign which is permanent and used to identify the name of a multi-user center and its tenants.

     “District” means one of five portions of Foothill Boulevard designated in the Foothill Boulevard master plan: West Gateway, The Link, Old Town, Downtown and Michigan Hill.

     “Domestic animal” is an animal which is commonly maintained in residence with man.

     “Downtown district” means the district of Foothill Boulevard extending from Verdugo Boulevard east to Hampton Road.

     “Dwelling unit” means one or more rooms in a building or portion thereof designed, intended to be used, or used for occupancy by one family for living and sleeping quarters and containing only one kitchen.

     “Earth station” means structures comprising one or more large parabolic reflectors which may be mounted on a circular control building and all appurtenant equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals in connection with a public utility communication route or system employing such earth stations and satellites in space.

 

     “Election sign” means a sign advertising any candidate for public office, proposition, or other issue to be voted on by the electorate. See also “Political sign.”

     “Electric distribution substation” means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the distribution of electric power where electric energy is received at a subtransmission voltage and transformed to a lower voltage for distribution for general consumer use.

 

     “Electric transmission substation” means an assembly of equipment which is part of a system for the transmission of electric power where electric energy is received at a very high voltage from its source of generation by means of a network of high voltage lines and where, by means of transformers, said high voltage is transformed to a lower sub-transmission voltage for purposes of supplying electric power to large individual consumers, interchange connection with other power producing agencies or electric distribution substations for transformation to still lower voltage for distribution to smaller individual users.

     “Employee parking area” means the portion of total required parking at a development used by on-site employees. Unless specified in the city zoning/building code, employee parking shall be calculated as follows:

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Required Parking
Devoted to Employees

Commercial

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial/manufacturing

90%

 

     “Encroach” means to extend beyond the allowed limits.

     “Exterior view” means the view from outside the enclosed space of a building, of a sign placed outside a building or within three feet of a window.

     “Externally illuminated” means illuminated in a manner other than described under “Internally illuminated.”

     “Field” means that portion of the sign area consisting of background, usually consisting of the sign area other than the lettering and other graphics.

     “Fifteen (15) gallon size” means a common nursery container size for a shrub or tree, smaller than twenty-four (24) inch box size.

     Finish Grade, Adjacent. “Adjacent finish grade” means the level of the ground or pavement immediately next to the building.

     “Flags, pennants, banners, bunting or streamers” means devices made of flexible materials, with or without copy.

     “Flashing illumination sign” means any sign for which illumination is not maintained constant in intensity, color and/or pattern.

     “Floor area ratio” means the square footage of lot areas under solid roof including, but not limited to, habitable attics and basements, lofts, guest houses, garages, barns, covered patios and other solid roofed accessory structures divided by the net lot area of the subject property.

     “Freestanding” means attached at top or bottom only.

     “Freeway” means a highway in respect to which the owners of abutting lands have no right or easement of access to or from their abutting lands, or in respect to which such owners have only limited or restricted right or easement of access and which is declared to be such in compliance with the Streets and Highways Code of the state of California; including principal roadways, interchange roadways connecting one freeway with another, and ingress and egress ramps connecting the freeway with other highways, but not including frontage roadways.

     “Frontage” means a lot line along a street. For the purposes of this definition, a corner radius between lot lines on two intersecting streets shall have one-half its length included in each abutting lot line.

     “Front façade” means one or more exterior sides of a primary structure that face the front property line.



 

     “Geometric” means characterized by straight lines, triangles, circles or similar substantially regular forms.

     “Glazing” means glass used in a building.

     “Government posters” means official notices authorized by a court of law, a public body, or a public office, as well as warning or information signs authorized by a government public safety authority.

     “Grade” means ground level.

     “Grading” means any excavation or fill or combination thereof, necessary and incidental to impending building construction or other lawful development of the premises.

     “Guidelines” means regulatory language which is intended for the guidance of the designer as well as the reviewing body, and is not necessarily mandatory. Guidelines are applied on a case-by-case basis as appropriate to the particular circumstances. Guidelines commonly use “should” rather than “shall” statements.

     “Hillsides” means those portions of the site which are elevated above the highest level of grades adjacent to the building and to the property lines abutting public rights-of-way.

     “Home for aged persons, foster family” means any family residence noninstitutional in character, providing twenty-four (24) hour care for not more than four aged persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Home for aged persons, small group care” means any facility noninstitutional in character, providing twenty-four (24) hour care for between five and fifteen (15) aged persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Home for children, foster family” means any family residence, noninstitutional in character, providing twenty-four (24) hour care for not more than six children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Home for children, special boarding” means any facility, noninstitutional in character, providing twenty-four (24) hour care for between seven and fifteen (15) children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by or under the regulations of the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

 

     “Home occupation” is defined as an accessory use or activity of a business nature conducted on residential property by the occupant(s) of the residence. A home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the primary residential use of the property and shall not change the residential character of said property or adversely affect the residential neighborhood within which it is located.

     “Hospital” means any institution, place, building or agency licensed by the Departments of Public Health or Mental Hygiene of the state of California, which maintains and operates organized facilities for the diagnosis, care and treatment of human illness, including convalescence and including care during and after pregnancy. Hospital includes sanitarium, sanatorium, convalescent home, nursing home and maternity home.

     Hospital, Small Animal. “Small animal hospital” means any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing or other services, including incidental boarding, to dogs, cats and other small animals.

     “Hotel” means any building containing six or more guest rooms intended or designed to be used, or which are used, rented or hired out to be occupied, or which are occupied for sleeping purposes by guests. Hotels include dormitories and fraternity and sorority houses.

     “Illuminated sign” means a sign with which an artificial source of light is used. This definition shall include internally and externally lighted signs and reflectorized, or glowing signs.

     “Incidental identification sign” means a sign which is used to identify the occupants or the activity at the building, lot, or premises where the sign is located.

     “Indirect neon” means a sign in which the neon tubes providing the illumination are concealed from view by an opaque surface, and project their light onto a visible surface.

     “Installed” means erected, constructed, posted, painted, printed, tacked, glued or otherwise fastened, fixed or made visible in any manner whatsoever.

 

 

 

     “Institution for aged persons, private” means any facility, institutional in character or providing twenty-four (24) hour day care for sixteen (16) or more aged persons sixty-five (65) years of age or older, as defined and licensed by the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Institution for children, private” means any facility, institutional in character or providing twenty-four (24) hour care for sixteen (16) or more children under sixteen (16) years of age, as defined and licensed by the Department of Social Welfare of the state of California.

     “Interior parking lot” means a parking lot, including landscaping areas within it, but excluding landscaping areas between the parking lot and the street.

     “Internally illuminated” means illuminated in a manner in which the light permeates the sign surface, as through plexiglass or neon materials.

     “Kitchen” means any room or space used, or intended or designed to be used for cooking or the preparation of food.

     “Landscaping” means areas devoted to vegetation and to paved areas for pedestrian movement and use exclusive from vehicular movements and service access.

     Link District, The. The “Link district” means the district of Foothill Boulevard from Leata Lane east to Alta Canyada Road.

     “Liquor store” means a retail establishment that is primarily engaged in the retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for consumption off the premises and that is applying for or has obtained an ABC License Type 20 (off-sale beer and wine - package store) or License Type 21 (off-sale general - package store), where a minimum of eighty (80) percent of the total square footage of the floor area of the establishment is dedicated to selling beer, wine, and other alcoholic beverages. A license for select on-site consumption, such as tastings, shall not alter the liquor store category.

     “Lot” means a parcel of land.

     Lot, corner. “Corner lot” means a lot having frontage on two or more streets at their intersection, where the streets or curvature form an angle of intersection of not more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees. If the angle of intersection of the streets is more than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees, the lot shall not be considered a “corner lot.”

 



 

     “Lot coverage” means the area of land covered by solid roofed structures, whether habitable or nonhabitable, including, but not limited to: building footprints of a single-family dwelling, detached garages, barns, covered patios and other solid roofed accessory structures constructed on a foundation whether above, below or at grade level.

     Lot, Flag. “Flag lot” means a lot having access to a public street or highway by a fee simple strip or easement strip, or where the lot is separated from a street by another lot or lots except for a fee simple strip or easement strip.

     Lot, Hairpin. “Hairpin lot” means a lot having frontage on a single street comprising more than fifty (50) percent of the total perimeter of the lot.

 



 

     Lot, Interior. “Interior lot” means a lot with frontage on only one street.

     Lot, Key. “Key lot” means the first lot in the rear of a reverse corner lot, whether or not separated by an alley.

     Lot, Landlocked. “Landlocked lot” means a lot which does not front on a public highway or street, and does not have any access to a public highway or street through any easement strip or fee simple strip of land.

 



 

     Examples of Lot Definitions: Corner Lot, Flag Lot, Hairpin Lot, Interior Lot, Key Lot, Reverse Corner Lot, and Through Lot.

 

     “Lot line” means a boundary line, consisting of one or more line segments and/or arcs, of a lot or of a parcel of land.

     Lot Line, Front. “Front lot line” means:

     1.     On an interior lot the “front lot line” means the lot line abutting a street.

     2.     On a corner lot, the “front lot line” means the narrowest street-abutting lot line, except as otherwise determined through development standards for setbacks. For the purposes of this definition, a corner radius between lot lines on two intersecting streets shall have one-half its length included in each abutting lot line.

     3.     On a flag lot, or a through lot, the location of the front lot line shall be determined by the director of community development. The director’s determination shall be shown on a set of maps on file with the community development department and shall be used for future reference and available for public inspection.

     4.     On a hairpin lot, the total frontage along the street or streets shall be considered the front lot line.

     Lot Line, Rear. “Rear lot line” means a lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. For a triangular or gore-shaped lot, the rear lot line shall mean a line ten feet in length within the lot which is parallel to the front lot line, or parallel to the chord of a curved front lot line.



     Lot Line, Side. “Side lot line” means any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

     Lot, Reverse Corner. “Reverse corner lot” means a corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot.

     Lot, Through. “Through lot” means a lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets or highways, or two parallel or approximately parallel portions of the same street or highway.

     Lot, Triangular or Gore-Shaped. “Triangular or gore-shaped lot” means a lot that is generally triangular in shape with front and side lot lines, and little or no rear lot line.

     Lot Width, Average. “Average lot width” shall be the width of the lot as measured from a line drawn perpendicular to a line connecting the mid-points of the front and rear property lines and intersecting the line at a point located one-third the length of the line from the front property line.

     “Major highway” means a major highway as shown on the master plan of highways of the county of Los Angeles.

     “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. Massage includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance, and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual.

     “Massage establishment” means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of massage. A massage establishment does not include any business that offers massage services that are accessory to the primary business, meaning massage services are provided within an area that totals less than fifteen (15) percent of the gross floor area of the business or any establishment that provides massage but which is specifically exempt pursuant to LCFMC Section 6.40.015.

     “Maximum building height” means the building height as measured from the lowest finish grade adjacent to the building wall to the highest portion of the building perpendicular to the building wall from the measured grade point.

     “May” is permissive.

     “Michigan Hill district” means the district of Foothill Boulevard from Hampton Road east to Oak Grove Drive.

     “Microwave station” means a structure supporting equipment necessary for the receiving, amplifying or transmitting of microwave signals, including necessary antenna systems, along a communications route or system which employs microwave frequencies assigned by the Federal Communications Commission.

     “Motel” means a group of attached or detached buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the outside of the building with garage attached or automobile parking space conveniently located on the lot or parcel of land and which is designed, used or intended to be used wholly or in part for the accommodation of automobile transients. Motels include auto courts, motor lodges, and tourist courts.

     “Moving sign” means any sign in or on which any visible portion rotates or moves in any way or appears to be doing the foregoing.

     “Multifamily housing complex” means a grouping of housing units sharing one parcel.

     “Neon sign” means a sign comprised partially or entirely of exposed small diameter tubing, illuminated by neon, argon or other means.

     “Net lot area” means the total square footage of lot area under contiguous ownership excluding flag strips with a width of twenty (20) feet or less.

     “Noncommercial signs” means election, political, public service, public safety, civic event, and directional on-site signs, and government posters.

     “Nonconforming building or structure” means any building or structure that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time this code or any amendment thereto became effective, but which, due to the application of this code or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all the applicable regulations and standards of development in the zone in which it is located.

     “Nonconforming use” means any use of land or property that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time this code or any amendment thereto became effective, but which, due to the application of this code or any amendment thereto, no longer complies with all of the applicable regulations and standards of the zone in which it is located.

     “Occupancy” means a use or a property upon which a use is conducted.

     “Off-premises sign” means a sign identifying a business, product or service not available at the property where the sign is displayed.

     “Old Town district” means the district of Foothill Boulevard from Alta Canyada Road east to Verdugo Boulevard.

 

     “On-premises sign” means a sign used to identify the business, occupant, product or service available at the premises on which the sign is displayed.

     “Open space area” means the amount of each site required to be devoted to open space other than parking and service.

     “Ordinance” means an ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “Outdoor display” means a display of a business’ goods or services, placed outside the building.

     “Outside display” means the placement of goods, equipment, merchandise or exhibits at a location visible to the public view, other than within a building.

     “Outside storage” means the storage of goods, equipment or materials outside of a building for any purpose other than outside display.

     “Paper products” means any paper-based materials, including but not limited to paper, cardboard or poster board, which are subject to rapid and extreme deterioration and/or deformation when exposed to a normal range of weather conditions.

     “Parapet” means the extension of an exterior building wall above the roof structure.

     “Parcel of land” means a contiguous quantity of land, owned by, or recorded as the property of the same claimant or person, or in the possession of the same claimant or person pursuant to a recorded lease with a term of not less than twenty (20) years.

     “Pedestrian plazas” means open space areas separate from vehicular access and of sufficient width to be perceived as gathering places rather than merely circulation paths.

     Pennants. See “Flags, pennants, banners, bunting or streamers.”

     “Person” means any individual, firm, copartnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this, and any other county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Planter” means an area devoted to vegetation and closely bounded by paving, building walls, garden walls or other edge features.

     “Plastic” means chemically produced polymer materials, including variants such as plexiglass, fiberglass, lexan and other similar products.

     “Plot plan” or “plan” means a site plan.

     “Political sign” means a sign advocating any political idea or message which is not to be voted on by the electorate. See also “Election sign.”

     “Portable sign” means a sign which is capable of being carried or moved from one spot to another and is not permanently attached to the ground or a structure.

     “Preferential parking” means parking spaces designated or assigned through use of a sign or painted space markings for carpool and vanpool vehicles carrying commute passengers on a regular basis that are provided in a location more convenient to a place of employment than parking spaces provided for single-occupant vehicles.

     “Projecting sign” means a sign attached to a building, with the orientation of the sign face(s) at more than twenty (20) degrees angle to the adjacent face of the building.

     Projection. See “Building projection.”

     “Property line” means a lot line.

     “Property owner” means the legal owner of a development who serves as the lessor to a tenant. The property owner shall be responsible for complying with the provisions of the ordinance either directly or by delegating such responsibility as appropriate to a tenant and/or agent.

     “Property regulation signs” means signs which bear a message solely for the purpose of regulating activity relative to the use of the property, of which common examples include “No Solicitors,” “No Parking” and “Beware of Dog.”

     “Pro shop” means an incidental commercial use operated in conjunction with, and on the same premises as a principal recreational use, which offers for retail sale sporting equipment and supplies customarily utilized in participating in such recreational activity. Pro shop does not include a general sporting goods store.

     “Public safety sign” means a sign determined by the director of community development or the director of public works, city or other public agency, to be necessary for the public safety or convenience.

     “Public service sign” means a temporary sign devoted to a religious, charitable, cultural, governmental, or educational purpose.

     “Reader board” means a permanent structure on which is displayed copy of a temporary or changeable nature.

     “Realty sign” means a sign which pertains to the sale, lease, rental or display of real property. See also “Construction and trades sign.”

     “Recreational vehicle” means a motorized or nonmotorized vehicle primarily designed for recreational, camping, animal transportation, human habitation, or similar uses. Examples of recreational vehicles include, but are not limited to, any of the following: motor homes, trailers, boats, all terrain vehicles, or similar vehicles as determined by the director of community development. Pickup trucks with attached utility camper shells not designed for animal transportation, camping, or human habitation, and used primarily for transportation and/or commercial use are excluded from this definition.

     Recreation Facilities, Neighborhood. “Neighborhood recreation facilities” means outdoor recreation facilities established by an association of persons who are bona fide members and operated as a nonprofit corporation to provide outdoor recreation facilities for residents in the immediate vicinity and their guests. Such facilities may include a clubhouse, changing rooms and similar subordinate facilities in conjunction with the outdoor recreation activity but shall not include a restaurant, bar or pro shop.

     Recreation Facility, Commercial. “Commercial recreation facility” means a commercial enterprise offering the use of outdoor recreational facilities to the public.

     Recreation Facility, Private. “Private recreation facility” means an association of persons who are bona fide members, paying regular dues, and organized to provide recreational facilities for members and their guests, but not including an association organized primarily to render a service customarily carried on as a commercial enterprise.

     “Refuse area” means an enclosed area for the storage of refuse containers.

     “Required area” means:

     1.     The area of a lot which is shown as a part of a subdivision for purposes of sale, recorded as a final map or filed as a record of survey map approved as provided in the Subdivision Map Act or as provided in LACC Ordinance No. 4478, entitled “Subdivision Ordinance,” adopted March 19, 1945, except that where a parcel which otherwise would have been shown as one lot, is divided into two or more lots because of a city boundary line or a line between land the title to which was registered under the Land Title Law (Torrens Title) and land the title to which was not so registered, in which case “required area” means the area of such parcel; or

     2.     The area of a lot, or parcel of land the right of possession of which, by virtue of a deed duly recorded, or by a recorded contract of sale, is vested in a person who neither owns nor has a right of possession of any contiguous parcel of property; provided, that the deed or contract of sale by which such right of possession was separated has been recorded prior to the adoption by the city council of the ordinance, which imposes the area requirements upon such lot or parcel of land; or

 

     3.     Where a number follows the zoning symbol and neither subdivision (1) nor (2) apply:

     a.     A gross area, including that portion, if any, subject to a highway easement or other public or private easement where the owner of the servient tenement does not have the right to use the entire surface, of the number or acres shown by such number if such number is less than one hundred (100); provided, that portion of the lot or parcel of land not subject to any such easement shall have an area not less than forty thousand (40,000) square feet,

     b.     A net area of the number of square feet shown by such number if such number is greater than one hundred (100);

     4.     Where no number follows the zoning symbol and neither subdivision (1) nor (2) apply, the required area is:

     a.     In zones R-1, R-3 and R-R, the same as in zone R-1-5000,

     5.     A lot shown as such on a subdivision for the purpose of lease only does not have the required area unless it complies with subdivisions (2), (3) or (4) of this subsection.

     “Residence” means a building designed as a one-family dwelling unit or a two-family dwelling unit which either complies with or was erected before the effective date of the requirements for Group I occupancies in LACC Ordinance No. 2225 entitled “An ordinance adopting a building code to regulate the construction, erection, enlargement, razing, alteration, repairing, removal, maintenance, moving, use and height of buildings or structures in the unincorporated territory of the County of Los Angeles,” adopted March 20, 1933. Residence does not include a trailer or an apartment house.

     “Residential zones” means zones R-1, R-3 and RPD.

     “Returns” means the visible sides of an object, distinct from the object’s face.

     “Reveals” means recesses in a surface, giving texture, definition and interest to it.

     “Right-of-way” means any property of which the city has an easement or ownership for public travel use or as a buffer between road use and private property.

     “Room” means an unsubdivided portion of the interior of a dwelling excluding bathrooms, kitchens, closets, hallways and service porches.

     “Rooming house and boarding house” means a lodging house, or other building or structure maintained, advertised or held out to the public as a place where sleeping or rooming accommodations are furnished to the whole, or any part of the public whether with or without meals. Rooming house includes fraternity and sorority houses.

     “Safety” includes a water supply for fire protection which complies with the requirements of LACC Ordinance No. 7834 entitled “Water Ordinance,” adopted August 2, 1960.

     “Screening” means blocking of a potentially disruptive object from sensitive surroundings, or blocking of disruptive surroundings from a potentially sensitive object.

     “Script” means cursive style lettering.

     “Secondary highway” means a secondary highway as shown on the master plan of highways of the county of Los Angeles.

     “Section” means a section of this code unless some other ordinance or statute is mentioned.

     “Security sign” means a sign indicating the provision of security protection service for the property.

     “Setback” means the portion of a lot along a frontage, required to remain free of construction.

     Setback Line, Corner Lot Street Side. “Corner lot street side setback line” means a line which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the side street lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

     Setback Line, Required Front. “Required front setback line” means a line which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the front lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

     Setback Line, Required Rear. “Required rear setback line” means a line which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the rear lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

     Setback Line, Required Side. “Required side setback line” means a line which is the minimum required horizontal distance between the side lot line and a line parallel thereto on the lot.

     “Shall” is mandatory.

     “Shrubs” means plants of substantial mass of less than tree size.

     “Sign” means any physical form of visual communication, including its structure and component parts, which is exposed to exterior view to attract attention to or provide information about the subject matter, through use of any combination of words, letters, figures and/or symbols.

     “Sign area” means the surface space containing words, letters, figures or symbols, together with any frame or material forming an integral part of the display but excluding support structures, the face of the building, and incidental parts not drawing attention to the subject matter. Where freestanding or projecting signs have two sides or faces, but only one face is visible from any point, the surface area of only one side shall be applied to the total sign area permitted.

     “Solid fill” means any noncombustible materials, insoluble in water, such as soil, rock, sand or gravel, that can be used for grading land or filling depressions.

     “Solid fill project” means any operation on a parcel of land where more than one thousand (1,000) cubic yards of solid fill materials are deposited for any purpose including the grading or reclaiming of land.

     “South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD)” means the regional authority appointed by the California State Legislature to meet federal standards and otherwise improve air quality in the South Coast Air Basin (the non-desert portions of Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside and San Bernardino Counties).

     Special Use Permit. Whenever this code, or any case granted thereunder, refers to a “special permit” or a “special use permit” it shall be construed to mean a conditional use permit.

     “Standards” means regulations which are mandatory, commonly “shall” rather than “should” statements.

     “Station” means the stopping place in a transportation system designed or intended to be used for the receiving or discharging of passengers and cargo, but shall not provide for the storage of the conveyance vehicle and shall not include any appurtenant facilities other than a shelter and ticketing facilities for passengers. Stations include train stations, bus stations and similar transit stations.

     “Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the next floor above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the roof above.

     Streamers. See “Flags, pennants, banners, bunting or streamers.”

     “Street” means a public or private right-of-way, other than a parkway, major or secondary highway or alley, whose function is to carry vehicular traffic and/or provide vehicular access to abutting property.

     “Structure” means anything built, constructed, fabricated, formed or placed which requires a fixed location on the ground, or is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground regardless of method or location of its creation.

     Structure, Accessory. “Accessory structure” means any structure that is on the same parcel as a primary structure and is separated from the primary structure by virtue of having no common walls.

     Structure, New. “New structure” means a structure built where no analogous structure exists, or a structure involving demolition of more than thirty (30) percent of the existing floor or roofed area.

     Structure, Primary. “Primary structure” means the structure that contains the principal use on a parcel.

     “Subdivision identification sign” means a sign which is permanent and used to identify a residential subdivision.

     “Subdivision sign” means a nonilluminated sign for the purpose of advertising and/or directing people to a newly constructed subdivision or apartment complex.

     “Subdued lighting” means lighting in which the source is not viewed directly, except for neon.

     “Suspended projecting sign” means a projecting sign which is affixed to its support along only the top edge of the sign.

     “Telephone repeater station” means a building used for housing amplifying equipment along aerial or underground telephone cable routes.

     “Temporary sign” means a sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvas, or other similar lightweight materials, with or without frames.

     “Tenant” means the lessee of facility space at an applicable development project.

     “Trailer” and “trailer coach” each includes a mobilehome.

     “Transportation demand management (TDM)” means the alteration of travel behavior—usually on the part of commuters—through programs of incentives, services and policies. TDM addresses alternatives to single-occupant vehicles such as carpooling and vanpooling, and changes in work schedules that move trips out of the peak period or eliminate them altogether (as is the case in telecommuting or compressed work weeks).

     “Trip reduction” means reduction in the number of work-related trips made by single-occupant vehicles.

     “Twenty-four (24) inch box size” means a substantial standard container size for a nursery shrub or tree.

     “Use” includes construction, establishment, maintenance, alteration, moving onto, enlargement and occupation. Wherever this code prohibits the “use” of any premises for any purpose, such premises and any building, structure or improvement on such premises shall not be used, occupied, altered or improved for such purpose, and no building, structure or improvement on such premises shall be erected, constructed, established, maintained, allowed to remain, altered, moved onto, or enlarged which is designed, arranged or intended to be occupied or used for such purpose.

     “Utility service center” means any buildings or premises used for the administration of public utility repair, maintenance and installation crews including parking for vehicles but not including warehouses or storage yards.

     “Utility service yard” means any buildings or premises used for the office, warehouse, storage yard or maintenance garage of a public utility including microwave repeater stations when incorporated as a part of the service yard use.

     “Valance” means the vertical bottom portion of an awning.

     “Vanpool” means a vehicle carrying seven or more persons commuting together to and from work on a regular basis, usually in a vehicle with a seating arrangement designed to carry seven to fifteen (15) adult passengers and on a prepaid subscription basis.

     “Vehicle” means any motorized form of transportation, including, but not limited to, automobiles, vans, buses and motorcycles.

     “Vesting tentative map” means a “tentative map” for a residential subdivision, as defined in the subdivision ordinance, that shall have printed conspicuously on its face the words “vesting tentative map” at the time it is filed.

     Veterinary Clinic, Small Animal. “Small animal veterinary clinic” means any facility providing medical or surgical treatment, clipping, bathing and similar services to dogs, cats and other small animals, but excluding boarding or the keeping of animals on the premises other than those requiring emergency treatment or those recovering from anesthetic.

     “Wall sign” means any sign affixed to the building with the alignment of the sign copy within twenty (20) degrees of parallel to the adjacent wall of the building.

     “Water appeals board” means the water appeals board created by LACC Ordinance No. 7834.

     “West Gateway district” means the district of Foothill Boulevard form the western city boundary to Leata Lane.

     “Wild animal” means any wild, exotic, dangerous or nondomestic animal, including but not limited to mammals, fowl, fish or reptiles.

     “Window sign” means any sign placed within three feet of the face of a display window, except for signs having their primary orientation to the interior of the building.

     “Writing” includes any form of recorded message capable of comprehension by ordinary visual means. Whenever any notice, report, statement or record is required or authorized by this code, it shall be made in writing in the English language unless it is expressly provided otherwise.

     “Yard” means an open space other than a court, on a lot or parcel of land, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise provided in Chapter 11.31.

     “Yard equipment” means anything constructed, assembled or erected and located outdoors, which does not require a fixed location on the ground and which is not attached to something having a fixed location on the ground. Examples of yard equipment include, but are not limited to, any of the following items, provided such items are not “structures”: play equipment, dog houses, storage sheds, greenhouses, automobile shades and containers. Yard equipment does not include ordinary yard furniture and umbrellas, seasonal decorations in the appropriate season, single freestanding portable or roof-mounted basketball backstops (incidental to driveway use), or signs and flags which are separately regulated under Chapter 11.37.

     Yard, Required Front. “Required front yard” means the yard which is located between the front lot line and the required front setback line.

     Yard, Required Rear. “Required rear yard” means the yard which is located between the rear lot line and the required rear setback line.

     Yard, Required Side. “Required side yard” means the yard which is located between the side lot line and the required side setback line.

     “Youth hostel” means a shelter for the use of pedestrian or bicycle travelers, not serving meals, under the auspices of a nonprofit organization. (Ord. 461 § 3, 2017; Ord. 453 § 2, 2016; Ord. 419 § 4, 2014; Ord. 410 § 1, 2013; Ord. 384 § 1, 2010; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 340 § 1, 2003; Ord. 314 § 9, 2001; Ord. 299 §§ 2—23, 1999; Ord. 281 § 1, 1997; Ord. 246 § 1(c), 1995; Ord. 241 § 2, 1995; Ord. 222 § 2, 1993; Ord. 217 § 1, 1993; Ord. 163 § 1A, 1989; Ord. 147 § 4, 1987; Ord. 125 § 1, 1985; Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 §§ 120, 120.5, 120.7, 120.8, 122.3, 123, 123.5, 124.5, 124.6, 125, 126, 128, 128.1, 128.3—128.5, 128.7, 129, 129.5, 130, 130.5, 132.13, 132.15, 132.17, 133, 134.5, 135, 135.05, 135.1, 135.25, 135.4, 137, 137.5, 139.4, 139.5, 139.6, 139.8, 139.9, 139.11, 139.13, 139.15, 139.17, 139.19, 139.195, 139.2, 139.31, 139.32, 139.33, 139.35, 139.51—139.57, 139.61—139.64, 139.80, 139.81, 140, 141, 141.05, 141.1—141.3, 141.5, 141.6, 141.8, 142, 143, 143.8, 143.9, 143.10, 144, 144.5, 145, 145.9, 146.3, 146.5, 146.51, 146.6, 146.7, 146.81—146.83, 147, 147.5, 148, 148.3, 148.5, 148.6, 149—151, 151.3, 151.5, 151.7, 152.3, 152.5, 152.55, 152.57, 152.59, 152.6, 153, 153.5, 153.8, 153.9, 154, 156—159, 195, 201, 1974)

 

11.01.040 Requirements as minimums.
     In interpreting and applying the provisions of this code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 105, 1974)

 

 

11.01.050 Replacement of other ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not be deemed or construed to repeal, amend, modify, alter or change any other ordinance or any part thereof not specifically repealed, amended, modified, altered or changed herein, except in such particulars or matters as this code is more restrictive than such other ordinances or part thereof; and that in all particulars wherein this code is not more restrictive each such other ordinance shall continue and shall be in full force and effect. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 106, 1974)

 

11.01.060 Assumption of power or duty by public officer.
     Whenever a power is granted to, or a duty imposed upon, a public officer by this code, the power may be exercised or the duty may be performed by the commission, a deputy of the officer or a person authorized pursuant to law or ordinance by the officer, unless this code expressly provides otherwise. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 107, 1974)

 

11.01.070 Delegation of power or duty by commission.
     Whenever by ordinance an administrative power is granted to, or an administrative duty imposed upon the commission, the commission may instruct the director to exercise such administrative power or perform such administrative duty. The director shall exercise all such powers, and perform all such duties as he or she is instructed to do by the commission. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 107.5, 1974)

 

11.01.080 Ordinance amendments included.
     Whenever reference is made to any portion of this code or of any other law or ordinance, the reference applies to all amendments and additions now or hereafter made. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 108, 1974)

 

11.01.090 Tenses.
     The present tense includes the past and future tenses; and the future the present. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 109, 1974)

 

11.01.100 Gender.
     The masculine gender includes the feminine and neuter. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 110, 1974)

 

11.01.110 Plural or singular.
     The singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 111, 1974)

 

11.01.120 Severability.
     If any provisions of this code, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the code, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances, shall not be affected thereby. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 112, 1974)

 

11.01.130 Continuation of existing law.
     The provisions of this code insofar as they are substantially the same as the provisions of any ordinance or portions of any ordinance repealed by the ordinance codified in this code shall be construed as restatements and continuations thereof, and not as new enactments. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 801, 1974)

 

11.01.140 Rights under existing approval not affected.
     No rights given by any permit, license or other approval under any ordinance repealed by the ordinance codified in this code are affected by such repeal, but such rights shall hereafter be exercised according to the provisions of this code. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 804, 1974)

 

11.01.150 Conviction of crime.
     Any conviction for a crime under any ordinance which is repealed by the ordinance codified in this code, which crime is continued as a public offense by this code, constitutes a conviction under this code for any purpose for which it constituted a conviction under such repealed ordinance. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 805, 1974)

 

11.01.160 Penalties for violators.
     No person shall violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of the county ordinances which are adopted in this code, or of any other provision in this code. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions or failing to comply with any of the mandatory requirements of this code shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Each person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which the violation of any provision is committed, continued, or permitted by such person and shall be punishable accordingly. (Ord. 128 § 2, 1986)

 

11.01.170 Public nuisance.
     In addition to the penalties provided in Section 11.01.160, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of the county ordinances which are adopted in this code, or of any other provision of this code shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated as such by the city. (Ord. 128 § 3, 1986)

Chapter 11.02 BASIC PROVISIONS
11.02.010 List of zones and zoning map.
     In order to classify regularly and restrict the location of trades and industries and the location of buildings for special uses and the use and area of premises for the general welfare of the city as regulations for the execution of the general plan pursuant to Chapters 3 and 4 of Title 7 of the Government Code, the Planning Law, or any statute superseding those chapters, the city is divided into classes of zones as follows:

 

Zone R-1

Single-Family Residence

Zone R-3

Limited Multiple Residence

Zone RPD

Residential Planned Development

Zone CPD

Community Planned Development

Zone FCD

Foothill Community District

Zone PS

Public/Semi-Public

Zone O-S

Open Space

Zone MU

Mixed Use

 

     The boundaries of these zones shall be shown on the zoning map of the city of La Cañada Flintridge and are hereby made part of this section. This map may be amended from time to time in accordance with Chapter 11.42 of this title. (Ord. 419 § 5, 2014; Ord. 147 § 3, 1987; Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 101, 1974)

 

11.02.020 Areas subject to inundation.
     A.    Findings by City Council. It is declared that after due investigation, the city council has found that in certain sections of the city the contour, elevation and other physical facts are such that these sections are subject to inundation. It is further found that this condition renders these sections unfit for human habitation.

     B.     Prohibition. No building or portion thereof which is designed for living purposes, as a hotel, lodging house, school or institution or home for the treatment of convalescent persons, children, aged persons, the wounded or mentally infirm, or for any combination thereof, may be built, and no existing building may be altered so as to be used either in whole or in part for any one or more of such uses where the land to be covered by such building, or portion thereof, is designated by this section as unfit for human habitation.

     C.     Application of Provisions. Except as otherwise provided, all of the provisions of this section, apply to areas designated by this chapter as unfit for human habitation. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 §§ 443—445, 1974)

 

11.02.030 Zoning of unclassified areas.
     All property in the city not otherwise classified, and all property not otherwise zoned upon annexation, is classified in the public/semi-public (PS) zone. (Ord. 282 § 2, 1997)

 

11.02.040 Zone exception modifying standards deemed variance.
     Where a zone exception granted by action of the Regional Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors of Los Angeles County prior to November 5, 1971 may be granted as a variance under the present provisions of this code, it shall be deemed a variance. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 808, 1974)

 

11.02.050 Status of zone exceptions other than standard.
     In all cases other than as provided in Section 11.02.040 where a zone exception was granted by action of the Regional Planning Commission or Board of Supervisors of Los Angeles County prior to November 5, 1971, such use shall be considered a nonconforming use under the provisions of this code provided:

     A.    That such uses shall remain in compliance with and subject to all limitations and conditions imposed by such grant; and

     B.     That all provisions governing nonconforming uses not in conflict with the limitations and conditions of such grant, shall apply. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 809, 1974)

Chapter 11.03 ZONING CODE ADOPTION
11.03.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted the “La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, a copy of which is available in the office of the city clerk. (Ord. 309 § 1, 2000)

 

11.03.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the “La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to the code as the “LCFZC” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision of this code or in any proceeding at law or equity. It is sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion of this code as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the “La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code.” References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the “La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code” and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 309 § 2, 2000)

 

11.03.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
     Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of La Cañada Flintridge, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 309 § 3, 2000)

 

11.03.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained in this code shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section in this code. (Ord. 309 § 4, 2000)

 

11.03.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 309 § 5, 2000)

 

 

11.03.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
     The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 305, passed May 15, 2000. (Ord. 309 § 6, 2000)

 

11.03.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 309 § 7, 2000)

 

11.03.080 References to prior code.
     References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 309 § 8, 2000)

 

11.03.090 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 309 § 9, 2000)

 
Chapter 11.04 CHANGES TO AN APPROVED PROJECT
11.04.010 Changes to an approved project.
     A project authorized through a zoning approval granted in compliance with this zoning code shall be established only as approved by the review authority and subject to any conditions of approval, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section.

     A.    Request for Change. An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, and shall also furnish appropriate supporting materials and an explanation of the reasons for the request. Changes may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

     B.     Minor Changes. The director shall determine whether a change is minor, and shall use the following criteria in determining what a minor change is. Changes should be deemed minor if the changes:

     1.     Are consistent with all applicable provisions of this zoning code;

     2      Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically mitigated, or was basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project;

     3.     Do not involve a feature of the project that was specifically conditioned, or do not create potential new adverse impacts as determined by the director of community development;

     4.     Do not expand the approved floor area of any outdoor activity area by ten percent or more over the life of the project; and

     5.     Do not change a design element for which the adopted design guidelines are applicable.

     C.     Major Changes. Changes to the project that do not comply with subsection B shall only be approved by the review authority through a new zoning approval application. (Ord. 413 § 21, 2013)

Chapter 11.11 R-1 SINGLE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL ZONE
11.11.010 Permitted uses.
     Property in zone R-1 may be used for residences, single-family. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 37 § 1(b), 1978: LACC Ord. 1494 § 207, 1974)

 

11.11.020 Accessory uses.
     Property in zone R-1 may be used for the following accessory uses:

     A.    Accessory structures customarily used in conjunction therewith;

     B.     Animals, domestic and wild, maintained or kept as pets or for personal use;

     C.     Building materials, storage of, used in the construction of a building or building project, during the construction and thirty (30) days thereafter, including contractor’s temporary office provided that any lot or parcel of land so used shall be a part of the building project, or on property adjoining the construction site;

     D.    Child day care, adult day care, foster care, or home for the aged as mandated by state law;

     E.     Tree houses or platforms upon a non-protected private tree per Chapter 11.40, provided the tree house/platform:

     1.     Does not exceed sixty-four (64) square feet in area, and

     2.     The floor to top of roof height does not exceed eight feet and the floor to ceiling height does not exceed six feet, and

     3.     Complies with the setback and height standards contained within Section 11.11.050. (Ord. 471 § 3, 2018; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 314 § 1.1, 2001; Ord. 154 § 2, 1987; Ord. 37 § 1(c), 1978: LACC Ord. 1494 § 207.3, 1974)

 

11.11.030 Uses subject to director’s review and approval.
     If site plans are first submitted to and approved by the director, premises in zone R-1 may be used for the following uses:

     A.    Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in zone R-1; provided, no other practical access to such property is available, and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in zone R-1.

     B.     Parking lots as a transitional use provided:

     1.     That the area used for parking adjoins or is separated only by an alley from property in a qualifying zone including, mixed use 1, mixed use 2, institutional and public/semi-public zone; and

     2.     That an area developed with parking shall have direct vehicular access to an improved public street, highway, alley or to the qualifying zone; and

     3.     That the lot or parcel of land developed with parking including access shall:

     a.     Have a side lot line adjoining or separated only by an alley, for a distance of not less fifty (50) feet, with property in the qualifying zone, or

     b.     Where the lot or parcel of land referred to in subsection (B)(1) of this section has a width less than one hundred (100) feet. Additional lots or parcels of land may be considered for parking provided:

     i.      They have successive contiguity on side lot lines with the first lot or parcel of land described in subsection (B)(1) of this section, and

     ii.     In no event shall the total area developed for parking extend more than one hundred (100) feet from the qualifying zone, and

     iii.    That all area extending from the qualifying zone is developed for parking; and

     4.     That the side lot line of the lot or parcel of land developed with parking shall not exceed the length of the side lot line common to the zone. The director may modify this provision to the extent permitted in subsection (B)(3) of this section; and

     5.     That any remaining portion of a lot or parcel of land developed with parking shall contain not less than the required area or width; and

     6.     That parking shall be developed in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.14.030(D) (CPD Parking) and Chapter 11.38 (Parking and Vehicle Storage), except that a landscaped front yard setback equal to that of the zone where it is located shall be provided; and

     7.     That parking shall be limited to motor vehicle parking lots exclusively, but shall exclude vehicles over two-ton rated capacity; and

     8.     That a site plan shall be submitted to the director, indicating compliance with the provisions of this section and the standards of development of the zone in which it is located; and

     9.     The transitional use parking lot shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a).

     C.     Riding and hiking trails, excluding trails for motor vehicles.

     D.    No home occupation shall be permitted without first obtaining a home occupation permit. Home occupations are permitted if such uses meet the following criteria:

     1.     The sum of the area of all interior space(s) used for home occupational purposes shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the combined total floor area of the dwelling unit and accessory structures. Any construction, structural alteration or addition to the main or accessory building shall be designed to be completely usable for residential purposes.

     2.     All aspects of the home occupation shall be conducted entirely within an enclosed structure. Articles, supplies, tools, equipment and other related items used in conjunction with a home occupation shall not be stored outside.

     3.     Employment of help shall be limited to no more than one nonresident in addition to persons residing at the residence, either for pay or as a volunteer. One on-site parking space, whether open or enclosed, shall be available for the nonresident employee.

     4.     There shall be no goods, samples, materials or objects publicly displayed or sold on the premises to clients in connection with the operation of the home occupation.

     5.     There shall be no significant and sustained increase in pedestrian and vehicular traffic, above normal activities for a single-family residence generated by any home occupation. A home occupation activity that includes transients to and from the residence, successively in one car at a time, between eight a.m. and ten p.m. for purposes of tutoring, counseling, language, music instruction, or similar home occupation, shall not constitute a significant and sustained traffic increase for purposes of this section.

 

     6.     No portion of any garage shall be used for home occupational purposes except work or storage areas which do not conflict with parking spaces as required by Section 11.38.030. Any reduction in required parking spaces is prohibited.

     7.     There shall be no sign posted on the premises which identifies the home occupation use.

     8.     There shall be no use of any equipment which may cause radio or television interference or fluctuation in line voltage off the property.

 

 

     9.     There shall be no emission of smoke, fumes, dust, gas, odor or glare from the property as a result of the home occupation. There shall be no significant and sustained increase in noise above normal activities for a single-family residence generated by any home occupation.

     10.   Revocation. The director may revoke or modify any home occupation permit if any conditions of the permit are being violated or the home occupation activity is in violation of any of the criteria set forth above. The director shall give written notice of an administrative hearing by the director or designee to the permit holder and complainants, if any, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Upon finding violations, the director may revoke the permit or modify the permit by adding conditions to cure the violations. The director may also set a future hearing to review the activity of the home occupation and compliance with the conditions of the permit and this section. The determination of the director shall be in writing and provided in accordance with Section 11.48.070. The determination of the director shall be final, subject to appeal as provided in Chapter 11.49.

     E.     Yard equipment otherwise prohibited by Section 11.11.050(C)(7)(g); provided, that, the director determines that such use will not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent or adjoining property and that such use is consistent with the residential character of the neighborhood.

     F.     Flat roofs as identified in Section 11.11.050(A)(2).

     G.    Second floor additions up to five hundred (500) square feet or thirty (30) percent of existing second floor area, whichever is less.

     H.    Other director’s approvals listed elsewhere in this chapter. (Ord. 413 §§ 1, 2, 2013; Ord. 408 § 2, 2012; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 326 § 3, 2002; Ord. 147 § 5, 1987; Ord. 53 § 1, 1979; Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 207.5, 1974)

 

11.11.040 Uses subject to permits.
     Property in zone R-1 may be used for:

     The following uses, provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Chapter 11.43, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with the conditions of such permit for:

     A.    Museums;

     B.     Residential projects resulting in total floor/roofed area above ten thousand (10,000) square feet. (Ord. 384 § 1, 2010; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 339 § 2, 2003; Ord. 275 § 2, 1997; Ord. 212 § 2 Exh. A, 1992; LACC Ord. 1494 § 208, 1974)

 

11.11.050 Residential development standards.
     The following standards shall apply to all single-family residential zoned lots within the city.

     A.    Building Mass.

     1.     Building Height.

     a.     Measured. Building height shall be measured from the lowest point at which the structure meets either natural grade or finished grade, whichever is lowest, to the highest point of the structure, exclusive of chimneys, weather vanes and other nonstructural architectural features.

     b.     Primary Structure Height. The maximum height for all primary structures shall be twenty-eight (28) feet on lots ten thousand (10,000) square feet or less in gross area or sixty-five (65) feet or less in width, measured along the front setback line. The maximum height for all primary structures shall be thirty-two (32) feet for all other lots.

     c.     Accessory Structure Height. The maximum height for accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet.

     d.     Excess Height. Excess height shall not be allowed unless approved through a variance, or an administrative height modification for excess height up to six feet above the underlying height limit as provided in Section 11.45.040, with the exception of lightwells subject to approval by the director of community development based on Section 11.45.040(B)(2)(b).

     e.     Porch Height. No entry structure or porch shall have an eave height more than three feet above the adjacent eave or twelve (12) feet, whichever is less, unless approved through second floor review per Section 11.45.050.

     2.     Roofs.

     a.     Flat Roofs. On a new structure, no more than twenty-five (25) percent of roofed area may be flat. For the purposes of this section, “new” means a structure built where no structure exists, or a structure involving demolition of more than thirty (30) percent of the existing floor area or removal of more than thirty (30) percent of solid roofed area, and “flat” means having a pitch of less than 2:12. For any design not complying with this section, approval by the director of community development shall be required subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a). In the event that the director of community development denies approval, the request shall be eligible for review by the planning commission under the required finding for director’s review height modifications. In order to approve the request, the director shall be required to make the following findings:

     i.      The roof configuration accommodates an architectural objective, as dictated by style, scale, and/or architectural consistency with the subject structure.

     ii.     The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood, and protects public views, and is sensitive to private views and aesthetics and other property values in such neighborhoods in a manner compatible with development of the subject lot and with the residential design guidelines.

     b.     Roof Equipment. On any structure, no mechanical equipment shall be roof-mounted unless director of community development approval is obtained. Such approval shall ensure that the equipment is not in a position to be visible from offsite, or that it is adequately screened from off-site view. Screening shall be integral to the design of the structure. The director’s approval is subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a).

     3.     Second Floor Review. Any project resulting in additional floor area at the second floor level, defined herein as any wall height twelve (12) feet or more above adjacent grade, shall be subject to review as a second story per Section 11.45.050, according to the following thresholds:

     a.     Additions to Existing Second Floors.

     i.      Director’s Review. Up to seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or forty-five (45) percent of existing second floor area, whichever is less.

     ii.     Planning Commission Review. Greater than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet or greater than forty-five (45) percent of existing second floor area, whichever is less.

     b.     New Second Floors.

     i.      Planning Commission Review. Is required for all new two-story primary structures or second floor additions to existing single-story primary structures.

     4.     Building Bulk.

     a.     Angle-Plane.

     i.      No portion of a building shall exceed the height of a forty-five (45) degree plane drawn from a height of ten feet above existing ground level at all boundaries of the lot. Roof eaves and rafter tails projecting out from the vertical plane of the exterior wall surface are exempted.

     ii.     Existing ground level shall be the grade elevation of the subject site at the property boundaries prior to start of construction.

     b.     Chimneys.

 

     i.      Chimneys serving functional interior fireplaces shall be exempt from building bulk limitations.

     ii.     Multiple chimneys located on the same side of the building shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the length of the subject elevation.

     iii.    Maximum chimney height shall not exceed the minimum height required for building code compliance.

     iv.    In no case shall more than three chimneys be located on the same side of a building.

     B.     Total Floor/Roofed Area.

     1.     Basic Limits.

     a.     Floor area standards shall apply to lot sizes as follows:

 

Lot Size Allowable Total Floor and Roofed Area

10,000 square feet or less

36 percent of lot area

10,001 to 15,000 square feet

3,600 square feet plus 23 percent of lot area over 10,000 square feet

15,001 square feet or more

4,750 square feet plus 20 percent of lot area over 15,000 square feet

 

     b.     Review Threshold for Narrow Lots. Floor area review per Section 11.45.030 shall be required for floor area exceeding four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet on any lot with less than eighty (80) feet of average lot width.

     c.     Review Threshold for Large Projects. Conditional use permit (CUP) review per Chapter 11.43 shall be required for any project resulting in total floor/roofed area above ten thousand (10,000) square feet.

     2.     Volume Space. Any space with a ceiling or top plate height exceeding the maximum allowed volume space height shall be considered as constituting two stories for the purpose of calculating floor area and determining required setbacks. Any such space comprising five percent or less of the total floor area, and any area under a sloped roof with a ridge height of fifteen (15) feet or less are exempt. The volume space height limit is as follows:

     i.      Parcel size twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or greater and average lot width one hundred (100) feet or greater: Fourteen (14) feet;

     ii.     Other properties: Twelve (12) feet.

     3.     Exemptions from Area Calculations.

     a.     Attic space under six feet in height, except that between structural ties which are less than six feet above floor level; ceilings may exceed the height provided that spacing between the structural ties do not exceed forty-eight (48) inches;

     b.     Floor levels entirely submerged below grade;

     c.     Eaves up to four feet in depth;

     d.     Porches attached to the primary residence, and facing the street, with no enclosure between the height of three feet and seven feet except for the building face to which it is attached.

     C.     Setbacks.

     1.     Applicability. The portions of subject parcels falling within the setbacks as stipulated in this section shall be kept clear of structures, except as provided in Section 11.11.050(C)(7).

     2.     Front Yard Setback.

     a.     Setback Measurement Criteria. The front yard setback shall be measured from the front lot line to the nearest portion of the building, excluding eaves up to four feet in depth.

     b.     Determination of Front Yard on Corner Lots. On corner lots, the narrower street frontage is normally the front lot line. However, the director of community development may determine that a longer street frontage comprises the front lot line, in consideration of other factors including house orientation, orientation of nearby houses, and access.

     c.     Basic Averaging Requirement. For all lots, except flag lots which shall have a front setback requirement of twenty-five (25) feet and hillside lots, the required minimum and maximum front yard setback shall be based on an average of neighboring properties. The average front yard setback shall be the average depth of the front setback of the properties along the same side of the block, subject to available data.

     In the event that data for the entire block is not available, the average front setback shall be determined according to the two adjacent properties, with the following additional exceptions:

     i.      An adjacent lot that is vacant or an adjacent flag strip shall be omitted from calculation of average setbacks, with the nearest adjacent non-vacant or non-flag lot beyond to be used for averaging purposes instead.

     ii.     For a corner lot, the average of the front setbacks of the adjacent property fronting on the same street and the property adjacent to that shall be used to determine the required front setback.

     d.     Criteria for Determining Front Setback.

     i.      Any neighboring property with a setback less than twenty-five (25) feet shall be considered as having a twenty-five (25) foot front setback.

     ii.     A lot that is vacant or a flag strip shall be omitted from calculation of average setbacks.

     iii.    In no case shall the required front setback be less than twenty-five (25) feet.

     3.     Side Yard Setbacks.

     a.     First Floor Interior Side Yard. There shall be a minimum side yard of ten percent of the average lot width of the subject lot, but in no case shall the required setback be less than five feet or more than twenty (20) feet.

     b.     Corner Lot Exterior and Second Story Side Yards.

     i.      There shall be a minimum street side yard on each story, and a minimum second story side yard regardless of street location, of twenty (20) percent of average lot width.

     ii.     In no case shall the required setback be less than ten feet or more than twenty (20) feet.

     iii.    Any space with a ceiling, eave, or top plate height exceeding twelve (12) feet shall be considered as constituting two stories for the purpose of calculating side yard setbacks, except for any area under a sloped roof with a ridge height of fifteen (15) feet or less.

     c.     Narrow Lot Side Yards. For lots with eighty (80) feet or less average lot width, and total floor/roofed area exceeding four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet, a minimum of eight feet ground floor interior side yard setback and sixteen (16) feet second floor or exterior side yard setback shall be provided.

     4.     Rear Yard Setbacks.

     a.     There shall be a rear yard on every lot and parcel of land in zone R-1, except through lots of not less than fifteen (15) feet.

     b.     Through lots shall not be allowed a rear yard setback facing the rear street, and instead shall provide front yard setbacks on both street frontages, except that a minimum setback of twenty-five (25) feet.

     5.     Setbacks for Fireplaces and Chimneys.

     a.     Interior fireplaces shall comply with the front, side, and rear setbacks as set forth in subsections (C)(2) through (C)(4), unless approved through the director’s review setback modification process (Section 11.45.010(B)(1)).

     b.     Outdoor fireplaces/chimneys and chimney outlets serving interior fireplaces shall comply with the front, side, and rear setbacks as set forth in subsections (C)(2) through (C)(4), except that in no case shall the required setback at the point of discharge be less than the applicable fire code requirements regarding set-

backs from trees/shrubbery and the setback at the point of exit shall be no less than five feet from the property line, unless approved through the director’s review setback modification process (Section 11.45.010(B)(1)), within the following parameters:

     i.      Outdoor fireplaces/chimneys and chimney outlets serving interior fireplaces shall not encroach into the front, side, and rear yard beyond the limits already established by the existing primary structure. In no case shall the setback be less than five feet;

     ii.     Maximum width of encroachment (up to ten feet above finish floor): ten feet;

     iii.    Maximum width of encroachment (more than ten feet above finish floor): five feet.

     6.     Setbacks for Pools, Spas and Equipment.*

     a.     Minimum Setbacks.

     i.      For pools and spas:*

     (A)   Side: Five feet;

     (B)   Rear: Five feet;

     (C)   Front: Any pool or spa in front of the subject residence or within the front yard requires conditional use permit approval.

 

*       Water features (ponds, fountains, etc.) with a water depth of less than two feet are not subject to setback requirements.

 

     ii.     Pool/spa mechanical equipment is subject to general structural setback requirements, except that a permit for such equipment located within the required side or rear yard setback may be granted through the director’s review setback modification process (Section 11.45.010(B)(1)). In no case shall the required setback for swimming pool equipment be less than the applicable building code requirements. Per the discretion of the director of community development, additional screening and/or a sound-buffering structure may be required for any equipment located within the required side or rear yard setback.

     (A)   Tree Protection. Pool construction shall be set back from the outer trunk circumference of any tree off the subject property, regardless of species, and from any tree on the subject property identified as protected by the city’s tree ordinance, at the minimum distance required by the tree ordinance. The tree ordinance shall be complied with at all times during construction.

     7.     Exceptions to Basic Setbacks.

     a.     Structures not exceeding a height of three feet six inches (front) or six feet (side and rear).

     b.     Eaves up to four feet in depth, provided that no eave is closer than two feet six inches from an interior side or rear property line.

     c.     Rear Garages. Setback requirements for any detached garage in the rear portion of a parcel may be reduced to a minimum of five feet at the rear and/or the interior side yard(s), provided that it is the sole garage on the parcel, and provided that the following limitations are met within the reduced setback area:

     i.      Garage depth and width shall not exceed twenty-five (25) feet.

     ii.     Eave height shall not exceed eight feet.

     iii.    Building bulk shall be limited to an angle-plane measured from eight feet above natural grade at the property line, and at an upward inclination of thirty (30) degrees, except for the following:

     (A)   Eaves;

     (B)   A single gable up to fifteen (15) feet in height.

     d.     Mechanical Equipment in Side Yard Setbacks. A permit for mechanical equipment (for heating, ventilating, and/or air-conditioning) located within the required side yard setback may be reduced to a minimum of five feet upon planning department receipt of a written acceptance of the equipment location from the owner of the affected adjacent property. Per the discretion of the director of community develop-

ment, a sound-buffering structure may be required for any equipment located within the required side or rear yard setback, depending on the location and orientation of the adjacent affected residence.

     e.     Dormer and Second Floor Setback Encroachments.

     i.      Dormers. Dormers may encroach within side yard setbacks; provided, that:

     (A)   The total length of the dormers shall not exceed thirty (30) percent of the length of the subject elevation; and

     (B)   The planning department receives a written acceptance of the dormer extent and location from the owner of the affected adjacent property.

     ii.     Second Floor Setback Encroachments. Portions of the second floor with ceiling height below six feet are not subject to second floor side yard setbacks; provided, that:

     (A)   The portions are beneath a sloped roof; and

     (B)   The eave height does not exceed twelve (12) feet; and

     (C)   The roof height does not exceed fifteen (15) feet within the required second-floor setback.

     f.      Stairways or Steps. Stairways or steps shall not extend to any extent into a front yard required by this chapter, but an unenclosed stairway or steps, together with the customary railings or balustrades or ornamental pedestals or piers, if no tread of that portion of the stairway within the building line is more than thirty (30) inches vertical distance above the natural level of the ground under and immediately adjacent thereto, and no portion of such stairway, steps, railing, balustrade, pedestal or pier is within five feet of the property line, and no portion of any such railing or balustrade is more than forty-two (42) inches vertical distance above the topmost surface of that trend of such stairway or steps which is immediately there under or above the natural level of the ground immediately adjacent to the base thereof, may extend within the front or side yard setbacks or other setbacks provided for in this code except a front yard required by this chapter.

     g.     Yard Equipment.

     i.      Front Yard Location. Yard equipment, as defined in Section 11.01.030 within the residential zones and unless permitted pursuant to Section 11.11.030(E), shall not be located for more than forty-eight (48) hours within the required front yard setback or in front of the primary structure (whichever is greater), or the corner lot exterior side yard setback.

     ii.     Interior Side and Rear Yard Setbacks.

     (A)   Yard equipment six feet or less in height shall not be subject to a setback.

     (B)   Yard equipment higher than six feet but less than ten feet in height shall be located no closer than five feet from the nearest property line(s) unless permitted pursuant to Section 11.11.030(E) (Uses subject to director’s review) and shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a).

     (C)   Yard equipment higher than ten feet shall be subject to all setback requirements applicable to structures.

     (D)   Yard equipment shall not exceed a height of fifteen (15) feet.

     h.     Other Encroachments. All other setback encroachments are subject to setback modification procedures per Section 11.45.010.

     D.    Vehicular Access and Storage.

     1.     Garage Requirement. Every new single-family residence shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one or more garages, or other enclosed structures, providing storage space for two vehicles, conveniently accessible and located at a place where structures are permitted. Each required vehicle storage space shall be at least ten feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep. Any adjacent vehicle storage space in front of or behind one or more of the spaces shall not be counted toward this requirement.

 

     2.     Garage Elevation. On any lot not subject to hillside review, a conditional use permit shall be required for construction of any parking garage or other roofed parking area more than fifty (50) percent below grade, as determined by comparing the area of garage walls below and above grade. For the purposes of this regulation, area of garage walls shall include garage doors; in the event that one or more sides of the roofed parking area is (are) open, it shall nevertheless be included in the calculation of below and above grade area.

     3.     Large Garage Review. Review per Section 11.45.020 shall be required for any project resulting in three or more garage spaces forward of the rear building line of the primary structure, in which the overall width of the garage spaces, regardless of their orientation, is thirty-five (35) percent or more of lot width at the front property line. Additionally, the review shall apply to garages facing and accessed from side streets on reverse corner lots and rear streets on through lots; those respective street frontages shall also be used to calculate the applicability threshold of thirty-five (35) percent for rear streets and twenty (20) percent for side streets. However, the director of community development may determine exemption from large garage review in cases where warranted by garages’ lack of visibility from the street.

     4.     Recreational Vehicle Parking or Storage. The parking or storage of all recreational vehicles shall be subject to director’s review as set forth in Section 11.45.015, with the exception of recreational vehicles not exceeding six feet in height as indicated in subsection (D)(4)(f) of this section, incidental parking as defined in subsections (D)(4)(g)(i) through (iv) of this section, or emergency parking as defined in subsection (D)(4)(h) of this section. Per the discretion of the director of community development, additional landscaping to screen the recreational vehicle from neighboring views may be required. Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored behind a six-foot tall sight-obscuring gate and/or fence/wall/hedge. Front, side, and rear yard parking or storage shall be regulated as required in subsections (D)(4)(a) through (h) of this section.

     a.     Front Yard and Front Façade. Recreational vehicles shall be parked or stored out of the required front yard setback and behind the front façade of the primary structure, except in cases where the recreational vehicle is parked or stored in an area not prominently visible from the street and public right-of-way as determined and conditioned by the director of community development.

     b.     Garage Access. Recreational vehicles shall not be parked or stored in areas that would prevent vehicle access of parking spaces within a garage or carport if the recreational vehicle parking or storage negatively impacts parking within the neighborhood as determined by the director of community development through the recreational parking and storage review process as set forth in Section 11.45.015.

     c.     Interior Side and Rear Yards. Recreational vehicles exceeding six feet in height that are parked or stored within the interior yard shall maintain a minimum space of eight feet between the recreational vehicle and the property line.

     d.     Corner Street Side Yard. The parking or storage of recreational vehicles within the required corner street side yard setback is prohibited.

     e.     Rear Yard of a Through Lot. The parking or storage of recreational vehicles within the required rear yard setback of a through lot, as defined in subsection (C)(4)(b), is prohibited, except in cases where the recreational vehicle is not prominently visible from the street and public right-of-way as determined by the director of community development.

     f.      Recreational Vehicles Not Exceeding Six Feet in Height. Recreational vehicles not exceeding six feet in height may be parked or stored within the required interior side or rear yard setbacks.

     g.     Incidental Parking or Storage.

     i.      Incidental parking or storage of up to fourteen (14) days in any calendar year subject to a permit issued pursuant to the requirements and restrictions contained in Section 8.11.020(D).

     ii.     Incidental parking or storage of a recreational vehicle for a maximum of two hours is allowed without a permit for purposes of loading or unloading the vehicle.

     iii.    Incidental parking or storage of recreational vehicles within a shared driveway shall be prohibited.

     iv.    Incidental parking or storage of recreational vehicles shall not unreasonably impact egress/ingress access to a shared driveway.

     h.     Emergency Parking or Storage Permitted. Parking or storage of recreational vehicles is permitted during emergency situations where the primary structure has been deemed as unusable as determined by the director of community development. Examples of emergency situations include, but are not limited to, the following: mudslides, floods, fires, earthquakes, wind damage, long-term power outages, or as determined by the director of community development.

     5.     Driveways.

     a.     Curb Cuts. All new and modified curb cuts/driveway aprons are subject to approval by the city director of public works.

     i.      New semicircular driveways and dual curb cuts are permitted where street frontage exceeds one hundred (100) feet, subject to approval by the director of public works.

     ii.     New semicircular driveways and dual curb cuts, where street frontage is between seventy-five (75) and one hundred (100) feet, may be permitted subject to review by the director of community development pursuant to Section 11.45.060 and subject to the criteria listed within subsection (d).

     iii.    New semicircular driveways and dual curb cuts are prohibited where street frontage is less than seventy-five (75) feet.

     iv.    Modification or alteration of an existing semicircular driveway, where the street frontage is less than one hundred (100) feet, may be permitted subject to review by the director of community development pursuant to Section 11.45.060 and subject to the criteria listed within subsection (d).

     b.     Width. Semicircular driveways shall not exceed twelve (12) feet in width within the required front setback except as required by the fire department, and as necessary for access to parking stalls. One of the two driveways may be allowed up to twenty (20) feet in width subject to review and approval of the director of community development and subject to the review criteria listed within subsection (d).

     c.     Slope. The finished grade of any driveway shall not exceed an average of seventeen (17) percent, with an absolute maximum grade of twenty (20) percent. Transitional top and bottom slopes shall be provided to the satisfaction of the director of community development and the director of public works.

     d.     Criteria for approval of new or modification of existing semicircular driveways. A new semicircular driveway and curb cuts or modification of an existing semicircular driveway and associated curb cuts as provided for within subsections (5)(a)(ii) and (5)(a)(iv) may be permitted where the director of community development and the director of public works determine the proposed location and design protects public health, safety and welfare based on:

     i.      Street geometric configurations and the provision of adequate line of sight, including, but not limited to, consideration of corner lots, sharp curves, steep or narrow roads;

     ii.     Above ground obstacles, including, but not limited to, trees, large utility poles, utility cabinets, or mail boxes;

     iii.    The number of potential conflict points, including, but not limited to, the number and proximity of driveways to each other;

     iv.    Sidewalk location and design.

     E.     Fences, Walls, Shrubbery and Landscaping Within Required Setbacks and Yards.

     1.     Design and Materials for All Fences and Walls. The finished side of all fences and freestanding walls shall face the neighboring property or public right-of-way, except as approved by the director of com-

munity development upon a determination that the proposed fence or wall is similar in appearance on both the side facing the subject property and the side facing the neighboring property or otherwise not adversely affecting neighboring properties. For the purposes of this subsection, “finished side” means the smooth side or the side that does not reveal the structural supports. Spears or other pointed elements on top of fences or freestanding walls shall not be allowed except as approved by the director of community development. Materials such as unfinished plywood, corrugated metals, bare metal wire, barbed wire, mesh fencing, and electrically charged fences shall be prohibited. Chain link fences shall not be installed in areas prominently visible from the public right-of-way except as set forth in subsection (10)(b) of this subsection. Materials for all fences and freestanding walls are subject to the review and approval of the planning division.

     2.     Building permits are required for all fences and walls over forty-two (42) inches in height.

     3.     Neighbor Notification and Survey Requirement. The owners of properties adjacent to any proposed property line fence or freestanding wall shall be notified by the planning division prior to the issuance of building permits. The property line shall be marked in the field, identified on a survey prepared by a licensed surveyor, and submitted to the planning division. An exception to the survey requirement may be granted upon planning division receipt of a written acceptance (including printed name, signature, and contact information) on the site plan of the fence or freestanding wall location by the owners of the properties adjacent to the proposed property line fence or freestanding wall.

     4.     Street-Fronting Fences and Walls. No wall or fence within the required front yard setback, the street side yard of a reverse corner lot, or the rear yard of a through lot, may exceed a height of forty-two (42) inches above adjacent grade on the street side, except as set forth by subsections (5) and (10) of this subsection or as may be permitted by Section 11.45.010, Setback modification.

     5.     Street-Fronting Fences and Walls in the R-1-20,000, R-1-30,000 or R-1-40,000 Zone. Any property within the R-1-20,000, R-1-30,000 or R-1-40,000 zone may have a fence that exceeds forty-two (42) inches in height in the front setback if it meets the following parameters. Review, action, and appeals for street-fronting fences and walls shall follow the regulations set forth in Section 11.45.060(C).

     a.     Open View Design. The fence shall be of a design that creates at least eighty (80) percent open work above forty-two (42) inches in height. An example would be wrought iron fencing with vertical bars spaced at least four inches apart.

     b.     Architectural Design. The fence shall be compatible with and subordinate to its surroundings and be consistent with the single-family residential design guidelines. Revisions to fence design, including simplification of its decorative components, may be required in order to meet this objective.

     c.     Colors. White or other very pale fences are generally discouraged because they are inconsistent with the objective of keeping fences compatible with and subordinate to their surroundings. Darker and more recessive colors may be required in order to meet this objective.

     d.     Fence Height. Fences shall not exceed six feet in height. However, pillars, pilasters or similar support posts of fences may reach a maximum height of six feet six inches. Vehicular and pedestrian entry gates may reach a maximum height of eight feet six inches. Pedestrian entry gates shall not exceed a width of ten feet, and vehicular entry gates shall not exceed a width of twenty (20) feet. A height transition shall be provided between the six-foot fence and the entry gates.

     e.     Light Fixture Height. Lighting may be added on top of the fencing or its pillar, provided the overall height of fence or pillar and light does not exceed a height of seven feet as measured from the finished grade or adjacent grade, whichever is lowest. Brightness of the fixtures shall be indicated on the drawings and subject to evaluation in the context of the project. The intensity of the lights as measured across property lines shall not be more than one foot-candle above ambient. Exceptions to light intensity shall be allowed for low level lighting of less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens.

     6.     Side and Rear Fences and Walls. Fences and freestanding walls shall be limited to six feet in height within the required rear setback and within the required side yard setback as measured from adjacent grade, with the following exceptions:

     a.     Side yard fences forward of the front setback line, shall conform to height limits set forth in subsection (4) of this subsection.

     b.     Street-fronting side yard fences on reverse corner lots shall conform to the height limits set forth in subsection (4) of this subsection.

     c.     Rear fences of through lots, shall conform to the height limits set forth in subsection (4) of this subsection.

     d.     Fences atop retaining walls, shall conform to the limits set forth in subsection (10)(c) of this subsection.

     7.     Flag Lots. Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section, freestanding fences or walls within any required yard on a flag lot may be built to the height limits applicable to side and rear yard fences or freestanding walls, except for that portion of the flag strip that lies within the dimensions of the average front yard setback of the adjacent non-flag lots, which shall conform to the limits set forth for front yards in subsection (4) of this subsection.

     8.     Driveway Gate Location. Driveway gates shall be recessed to allow for safe stacking of at least one vehicle outside of the street. A setback of at least twenty (20) feet from the face of curb, or edge of roadbed if there is no curb shall be required for driveway gates. In no case shall driveway gates be installed in the public right-of-way. Driveway gates shall not swing out toward the street unless the swing arc is greater than twenty (20) feet from the face of curb, or edge of roadbed if there is no curb.

     9.     Lighting. Light fixtures shall only be installed immediately alongside the driveway, immediately alongside the pedestrian entry gate, on pedestrian entry ways, or as determined by the director of community development. Light fixtures atop fences or fence pillars shall be included in the maximum height of the fence. Light fixtures on pedestrian entry ways shall be centered above the walkway and shall be no higher than the pedestrian entry structure. The intensity of the lights shall be measured to ensure that the light projected across property lines is not more than one foot-candle above ambient. Exceptions to light intensity shall be allowed for low level lighting of less than one thousand six hundred (1,600) lumens.

     10.   Exceptions for Fence and Wall Height.

     a.     Pedestrian Entries. A pedestrian entry or similar arbor is permitted within the required front and street side setback; provided, that, it does not exceed a height of eight feet six inches and is subject to the review and approval of the director of community development and shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a). For the purposes of this section, “arbor” means a rustic work or latticework bower designed to be intertwined with climbing vines or flowers.

     b.     Temporary Construction Fence. Temporary chain link construction fencing may be permitted within the required front and street side setbacks provided that it does not exceed a height of six feet. Temporary chain link construction fencing shall be installed in conjunction with a mesh windscreen for dust and visibility reduction. Temporary construction fencing shall not be installed without a valid building permit and shall be removed within seven days of building permit final or the expiration of the permit, which ever shall come first.

     c.     Change in Grade.

     i.      “Inward-Facing” Retaining Walls. Where retaining walls face inward to the subject house, the retaining wall may reach a maximum height of five feet six inches, and the total height of the retaining wall and a fence or freestanding wall atop it may reach nine feet or eleven (11) feet six inches for properties that qualify under subsection (6)(d).

     ii.     “Outward-Facing” Retaining Walls.

     (A)   Interior Side and Rear Yards. Where retaining walls face away from the subject house, an overall height of up to nine feet above low grade, consisting of up to three feet of retaining wall height and up to six feet of freestanding fence or wall height, may be granted upon planning division receipt of a written acceptance by the owners of the properties adjacent to the fence.

     (B)   Exterior Side yards. No more than two feet six inches of the allowable six feet of total wall/fence height may be comprised of a retaining wall.

     iii.    Terracing. Landscaped terracing with a gradient up to 1:1 may be used to obtain approval of an aggregate height of retaining walls exceeding the single-wall limit set forth in this section within the required front, side, or rear setback, subject to the review and approval by the director of community development and shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a).

     11.   Replacement of Legal Nonconforming Fences or Walls. The replacement of legal nonconforming fences or walls may be permitted by the director of community development upon receipt of sufficient evidence (such as, but not limited to: previous fence material present on-site, camera dated photograph, or written testimony from the owners of the adjoining property) indicating that the fence or wall existed on-site, and upon a determination that the fence or wall: (a) does not impede line-of-sight or public safety; and (b) either the fence or wall is compatible with the neighborhood or the removal of which would impose a practical hardship.

     12.   Front Yard Shrubbery. Tall shrubbery located on private property exceeding three feet six inches in height within twenty (20) feet of the street curb or edge of pavement shall be referred to the public works department for a line-of-sight public safety review and approval. If the shrubbery has been determined to be a safety hazard by the city traffic engineer, the property owner shall be required to reduce the height of the shrub(s).

     13.   Minimum Front Yard Landscaping. Within the front yard, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the land area shall be maintained with landscaping. For the purposes of this section, “front yard” means the area forward of the primary structure. Paving which incorporates planting cells shall be counted toward the requirement with the exclusion of the hard surface, and parking on such composite planted paving shall not be allowed within the front yard. Exceptions to this section shall be allowed upon determination by the director of community development and shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a) that the front yard treatment is compatible with the neighborhood and is not prominently visible from the street. Paving shall be prohibited on vacant lots. (Ord. 478 § 2, 2019; Ord. 462 § 3, 2017; Ord. 413 §§ 3—9, 2013; Ord. 410 § 1, 2013; Ord. 403 § 1, 2011; Ord. 384 § 1, 2010; Ord. 382 § 1, 2010; Ord. 369 § 1, 2008; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006; Ord. 340 § 2, 2003; Ord. 339 § 1, 2003; Ord. 314 §§ 1.2, 3—5, 6, 7, 8, 2001; Ord. 305 § 1, 2000; Ord. 281 §§ 3—5, 9, 1997; Ord. 192 § 1, 1991; Ord. 163 § 1, 1989; Ord. 155 § 1, 1987; LACC Ord. 1494 §§ 210, 210.2—210.4, 1974)

 

11.11.060 Residential design guidelines.
     The residential design guidelines as adopted by city council resolution shall apply to all single-family residential zoned lots within the city. These guidelines will be used by the planning commission and city staff as a basis of evaluation of proposed projects. They will aid toward promoting good design, preserving neighborhood character and protecting property values. Residential property owners, developers, architects, building designers, and contractors seeking to construct new residential structures or alterations and additions to existing structures should use the guidelines in the early design stages of their projects. The guidelines are not intended to limit creative design or dictate a particular design or architectural style. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

Chapter 11.12 RPD RESIDENTIAL PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
11.12.010 Purpose.
     This zone is established for residential development consistent with the multifamily residential designation of the general plan. Minimum densities should be twenty (20) dwelling units per acre and maximum densities shall be thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. Except for density bonus projects, residential densities which exceed the general plan land use designation are not permitted.

     The residential planned development zone (RPD zone) is established to achieve the following:

     A.    To encourage compatibility of multifamily projects with adjacent uses;

     B.     To promote high standards of site planning, architecture and landscape design;

     C.     To provide opportunities for design flexibility while maintaining high quality in multifamily residential developments;

     D.    To avoid overloading of utilities;

     E.     To provide for orderly transition between the types of residential land uses, and between residential and commercial land uses, as outlined in the land use element of the general plan;

     F.     To promote internal compatibility of each project’s architecture, landscaping, and use of open space to achieve a high quality residential environment;

     G.    To assure that sufficient open space is provided for both private and common areas.

     This chapter contains not only development standards (mandatory or “shall” statements), but also guidelines (“should” statements). Any departure of design guidelines should be utilized to effectively achieve quality and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods. (Ord. 419 § 6, 2014; Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.020 Permitted uses.
     The following are permitted uses in the RPD zone:

     A.    One detached single-family dwelling unit per lot;

     B.     A duplex, triplex or multiple-family dwellings, apartments and dwelling groups containing two or more units;

     C.     Residential condominium projects;

     D.    Family day care home, small or large, as permitted by state law;

 

     E.     Foster family homes for senior citizens or developmentally disabled, serving six or fewer persons, as permitted by state law;

     F.     Foster home facilities for children, serving six or fewer children, as permitted by state law;

     G.    Riding and hiking trails, excluding trails for motor vehicles;

     H.    Uses accessory to permitted residential uses, including, but not limited to, places of assembly such as common recreation rooms and community centers appurtenant to a project or similar facilities, and recreational facilities such as unlighted tennis courts and pools appurtenant to a project or similar facilities;

     I.      Real estate tract offices, temporary. Such offices may remain on the site no more than six months after at least fifty (50) percent of the project is sold.

     All permitted uses within the RPD zone other than single-family residences are subject to approval of a planned development permit prior to any construction, in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.030 Conditional uses.
     The following are permitted uses in the RPD zone if authorized by a conditional use permit.

     A.    Social day care facilities for seniors and the developmentally disabled, serving seven or more persons;

     B.     Parks;

     C.     Churches, temples or other places used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental educational and social activities in conjunction therewith;

     D.    Publicly owned uses necessary to maintenance of the public health, convenience or general welfare;

     E.     Lighted tennis courts, subject to development standards contained in Chapter 11.34;

     F.     Schools, through grade 12, including appurtenant facilities.

     Any conditionally permitted uses are subject to the findings required by the La Cañada Flintridge zoning ordinance, pertaining to conditional use permits. Such uses also requiring construction are subject to approval of a planned development permit prior to any construction, in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.040 Single-family development standards and guidelines.
     Single-family residential developments within the residential planned development zone shall comply with the zoning and development standards required of the R-1-5,000 zone, including, but not limited to, minimum lot area, setbacks, building height and bulk, and lot area ratio and floor coverage ratio. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.050 Multifamily development standards and guidelines.
     The following standards shall apply to all multifamily development in the residential planned development zone:

     A.    Area Standards.

     1.     A minimum site size of one-half acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet);

     2.     The minimum density of multifamily development should be twenty (20) dwelling units per acre and the maximum density of multifamily development shall be thirty (30) dwelling units per acre;

     3.     A maximum lot coverage of fifty (50) percent of net lot area. Net lot area is defined in Section 11.01.010.

 

     B.     Siting Standards.

     1.     The minimum setbacks are as follows:

     Front: twenty-five (25) feet from arterial or collector street; twenty (20) feet from local street (streets are defined in the general plan);

     Rear: twenty-five (25) feet for principal buildings; twenty (20) feet for accessory buildings, provided that, for accessory buildings adjacent to commercial properties, this setback may be reduced to ten feet;

     Corner side: fifteen (15) feet from arterial or collector street; ten feet from local street;

     Reverse corner side: twenty (20) feet;

     Interior side: ten feet minimum; if adjacent to single-family residence, then twenty (20) feet minimum for the second and third floors; provided, that for accessory buildings adjacent to commercial properties, this setback may be reduced to a minimum five-foot landscaped strip.

     Where windows of primary living areas (living or dining rooms) face side property lines, a separation of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided.

     In any case, a ground-level porch, uncovered or covered and open on three sides, may encroach into the front, side, corner side and reverse corner side setbacks by up to ten feet.

     2.     Building Separation. Where windows of primary living areas face walls of other units, a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet shall be provided.

     3.     The standards for landscaping and open space are as follows:

     Area. A total of a minimum thirty-five (35) percent of the site area shall be provided as landscaping and usable open space. Of this required landscaping and usable open space, at least fifty (50) percent of said area must have an average slope of ten percent or less.

     Use. All open space must be outdoor area on the ground which is open to the sky and which is designed and used for outdoor living and/or recreation, whether such area is paved or not, and shall not include parking or vehicle circulation areas.

     Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained with proper care, weeding, pruning and irrigation. Plants shall be replaced as necessary to maintain conformance with approved landscaping plans.

     Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided and continuously maintained by the property owner. Street trees shall be selected and located in accordance with the city’s standards for street trees, as maintained by the director of public works.

     On-Site Trees. Any removal or pruning of existing trees shall conform to the requirements of the city’s tree preservation ordinance, (adopted by Ordinance No. 178 and any successor thereto).

     Landscape guidelines are contained in a separate section of this chapter.

     4.     View Preservation. Building(s) should be placed in a manner which minimizes blockage of neighboring views, especially those portions of any view which are central to the total view, and/or are viewed from primary outdoor and indoor living areas (living rooms, dining rooms or foyers). Landscaping height at maturity should be consistent with preservation of neighboring views.

     5.     The standards for parking are as follows:

     Minimum parking required:

     a.     Resident parking:

     0 to 1-bedroom units: one space per unit;

     2-bedroom units: two spaces per unit;

     3-bedroom units: two and one-fourth spaces per unit;

     4 or more bedroom units: two and one-half spaces per unit.

 

     b.     Guest parking: one-fourth spaces per unit, in addition to resident parking required in subsection (5)(a).

     c.     At least one parking space per unit shall be covered. Guest parking may be uncovered.

     d.     The minimum number of parking spaces provided may be reduced for affordable housing units, senior housing units, or under other appropriate circumstances when written evidence justifying the reduction is provided and approved by the decisionmaker.

     Separation. Parking areas, including internal circulation areas, parking spaces and turnaround areas, shall be separated from any public rights-of-way by a minimum eight-foot wide (inside dimension) planter area or landscape strip, except at driveway and walkway openings. Parking spaces shall not be permitted in front or side setbacks.

     Landscape Buffer. A minimum five-foot landscaped buffer shall remain between any uncovered parking space and the property line.

     Safety. All landscaped areas adjacent to parking, circulation and vehicle storage areas shall be enclosed by a raised six-inch concrete curb or low wall.

     Compatibility. The design of the parking areas should be integrated into and compatible with the design of the overall project, and must be considered in making the findings regarding internal compatibility of the project, as stated elsewhere in this chapter.

     6.     Watercourse Protection.

     a.     Blockage. Blockage of watercourses, canyons or streambeds is prohibited, and any alteration of such features is discouraged.

     b.     Approval of Other Agencies. Development in the vicinity of blue line streams is subject to Army Corps of Engineers and California Department of Fish and Game approval prior to any issuance of grading or building permits.

     C.     Building Height Standards.

     1.     Maximum height of principal buildings and structures: thirty (30) feet maximum outward facing wall height; thirty-five (35) feet maximum roof height. Heights are measured from lowest finished grade adjacent to or directly below the building face.

     2.     Maximum height of accessory structures: fifteen (15) feet.

     3.     Maximum building bulk: all properties abutting properties which are zoned R-1 or foothill community district (FCD) are subject at those zone boundaries to requirements of the Municipal Code regarding building bulk (angle plane).

     D.    Architectural Design Guidelines. The following design guidelines shall apply to all projects under this section other than single-family residential projects:

     1.     Architectural features should be internally consistent, complement the character of the surrounding uses, and be compatible with the design, quality, and scale of buildings in the area.

     2.     Architectural Extensions. The planning commission may allow architectural extensions to a maximum height of forty (40) feet above grade and up to twenty (20) feet in width or depth as part of an approved residential development permit. Such extensions are best used in meaningful locations, such as street corners, major building corners, entries and vertical circulation elements. Architectural extensions shall not be used for inhabited floor area above the highest floor level of the attached unit.

     3.     Roof Materials. Glossy roofing materials are prohibited from public views.

     4.     Parapets. Where a parapet has its thickness exposed to view, as when it is stepped or gabled, each visible side should be made to appear substantial.

     5.     Façade Elements. Carefully detailed elements, such as deep openings, reveals, shadow lines, articulation of edges and surface breaks, and pilasters, are encouraged, with emphasis given to the tops of buildings through cornice or eave treatments. Alcoves, benches, gates, sconces, wall fountains, and such features are encouraged as façade elements.

     6.     Modulation. An additional setback of at least eight feet extending at least twenty (20) feet should be provided for each eighty (80) feet of building frontage.

     7.     Entry Articulation. Entries should be the focus of the architecture of their respective elevations. Landscaping, hardscaping and architecture should be integrated to feature entries as dominant elements of the design. For this reason, porches may encroach in the front and side setbacks as stipulated elsewhere in this chapter.

     8.     Balconies. Balconies are encouraged as amenities to the units and enhancing elements within the building façades; provided, that:

     a.     The balconies are provided with a level of detailing, such as molding and reveals appropriate to their visibility;

     b.     Where balconies are used, they are integrated into the overall design of the building without becoming the dominant element of the architecture. This integration should include expression of vertical alignment through articulated vertical connecting elements such as reveals, columns or pilasters;

     c.     Any scuppers and dividing panels are integrated with the balcony design; and

     d.     Adequate privacy is provided.

     9.     Exterior Stairs. An enclosure or a landscaping barrier should be provided wherever there is less than seven feet vertical clearance below the stairs.

     10.   Color. Light reflectance value should not exceed eighty (80) percent for walls or fifty (50) percent for visible roofs.

     11.   Screening.

     a.     Where balconies at or above the second floor overlook yards of abutting residential properties or parking areas, effective landscaping screening should be provided.

     b.     Trellises or canopy structures are recommended for privacy where higher units overlook private open space.

     E.     Landscaping Guidelines. The following are guidelines for landscaping of multifamily developments.

     1.     The selection and arrangement of plant materials should landscape the open space to support recreation activities appropriate to the density and type of the residential development.

     2.     The augmentation of open space by retaining unfenced or unimpeded areas to the adjoining property is encouraged where adjacent developments are of similar density or character. Otherwise, a landscaping buffer or decorative wall barrier shall be provided within five feet of any property line on all sides abutting adjacent developments. The buffer shall be six feet high in all areas except the front setback, where its maximum height shall be three feet six inches.

     3.     A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the front setback area shall be landscaped.

     4.     Plants shall be established and maintained in accordance with the approved plan.

     5.     An automatic timed irrigation system appropriate to the plant materials used shall be provided for all landscaped areas.

     6.     The plant palette should be consistent with the objectives of:

     a.     Compatibility with surrounding plantings where desirable;

     b.     Drought tolerance; and

     c.     Concentration of plants with similar watering requirements.

     7.     Trees.

     a.     Sizes and quantities of new trees and existing trees to remain should maximize retention and planting of mature trees, with a guideline of twenty-five (25) percent of the new and existing trees to be either mature or of minimum thirty-six (36) inch box size at planting.

     b.     Number. At least one tree shall be provided or retained per each eight hundred (800) square feet of landscape area.

     c.     Height and Canopy. At least one tree should be capable of attaining at maturity the combined height-and-canopy measures of one hundred twenty (120) feet.

     d.     Rooting. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required trees should be planted in the ground.

     e.     View Preservation. Landscaping height at maturity should be consistent with preservation of neighbors’ views.

     F.     Slope Factor Guideline. As average lot slope increases, lowered allowable density, lot coverage, and floor area ratio should be considered per the following Table 1. This applicable slope factor determines the effective guideline for each criterion as follows:

     Minimum lot size and dwelling units per acre guideline:

     Underlying number of units per acre, divided by slope factor;

     Allowable lot coverage or floor ratio:

     Underlying standard by site size, multiplied by site size, multiplied by slope factor.

 

Table 1. Slope factor as related to average slope

 

Slope (%)

Slope Factor

20 or less

1.00

21

0.99

22

0.98

23

0.97

24

0.96

25

0.95

26

0.94

27

0.93

28

0.92

29

0.91

30

0.90

31

0.88

32

0.86

33

0.84

34

0.82

35

0.80

36

0.78

37

0.76

38

0.73

39

0.70

40

0.67

41

0.64

42

0.60

43

0.57

44

0.54

45

0.50

46

0.45

47

0.40

48

0.35

49

0.30

50 or more

0.20

 

     G.    General Standards.

     1.     In any building project, during construction and for thirty (30) days thereafter, property in the project may be used for the storage of building materials and equipment used in the construction of the building project and for the contractor’s temporary office, subject to approval of the director of community development.

     2.     The storage of recreation vehicles within any multifamily project shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:

     a.     Highway operative recreational vehicles, i.e., camper-trucks, motor homes, etc., shall be stored within the enclosed or covered parking spaces for each unit or placed within a separate storage area.

     b.     Other recreational vehicles, consisting of, but not limited to, trailers, boats, etc., shall be stored within a separate storage facility within the project or at another appropriate off-site location.

     c.     Storage areas for recreational vehicles shall be enclosed with a six-foot or higher decorative block wall or acceptable substitute which is screened by exterior landscaping, and shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or similar surface. The location and size shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission.

     d.     No recreational vehicles shall be stored in designated guest parking areas.

     3.     Any signage for the project shall conform to the requirements of the city’s sign ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 11.37.

     4.     Equipment and utilities for all developments other than single-family residences shall meet the following standards:

     a.     Ground-oriented building service equipment, including, but not limited to, air conditioning and heating units, utility connections, and service, shall not be visible from public right-of-way. However, such equipment shall be located for easily accessible service and located or screened to minimize noise offensive to the occupants and to neighboring properties.

     b.     Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be prohibited.

     c.     Exterior wall-mounted equipment and utility meters shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

     d.     All utility service controls and equipment, including, but not limited to, electrical, communication and cable television lines installed for the purpose of supplying service to any new construction within the city shall be installed underground on the property to be served and from the property to be served to the point of connection with the utility’s distribution facilities in accordance with the rules approved by the Public Utilities Commission of the state.

     5.     All multifamily developments shall provide one or more screened refuse area(s) with trash enclosure(s) in accessible locations and of sufficient size to accommodate the intensity of use, and to accommodate recycling containers in addition to general refuse or trash collection. Trash enclosures and refuse areas shall meet minimum standards, as follows:

     a.     All refuse/recycling storage areas must be accessible for trash pick up method used, and shall be enclosed by screening materials compatible with the project and, to the extent feasible, should be situated out of public view.

     b.     The area upon which trash bins or receptacles are stored and the access or pathway over which the bins or receptacles are moved for collection purposes shall be composed of a smooth, flat material such as concrete.

     c.     Each refuse/recycling area shall be provided with a water line and drain for cleaning purposes, and self-closing solid gate.

     d.     Refuse/recycling storage areas shall be screened by a trash enclosure wall constructed to a width, depth and height adequate to accommodate the number of trash bins or receptacles needed. Such enclosure walls shall be constructed of decorative blocks or other nonflammable material consistent in design, quality and color with the building(s) serviced by the area.

     6.     Exterior lighting devices for multifamily project automobile parking lots and pedestrian walkways and entries shall:

     a.     Provide adequate lighting for safe nighttime residential access;

     b.     Eliminate excessive lighting and glare, and prevent spillover onto adjacent properties; and

     c.     Utilize automatic timers for energy conservation.

     7.     The city reserves the right to be a party to the covenants, conditions and restrictions. (Ord. 419 §§ 7—15, 2014; Ord. 243 §§ 1—3 and 7, 1995; Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.060 Application requirements.
     A.    Submittal Requirements. In addition to all materials required by the city’s subdivision, building and grading regulations and environmental review procedures applicable to projects falling within the scope of this chapter, submittal of the following application materials shall be required for all projects provided for herein. The items listed in subsections (A)(1) through (3) of this section may be combined on one or more drawings.

     1.     A site or plot plan, drawn to a scale prescribed by the city planner, but not less than a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, reflecting the proposed project, including representations of property lines and all recorded and proposed easements and public rights-of-way;

     2.     A topographical map of the project site and all adjacent development located within seventy-five (75) feet of the project’s proposed boundaries. This map shall be drawn to the same scale as the site plan required in subsection (A)(1) above, with a maximum contour interval of ten feet, or less as prescribed by the director. The average slope of the property shall be identified on this map, calculated by the following formula:

 

S = 0.002296 x I x L

A

 

     Where S = Average percent slope

                I = Contour interval in feet

                L = Summation of length of all contours in feet

                A = Area in acres of project being considered

 

     3.     A complete grading plan for the project, drawn to the same scale as prescribed above, unless no grading requiring a permit is proposed. A tabulation of the areas within each gradient category may be required as prescribed by the director;

     4.     A landscaping plan which shall accurately show:

     a.     Existing trees on the project site with a trunk diameter of two inches or greater at a height of four feet above grade, and/or having a vertical height from the ground level to treetop level of fifteen (15) feet or greater,

     b.     Species of all such trees and their appropriate trunk diameter, height and condition,

     c.     Final disposition of all existing trees,

     d.     The type and extent of proposed vegetation, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and irrigation thereof,

     e.     Mix and percentage of lot area used for landscaping and open space. Parking and vehicle circulation areas shall not be included in such calculations, and

     f.      Evidence of slope stability through vegetation of created slopes.

     This plan shall be drawn to or keyed to a master map the same scale as is prescribed for the application materials required by subsection (A)(1) above, and shall be completed by a professional landscape architect registered with the state of California;

     5.     A lighting plan showing the location, height, approximate brightness and style of all exterior lighting for the project;

     6.     Elevation drawings at a scale of at least one-eighth inch equals one foot zero inches, with materials, colors, finishes, and critical vertical dimensions clearly indicated. As deemed appropriate by the director or designee, proposed and existing-to-remain landscaping at maturity shall be shown in a manner that allows full visibility of building elevations beyond. Indication of nearby structures or features offsite shall also be shown where deemed appropriate by the director or designee;

     7.     Photographs of the site and its surroundings as prescribed by the director. Normally, such photos would include views of the site and properties adjacent for a distance of three hundred (300) feet from each end of the principal street frontage, as well as properties opposite the subject and adjacent properties. Photos should be mounted color prints, spliced from continuous views along the principal street(s), with a key map provided indicating relationship of views to parcels, streets and features;

     8.     Color chips including reflectance values (LRVs) and keyed to elevation drawings;

     9.     A completed residential development application and initial study questionnaire, on forms provided by the city;

     10.   On sites with an average slope of fifteen (15) percent or greater, the applicant shall submit a hydrology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     a.     The hydrologic conditions on the site,

     b.     Possible flood inundation,

     c.     Downstream flood hazards,

     d.     Natural drainage courses,

     e.     Analysis of the project, including its septic system, in relation to Regional Water Quality Control Board standards,

     f.      Design criteria to mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards consistent with applicable regulations,

     g.     Account of all runoff and debris from tributary areas,

     h.     Consideration for each lot or dwelling unit site in a proposed development project,

     i.      Runoff and debris amounts computed using the Los Angeles County flood control district criteria, and

     j.      A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability, water quality, and downstream drainage.

     This investigation and report shall be completed by a professional civil engineer experienced in the science of hydrology and hydrologic investigation and who is registered with the state of California;

     11.   Where alteration to existing topography is proposed:

     a.     A soils engineering report which shall contain, but not be limited to:

     i.      Data regarding the nature, distribution and strengths of existing soils,

     ii.     Relationship of soil characteristics to drainage related to lot coverage and landscaping/irrigation design,

     iii.    Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures,

     iv.    Design criteria for any identified corrective measures, and

     v.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability.

     This investigation and report shall be performed by a professional soils engineer who is experienced in the practice of soil mechanics and who is registered with the state of California,

     b.     A geology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     i.      The surface and sub-surface geology of the site,

     ii.     Strike angle of bedrock strata,

     iii.    Degree of seismic hazard,

     iv.    Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and

     v.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability;

     12.   Cross sections of the site and nearby affected areas as prescribed by the director, showing all buildings, fences, walls and landscaping at mature height anticipated under the planting conditions onsite.

     13.   Recommended for complete understanding of the proposal where appropriate, a three-dimensional scale model of the project site, onsite erection of a full-size mockup (either balloons denoting building corners or a story pole frame), perspective views, building plans or such other graphic information which in the director’s judgment would aid in the city’s review of the project. All graphic information shall be drawn to such scale as prescribed by the director;

     14.   Where the impact of noncompliance with specified guidelines and/or standards of this chapter cannot be determined by the city following public review, the applicant will be required to provide alternative project plans which are in conformance with said guidelines and standards for the purpose of comparative evaluation.

     B.     Waiver of Requirement for Application Materials. The requirement to submit any or all of the materials enumerated above may be waived by the director, under any of the following conditions:

     1.     The materials are not applicable to the scope of the project and not pertinent to any of the findings contained in this section;

     2.     The existence of reports covering the same subject matter on the same site;

     3.     Inclusion of any or all of the above reports as part of an environmental impact report or negative declaration, if either is required or has been satisfactorily completed for the proposal on the site;

     4.     The existence of a report as described in subsection (A)(10) of this section, previously prepared for a site or area adjacent to the project site, if the project site and such adjacent site or area may reasonably be expected to possess similar characteristics relative to the development issues addressed by this chapter. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.070 Project evaluation.
     All projects proposed for the RPD zone, other than single-family residences, are subject to review by the architecture review committee or its successor prior to review by the planning commission. The planning commission may, however, remand projects to the architecture review committee or its successor for final details, when appropriate.

     Any proposed project which is a permitted use in the RPD zone and which requires a planned development permit as specified in this chapter shall be submitted for consideration by the planning commission for said permit. Any project which is a conditionally permitted use in the RPD Zone, and which also requires a planned development permit as specified in this chapter, shall be submitted simultaneously for consideration by the planning commission for both the conditional use permit and the planned development permit.

     The planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may approve an application following the determination that the findings set forth in this chapter can be met. (Ord. 419 § 16, 2014; Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.080 Findings required.
     The planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may grant a planned development permit for a project in the RPD zone upon findings that the project meets the requirements of this section. Additional conditions and requirements may be imposed upon a planned development permit as the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, finds are reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes and requirements of the RPD zone.

     The following findings shall be made by the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, in order to grant a planned development permit:

     A.    That the proposed development complies with the general plan and with the intent of the development standards of the RPD zone for protection of neighborhood character and preservation of the general welfare of the community;

     B.     That the site plans, architectural design and landscaping plans of the project contribute to the RPD zone goals of:

     1.     Compatibility with the density, character and design of any surrounding neighborhoods,

     2.     Internal compatibility of the project’s architecture, landscaping, and use of open space to achieve a high quality residential environment, and

     3.     Sufficient open space provided for both private and common areas;

     C.     That any departure from guidelines permitted by the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, should be utilized to effectively achieve quality and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods;

     D.    That the project will not create a nuisance, hazard or otherwise compromise public safety. (Ord. 419 §§ 17—19, 2014; Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.090 Granting of permits.
     No occupancy permit shall be granted until plantings as approved on the landscaping plans are established, to be verified by two inspections approximately one month apart. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

 

11.12.100 Appeals and call-up.
     Actions by the city on development permits may be appealed by any person upon filing of written notice of such appeal to the city within fifteen (15) days of the action, as follows:

     A.    Any action by the director of community development or the director of public works under this chapter is subject to appeal to the planning commission.

     B.     Any decision of the planning commission under the provisions of this chapter is subject to appeal to the city council.

     C.     All decisions are subject to city council call-up provision Section 11.49.050. (Ord. 413 § 11, 2013; Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

 

11.12.110 Fees.
     Reasonable fees may be imposed by resolution of the city council for review of project applications and appeals as provided for in this code. (Ord. 199 § 1.2, 1991)

Chapter 11.13 R-3 MULTIFAMILY ZONE
11.13.010 Purpose.
     This zone is established for residential development consistent with the multifamily residential designation of the general plan. Minimum densities should be twenty (20) dwelling units per acre and maximum densities shall be thirty (30) dwelling units per acre. Except for density bonus projects, residential densities which exceed the general plan land use designation are not permitted.

     The R-3 multifamily residential zone (R-3 zone) is established to achieve the following:

     A.    To encourage compatibility of multifamily projects with adjacent uses;

     B.     To promote high standards of site planning, architecture and landscape design;

     C.     To provide opportunities for design flexibility while maintaining high quality in multifamily residential developments;

     D.    To avoid overloading of utilities;

     E.     To provide for orderly transition between the types of residential land uses, and between residential and commercial land uses, as outlined in the land use element of the general plan;

     F.     To promote internal compatibility of each project’s architecture, landscaping, and use of open space to achieve a high quality residential environment;

     G.    To assure that sufficient open space is provided for both private and common areas.

     This chapter contains not only development standards (mandatory or “shall” statements), but also guidelines (“should” statements). Any departure of design guidelines should be utilized to effectively achieve quality and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods. (Ord. 419 § 20, 2014; Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.020 Permitted uses.
     The following are permitted uses in the R-3 zone:

     A.    One detached single-family dwelling unit per lot;

     B.     A duplex, triplex or multiple-family dwellings, apartments and dwelling groups containing two or more units;

     C.     Residential condominium projects;

     D.    Family day care home, small or large, as permitted by state law;

     E.     Foster family homes for senior citizens or developmentally disabled, serving six or fewer persons, as permitted by state law;

     F.     Foster home facilities for children, serving six or fewer children, as permitted by state law;

     G.    Riding and hiking trails, excluding trails for motor vehicles;

     H.    Uses accessory to permitted residential uses, including but not limited to places of assembly such as common recreation rooms and community centers appurtenant to a project or similar facilities, and recreational facilities such as tennis courts and pools appurtenant to a project or similar facilities;

     I.      Real estate tract offices, temporary. Such offices may remain on the site no more than six months after at least fifty (50) percent of the project is sold.

     All permitted uses within the R-3 zone other than single-family residences, duplexes, triplexes and multiple-family dwellings, apartments, dwelling groups containing two or more units, and residential condominium projects, are subject to approval of a planned development permit prior to any construction, in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 419 § 21, 2014; Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.040 Single-family development standards and guidelines.
     Single-family residential developments within the R-3 multifamily zone shall comply with the zoning and development standards required of the R-1-5,000 zone, including, but not limited to, minimum lot area, setbacks, building height and bulk, and lot area ratio and floor coverage ratio. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.050 Multifamily development standards and guidelines.
     The following standards shall apply to all multifamily development in the R-3 zone:

     A.    Area Standards.

     1.     Density of units:

     a.     Any site of less than seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet can only be developed or redeveloped with a single-family residence. Such development is subject to the development standards of the R-1-5,000 zone.

     b.     Any site of seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet or more should be developed with a minimum of twenty (20) dwelling units per acre and shall be developed with a maximum of thirty (30) dwelling units per acre.

     2.     A maximum lot coverage of fifty (50) percent of net lot area. Net lot area is defined in Section 11.01.030.

     B.     Siting Standards.

     1.     The minimum setbacks are as follows:

     Front: twenty-five (25) feet from arterial or collector street; twenty (20) feet from local street (streets are defined in the general plan).

     Rear: twenty-five (25) feet for principal buildings; twenty (20) feet for accessory buildings; provided, that for accessory buildings adjacent to commercial properties, this setback may be reduced to ten feet.

     Corner side: fifteen (15) feet from arterial or collector street; ten feet from local street.

     Reverse corner side: twenty (20) feet.

     Interior side: ten feet minimum; if adjacent to single-family residence, then twenty (20) feet minimum for the second and third floors; provided, that for accessory buildings adjacent to commercial properties, this setback may be reduced to a minimum five-foot landscaped strip.

     Where windows of primary living areas (living or dining rooms) face side property lines, a separation of at least twenty (20) feet shall be provided.

     In any case, a ground-level porch, uncovered or covered and open on three sides, may encroach into the front, side, corner side and reverse corner side setbacks by up to ten feet.

     2.     Building Separation: Where windows of primary living areas face walls of other units, a minimum separation of twenty (20) feet shall be provided.

     3.     The standards for landscaping and open space are as follows:

     Area. A total of a minimum thirty-five (35) percent of the site area shall be provided as landscaping and usable open space. Of this required landscaping and usable open space, at least fifty (50) percent of said area must have an average slope of ten percent or less.

     Use. All open space must be outdoor area on the ground which is open to the sky and which is designed and used for outdoor living and/or recreation, whether such area is paved or not, and shall not include parking or vehicle circulation areas.

     Maintenance. All landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained with proper care, weeding, pruning and irrigation. Plants shall be replaced as necessary to maintain conformance with approved landscaping plans.

     Street Trees. Street trees shall be provided and continuously maintained by the property owner. Street trees shall be selected and located in accordance with the city’s standards for street trees, as maintained by the director of public works.

     On-Site Trees: Any removal or pruning of existing trees shall conform to the requirements of the city’s tree preservation ordinance (adopted by Ordinance No. 178 and any successor thereto).

     Landscape guidelines are contained in a separate section of this chapter.

     4.     View Preservation. Building(s) should be placed in a manner which minimizes blockage of neighboring views, especially those portions of any view which are central to the total view, and/or are viewed from primary outdoor and indoor living areas (living rooms, dining rooms or foyers). Landscaping height at maturity should be consistent with preservation of neighboring views.

     5.     The standards for parking are as follows:

     Minimum parking required:

     a.     Resident parking:

     0 to 1-bedroom units: one space per unit;

     2-bedroom units: two spaces per unit;

     3-bedroom units: two and one-fourth spaces per unit;

     4 or more bedroom units: two and one-half spaces per unit.

     b.     Guest parking: one-fourth spaces per unit, in addition to resident parking required in subsection (5)(a).

     c.     At least one parking space per unit shall be covered. Guest parking may be uncovered.

     d.     The minimum number of parking spaces provided may be reduced for affordable housing units, senior housing units, or under other appropriate circumstances when written evidence justifying the reduction is provided and approved by the decisionmaker.

     Separation. Parking areas, including internal circulation areas, parking spaces and turnaround areas, shall be separated from any public rights-of-way by a minimum eight-foot wide (inside dimension) planter area or landscape strip, except at driveway and walkway openings. Parking spaces shall not be permitted in front or side setbacks.

     Landscape Buffer. A minimum five-foot landscaped buffer shall remain between any uncovered parking space and the property line.

     Safety. All landscaped areas adjacent to parking, circulation and vehicle storage areas shall be enclosed by a raised six-inch concrete curb or low wall.

     Compatibility. The design of the parking areas should be integrated into and compatible with the design of the overall project, and must be considered in making the findings regarding internal compatibility of the project, as stated elsewhere in this chapter.

     6.     Watercourse Protection.

     a.     Blockage. Blockage of watercourses, canyons or streambeds is prohibited, and any alteration of such features is discouraged.

     b.     Approval of Other Agencies. Development in the vicinity of blue line streams is subject to Army Corps of Engineers and California Department of Fish and Game approval prior to any issuance of grading or building permits.

     C.     Building Height Standards.

     1.     Maximum height of principal buildings and structures: thirty (30) feet maximum outward facing wall height; thirty-five (35) feet maximum roof height. Heights are measured from lowest finished grade adjacent to or directly below the building face.

     2.     Maximum height of accessory structures: fifteen (15) feet.

     3.     Maximum Building Bulk. All properties abutting properties which are zoned R-1 or foothill community district (FCD) are subject at those zone boundaries to the Municipal Code regarding building bulk (angle plane).

     D.    Architectural Design Guidelines. The following design guidelines shall apply to all projects under this section other than single-family residential projects:

     1.     Architectural features should be internally consistent, complement the character of the surrounding uses, and be compatible with the design, quality, and scale of buildings in the area.

     2.     Architectural Extensions. Architectural extensions to a maximum height of forty (40) feet above grade and up to twenty (20) feet in width or depth may be allowed. Such extensions are best used in meaningful locations, such as street corners, major building corners, entries and vertical circulation elements. Architectural extensions shall not be used for inhabited floor area above the highest floor level of the attached unit.

     3.     Roof Materials. Glossy roofing materials are prohibited from public view.

     4.     Parapets. Where a parapet has its thickness exposed to view, as when it is stepped or gabled, each visible side should be made to appear substantial.

     5.     Façade Elements. Carefully detailed elements, such as deep openings, reveals, shadow lines, articulation of edges and surface breaks, and pilasters, are encouraged, with emphasis given to the tops of buildings through cornice or eave treatments. Alcoves, benches, gates, sconces, wall fountains, and such features are encouraged as façade elements.

     6.     Modulation. An additional setback of at least eight feet extending at least twenty (20) feet should be provided for each eighty (80) feet of building frontage.

     7.     Entry Articulation. Entries should be the focus of the architecture of their respective elevations. Landscaping, hardscaping and architecture should be integrated to feature entries as dominant elements of the design. For this reason, porches may encroach in the front and side setbacks as stipulated elsewhere in this chapter.

     8.     Balconies. Balconies are encouraged as amenities to the units and enhancing elements within the building façades; provided, that:

     a.     The balconies are provided with a level of detailing, such as molding and reveals appropriate to their visibility;

     b.     Where balconies are used, they are integrated into the overall design of the building without becoming the dominant element of the architecture. This integration should include expression of vertical alignment through articulated vertical connecting elements such as reveals, columns or pilasters;

     c.     Any scuppers and dividing panels are integrated with the balcony design; and

     d.     Adequate privacy is provided.

     9.     Exterior Stairs. An enclosure or a landscaping barrier should be provided wherever there is less than seven feet vertical clearance below the stairs.

     10.   Color. Light reflectance value should not exceed eighty (80) percent for walls or fifty (50) percent for visible roofs.

     11.   Screening.

     a.     Where balconies at or above the second floor overlook yards of abutting residential properties or parking areas, effective landscaping screening should be provided.

     b.     Trellises or canopy structures are recommended for privacy where higher units overlook private open space.

     E.     Landscaping Guidelines. The following are guidelines for landscaping of multifamily developments.

     1.     The selection and arrangement of plant materials should landscape the open space to support recreation activities appropriate to the density and type of the residential development.

     2.     The augmentation of open space by retaining unfenced or unimpeded areas to the adjoining property is encouraged where adjacent developments are of similar density or character. Otherwise, a landscaping buffer or decorative wall barrier shall be provided within five feet of any property line on all sides abutting adjacent developments. The buffer shall be six feet high in all areas except the front setback, where its maximum height shall be three feet six inches.

     3.     A minimum of sixty (60) percent of the front setback area shall be landscaped.

     4.     Plants shall be established and maintained in accordance with the approved plan.

     5.     An automatic timed irrigation system appropriate to the plant materials used shall be provided for all landscaped areas.

     6.     The plant palette should be consistent with the objectives of:

     a.     Compatibility with surrounding plantings where desirable;

     b.     Drought tolerance; and

     c.     Concentration of plants with similar watering requirements.

     7.     Trees.

     a.     Sizes and quantities of new trees and existing trees to remain should maximize retention and planting of mature trees, with a guideline of twenty-five (25) percent of the new and existing trees to be either mature or of minimum thirty-six (36) inch box size at planting.

     b.     Number. At least one tree shall be provided or retained per each eight hundred (800) square feet of landscape area.

     c.     Height and Canopy. At least one tree should be capable of attaining at maturity the combined height-and-canopy measures of one hundred twenty (120) feet.

     d.     Rooting. A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the required trees should be planted in the ground.

     e.     View Preservation. Landscaping height at maturity should be consistent with preservation of neighbors’ views.

     F.     Slope Factor Guideline. As average lot slope increases, lowered allowable density, lot coverage, and floor area ratio should be considered per the following Table 1. This applicable slope factor determines the effective guideline for each criterion as follows:

     Minimum lot size and dwelling units per acre guideline:

     Underlying number of units per acre, divided by slope factor;

     Allowable lot coverage or floor ratio:

     Underlying standard by site size, multiplied by site size, multiplied by slope factor.

 

Table 1. Slope factor as related to average slope.

 

Slope (%)

Slope Factor

20 or less

1.00

21

0.99

22

0.98

23

0.97

24

0.96

25

0.95

26

0.94

27

0.93

28

0.92

29

0.91

30

0.90

31

0.88

32

0.86

33

0.84

34

0.82

35

0.80

36

0.78

37

0.76

38

0.73

39

0.70

40

0.67

41

0.64

42

0.60

43

0.57

44

0.54

45

0.50

46

0.45

47

0.40

48

0.35

49

0.30

50 or more

0.20

 

     G.    General Standards.

     1.     In any building project, during construction and for thirty (30) days thereafter, property in the project may be used for the storage of building materials and equipment used in the construction of the building project and for the contractor’s temporary office, subject to approval of the director of community development.

     2.     The storage of recreation vehicles within any multifamily project shall be permitted subject to the following provisions:

     a.     Highway operative recreational vehicles, i.e., camper-trucks, motor homes, etc., shall be stored within the enclosed or covered parking spaces for each unit or placed within a separate storage area.

     b.     Other recreational vehicles, consisting of, but not limited to, trailers, boats, etc., shall be stored within a separate storage facility within the project or at another appropriate off-site location.

     c.     Storage areas for recreational vehicles shall be enclosed with a six-foot or higher decorative block wall or acceptable substitute which is screened by exterior landscaping, and shall be paved with concrete, asphalt or similar surface. The location and size shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission.

     d.     No recreational vehicles shall be stored in designated guest parking areas.

     3.     Any signage for the project shall conform to the requirements of the city’s sign ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 11.37.

     4.     Equipment and utilities for all developments other than single-family residences shall meet the following standards:

     a.     Ground-oriented building service equipment, including, but not limited to, air conditioning and heating units, utility connections, and service areas, shall not be visible from public right-of-way. However, such equipment shall be located for easily accessible service and located or screened to minimize noise offensive to the occupants and to neighboring properties.

     b.     Roof-mounted mechanical equipment shall be prohibited.

     c.     Exterior wall-mounted equipment and utility meters shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

     d.     All utility service controls and equipment, including but not limited to electrical, communication and cable television lines installed for the purpose of supplying service to any new construction within the city shall be installed underground on the property to be served and from the property to be served to the point of connection with the utility’s distribution facilities in accordance with the rules approved by the public utilities commission of the state.

     5.     All multifamily developments shall provide one or more screened refuse area(s) with trash enclosure(s) in accessible locations and of sufficient size to accommodate the intensity of use, and to accommodate recycling containers in addition to general refuse or trash collection. Trash enclosures and refuse areas shall meet minimum standards, as follows:

     a.     All refuse/recycling storage areas must be accessible for trash pick up method used, and shall be enclosed by screening materials compatible with the project and, to the extent feasible, should be situated out of public view.

     b.     The area upon which trash bins or receptacles are stored and the access or pathway over which the bins or receptacles are moved for collection purposes shall be composed of a smooth, flat material such as concrete.

     c.     Each refuse/recycling area shall be provided with a water line and drain for cleaning purposes, and self-closing solid gate.

     d.     Refuse/recycling storage areas shall be screened by a trash enclosure wall constructed to a width, depth and height adequate to accommodate the number of trash bins or receptacles needed. Such enclosure walls shall be constructed of decorative blocks or other nonflammable material consistent in design, quality and color with the building(s) serviced by the area.

     6.     Exterior lighting devices for multifamily project automobile parking lots and pedestrian walkways and entries shall:

     a.     Provide adequate lighting for safe nighttime residential access;

     b.     Eliminate excessive lighting and glare, and prevent spillover onto adjacent properties; and

     c.     Utilize automatic timers for energy conservation.

     7.     The city reserves the right to be a party to the covenants, conditions and restrictions. (Ord. 419 §§ 23—31, 2014; Ord. 243 §§ 4—7, 1995; Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.060 Application requirements.
     A.    Submittal Requirements. In addition to all materials required by the city’s subdivision, building and grading regulations and environmental review procedures applicable to projects falling within the scope of this chapter, submittal of the following application materials shall be required for all projects provided for herein. The items listed in subsections (A)(1) through (3) of this section may be combined on one or more drawings as prescribed by the director.

     1.     A site or plot plan, drawn to a scale prescribed by the city planner, but not less than a scale of one inch equals one hundred feet, reflecting the proposed project, including representations of property lines and all recorded and proposed easements and public rights-of-way;

     2.     A topographical map of the project site and all adjacent development located within seventy-five (75) feet of the project’s proposed boundaries. This map shall be drawn to the same scale as the site plan required in subsection (A)(1) above, with a maximum contour interval of ten feet, or less as prescribed by the director. The average slope of the property shall be identified on this map, calculated by the following formula:

 

S =0.002296 x I x L

A

 

     Where S = Average percent slope

                I = Contour interval in feet

                L = Summation of length of all contours in feet

                A = Area in acres of project being considered

 

     3.     A complete grading plan for the project, drawn to the same scale as prescribed above, unless no grading requiring a permit is proposed. A tabulation of the areas within each gradient category may be required as prescribed by the director;

     4.     A landscaping plan which shall accurately show:

     a.     Existing trees on the project site with a trunk diameter of two inches or greater at a height of four feet above grade, and/or having a vertical height from the ground level to treetop level of fifteen (15) feet or greater,

     b.     Species of all such trees and their appropriate trunk diameter, height and condition,

     c.     Final disposition of all existing trees,

     d.     The type and extent of proposed vegetation, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and irrigation thereof,

     e.     Mix and percentage of lot area used for landscaping and open space. Parking and vehicle circulation areas shall not be included in such calculations, and

     f.      Evidence of slope stability through vegetation of created slopes.

     This plan shall be drawn to or keyed to a master map the same scale as is prescribed for the application materials required by subsection (A)(1) above, and shall be completed by a professional landscape architect registered with the state of California;

     5.     A lighting plan showing the location, height, approximate brightness and style of all exterior lighting for the project;

     6.     Elevation drawings at a scale of at least one-eighth inch equals one foot zero inches, with materials, colors, finishes and critical vertical dimensions clearly indicated. As deemed appropriate by the director or designee, proposed and existing-to-remain landscaping at maturity shall be shown in a manner that allows full visibility of building elevations beyond. Indication of nearby structures or features off-site shall also be shown where deemed appropriate by the director or designee.

     7.     Photographs of the site and its surroundings as prescribed by the director. Normally, such photos would include views of the site and properties adjacent for a distance of three hundred (300) feet from each end of the principal street frontage, as well as properties opposite the subject and adjacent properties. Photos should be mounted color prints, spliced from continuous views along the principal street(s), with a key map provided indicating relationship of views to parcels, streets and features;

     8.     Color chips including reflectance values (LRVs) and keyed to elevation drawings;

     9.     A completed residential development application and initial study questionnaire, on forms provided by the city;

     10.   On sites with an average slope of fifteen (15) percent or greater, the applicant shall submit a hydrology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     a.     The hydrologic conditions on the site,

     b.     Possible flood inundation,

     c.     Downstream flood hazards,

     d.     Natural drainage courses,

     e.     Analysis of the project, including its septic system, in relation to Regional Water Quality Control Board standards,

     f.      Design criteria to mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards consistent with applicable regulations,

     g.     Account of all runoff and debris from tributary areas,

     h.     Consideration for each lot or dwelling unit site in a proposed development project,

     i.      Runoff and debris amounts computed using the Los Angeles County flood control district criteria, and

     j.      A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability, water quality, and downstream drainage.

     This investigation and report shall be completed by a professional civil engineer experienced in the science of hydrology and hydrologic investigation and who is registered with the state of California;

     11.   Where alteration to existing topography is proposed:

     a.     A soils engineering report which shall contain, but not be limited to:

     i.      Data regarding the nature, distribution and strengths of existing soils,

     ii.     Relationship of soil characteristics to drainage related to lot coverage and landscaping/irrigation design,

     iii.    Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures,

     iv.    Design criteria for any identified corrective measures, and

     v.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability.

     This investigation and report shall be performed by a professional soils engineer who is experienced in the practice of soil mechanics and who is registered with the state of California,

     b.     A geology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     i.      The surface and sub-surface geology of the site,

     ii.     Strike angle of bedrock strata,

     iii.    Degree of seismic hazard,

     iv.    Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and

     v.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability;

     12.   Cross sections of the site and nearby affected areas as prescribed by the director, showing all buildings, fences, walls and landscaping at mature height anticipated under the planting conditions onsite;

     13.   Recommended for complete understanding of the proposal where appropriate, a three-dimensional scale model of the project site, onsite erection of a full-size mockup (either balloons denoting building corners or a story pole frame), perspective views, building plans or such other graphic information which in the director’s judgment would aid in the city’s review of the project. All graphic information shall be drawn to such scale as prescribed by the director;

     14.   Where the impact of noncompliance with specified guidelines and/or standards of this chapter cannot be determined by the city following public review, the applicant will be required to provide alternative project plans which are in conformance with said guidelines and standards for the purpose of comparative evaluation.

     B.     Waiver of Requirement for Application Materials. The requirement to submit any or all of the materials enumerated above may be waived by the director, under any of the following conditions:

     1.     The materials are not applicable to the scope of the project and not pertinent to any of the findings contained in this section;

     2.     The existence of reports covering the same subject matter on the same site;

     3.     Inclusion of any or all of the above reports as part of an environmental impact report or negative declaration, if either is required or has been satisfactorily completed for the proposal on the site;

     4.     The existence of a report as described in subsection (A)(10) of this section, previously prepared for a site or area adjacent to the project site, if the project site and such adjacent site or area may reasonably be expected to possess similar characteristics relative to the development issues addressed by this chapter. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.070 Project evaluation.
     A.    All projects proposed for the R-3 zone, other than single-family residences, are subject to review by the design commission or its successor. If review by the planning commission is required, it shall take place subsequent to review by the design commission or its successor. The planning commission may remand projects to the design commission or its successor for final details, when appropriate.

     B.     Any proposed project which is a permitted use in the R-3 zone and which requires a planned development permit as specified in this chapter shall be submitted for consideration by the planning commission for said permit. Any project which is a conditionally permitted use in the R-3 zone, and which also requires a planned development permit as specified in this chapter, shall be submitted simultaneously for consideration by the planning commission for both the conditional use permit and the planned development permit.

     C.     The planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may approve an application following the determination that the findings set forth in this chapter can be met. (Ord. 419 § 32, 2014; Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.080 Findings required.
     The planning commission, or the city council on appeal, may grant a planned development permit for a project in the R-3 zone upon findings that the project meets the requirements of this section. Additional conditions and requirements may be imposed upon a planned development permit as the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, finds are reasonable and necessary to carry out the purposes and requirements of the R-3 zone.

     The following findings shall be made by the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, in order to grant a planned development permit:

     A.    That the proposed development complies with the general plan and with the intent of the development standards of the R-3 zone for protection of neighborhood character and preservation of the general welfare of the community;

     B.     That the site plans, architectural design and landscaping plans of the project contribute to the R-3 zone goals of:

     1.     Compatibility with the density, character and design of any surrounding neighborhoods,

     2.     Internal compatibility of the project’s architecture, landscaping, and use of open space to achieve a high quality residential environment, and

     3.     Sufficient open space provided for both private and common areas;

     C.     That any departure from guidelines permitted by the planning commission, or the city council on appeal, should be utilized to effectively achieve quality and compatibility with the surrounding neighborhoods;

     D.    That the project will not create a nuisance, hazard or otherwise compromise public safety. (Ord. 419 §§ 33—35, 2014; Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.090 Granting of permits.
     No occupancy permit shall be granted until plantings as approved on the landscaping plans are established, to be verified by two inspections approximately one month apart. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.100 Appeals.
     Actions by the city on development permits may be appealed by any person upon filing of written notice of such appeal to the city within fifteen (15) days of the action, as follows:

     A.    Any action by the director of community development or the director of public works under this chapter is subject to appeal to the planning commission.

     B.     Any decision of the planning commission under the provisions of this chapter is subject to appeal to the city council. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

 

11.13.110 Fees.
     Reasonable fees may be imposed by resolution of the city council for review of project applications and appeals as provided for in this code. (Ord. 199 § 3, 1991)

Chapter 11.14 CPD COMMUNITY PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
11.14.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the community planned development zone is to achieve the following:

     A.    To protect properties designated as residential in the general plan which are adjacent to properties designated as commercial from noise, unsightliness and other nonresidential environmental impacts associated with commercial operation;

     B.     To provide appropriately located areas for office use, retail stores, service establishments and wholesale businesses offering commodities and services required by residents of the city and its surrounding market area;

     C.     To encourage office and related uses to concentrate for the convenience of the public and for a more beneficial relationship with each other;

     D.    To minimize traffic congestion and to avoid overloading of utilities by preventing construction of buildings of excessive size in relation to the amount of land around them;

     E.     To promote high standards of site planning, architecture and landscape design for office and general commercial developments within the city;

     F.     To provide more opportunities for design flexibility than otherwise occur under conventional commercial zoning regulations;

     G.    To provide specific zoning and performance development standards needed for the orderly transition of residential land uses within the commercial general plan designation. (Ord. 241 § 2, 1995)

 

11.14.020 Uses permitted, conditionally permitted and prohibited.
     The following uses shall be permitted in the CPD zone where the symbol “P” appears, and shall be permitted subject to a conditional use permit where the “CUP” symbol appears. All other uses are prohibited; provided, however, that the director of community development may determine that any use not listed is comparable to a listed use and to be treated in a similar manner. Such determination shall be final and conclusive. A list of all comparable use determinations shall be kept on file in the planning department.

 

 

Table 1. Permitted Uses

Use

Permit Required

A.

Retail Sales

 

1.

Alcoholic beverage sales, whether for consumption on- or off-site and whether alone or in conjunction with other uses

CUP

2.

Antique shops (genuine antiques only)

P

3.

Appliance store, household

P

4.

Art galleries

P

5.

Art supply stores

P

6.

Automobile sales, new vehicles only, including incidental repair/washing

CUP

7.

Automobile supply stores

P

8.

Bakery shops, including baking only when incidental to retail sales from premises

P

9.

Bicycle shops, including rental

P

10.

Book stores

P

11.

Ceramic shops; manufacturing incidental to retail sales from premises, up to 8 cubic feet kiln volume

P

12.

Clothing stores

P

13.

Confectionery or candy stores; candy making only when incidental to retail sales from premises

P

14.

Delicatessens

P

15.

Department stores

P

16.

Dress shops

P

17.

Drug stores

P

18.

Florist shops

P

19.

Furniture stores

P

20.

Furrier shops

P

21.

Gift shops

P

22.

Glass/mirror sales, including automobile glass installation only when conducted within an enclosed building

P

23.

Grocery stores

P

24.

Hardware stores

P

25.

Health food stores

P

26.

Hobby supply stores

P

27.

Ice cream shops

P

28.

Jewelry stores

P

29.

Leather goods stores

P

30.

Liquor stores

CUP

31.

Meat markets, excluding slaughtering

P

32.

Millinery shops

P

33.

Music stores

P

34.

Notions or novelty stores

P

35.

Nurseries, including growing of plant stock

P

36.

Office machines and equipment sales

P

37.

Paint and wallpaper stores

P

38.

Pet supply stores, excluding sale of pets other than tropical fish or goldfish

P

39.

Pet sales, other

CUP

40.

Photographic equipment and supply stores

P

41.

Radio and television stores

P

42.

Shoe stores

P

43.

Shopping centers consisting of a minimum of 10,000 square feet of gross leasable floor area for 2 or more occupants

CUP

44.

Silver shops

P

45.

Sporting goods stores

P

46.

Stationery stores

P

47.

Tobacco shops

P

48.

Toy stores

P

49.

Yarn and yardage stores

P

B.

Services

 

1.

Automobile service

CUP:

 

a. Repair activities shall be within enclosed building only, and shall not include body work, paint or upholstery

 

 

b. Smog control certification; service stations

 

2.

Bakery goods distributors

P

3.

Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and finance companies

P

4.

Barber shops

P

5.

Bars and cocktail lounges

CUP

6.

Beauty shops

P

7.

Blueprint shops

P

8.

Book binderies

P

9.

Churches, temples, and other places used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental educational and social activities in conjunction therewith

CUP

10.

Communications equipment buildings and antennas

CUP

11.

Community centers

CUP

12.

Day care for children (special home or day nursery)

CUP

13.

Dental clinics, including laboratories in conjunction therewith

P

14.

Dry cleaners

CUP

15.

Electrical shops

P

16.

Film laboratories

P

17.

Fortunetelling, psychic readings, palmistry, astrology, numerology, tarot card reading and similar uses

CUP

18.

Frozen food lockers

P

19.

Health clubs or centers, gymnasiums, aerobics studios

CUP

20.

Hospital equipment and supply rentals

P

21.

Hotel, motel

CUP

22.

Interior decorating studios

P

23.

Laboratories, research and testing

P

24.

Locksmith shops

P

25.

Lodge halls

CUP

26.

Massage establishments2

CUP

27.

Medical clinics, including laboratories in conjunction therewith

P

28.

Mortuaries (excluding crematoriums)

CUP

29.

Offices, business or professional

CUP

30.

Parking lots and parking structures

CUP

31.

Pet grooming, excluding boarding

CUP

32.

Photocopying/duplicating services

P

33.

Photoengravers and lithographers

P

34.

Photography studios

P

35.

Plumbing shops

P

36.

Pool service and supply

P

37.

Printers or publishers

P

38.

Public utility service centers

P

39.

Recreational vehicle repairs

CUP

40.

Rental business (e.g., party equipment, costumes), excluding tool or vehicle rental

P

41.

Rental of tools, including power equipment but excluding heavy machinery or trucks exceeding 2 tons capacity, within enclosed structure

CUP

42.

Repair shops for household goods

P

43.

Restaurants and other eating establishments, including food take-out, but excluding sale of alcoholic beverages

P

44.

Restaurants with outside eating facilities

CUP

45.

Reupholsterers, furniture

P

46.

Schools through grade 12, accredited, including appurtenant facilities, which offer instruction required by the State Education Code

CUP

47.

Schools, business/professional, including the arts, grooming, manual training, shop work

CUP

48.

Shoe repair shops

P

49.

Tailor shops

P

50.

Veterinary clinics, small animal including incidental boarding

CUP

51.

Watch repair shops

P

C.

Recreation and Amusement

 

1.

Parks and playgrounds with all appurtenant facilities customarily found in conjunction therewith

P

2.

Recreation clubs, including tennis, polo, swimming and similar recreational activities, together with appurtenant clubhouse

CUP

3.

Swimming pools

CUP

4.

Tennis, volleyball, badminton, lawn bowling and similar courts

CUP

5.

Theaters and other auditoriums

CUP

D.

Accessory Uses

 

1.

Accessory buildings and structures

P

2.

Storage, temporary of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance for a period not to exceed one year

CUP

E.

Residential Uses

 

1.

Rooming and boarding houses

CUP

2.

Single room occupancy facilities as defined in Section 11.18.050

CUP

F.

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

1.

Air pollution sampling stations

P

2.

Electric transmission substations and generating plants, including microwave facilities used in conjunction therewith

CUP

3.

Emergency shelters necessary to meet the needs of the city’s homeless population, as required by state law

P1

4.

Additional emergency shelters beyond those necessary to meet the needs of the city’s homeless population, as required by state law

CUP

5.

Fire stations

CUP

6.

Gas metering and control (public utility)

CUP

7.

Hospitals

CUP

8.

Institutions for aged persons, private

CUP

9.

Institutions for children, private

CUP

10.

Library

CUP

11.

Microwave station

CUP

12.

Post office

CUP

13.

Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the general public health, convenience, or general welfare

CUP

1        Emergency shelters are subject to Chapters 11.18 and 11.20.

2        Massage establishments and massage as an accessory use are subject to LCFMC Chapter 6.40.

 

(Ord. 485 § 2, 2019; Ord. 453 § 3, 2016; Ord. 428 § 1, 2014; Ord. 419 §§ 36, 37, 2014; Ord. 417 § 1, 2013; Ord. 271, 1996; Ord. 269 § 2, 1996; Ord. 264 § 1.1, 1996; Ord. 241 § 2, 1995)

 

11.14.030 Development standards.
     The following standards shall apply to all development in the community planned development zone:

     A.    Building Envelope—Building Height.

     1.     Basic Standard. No building shall exceed:

     a.     Thirty-five (35) feet: to highest point on the building; and

     b.     Twenty-eight (28) feet: to the top of the building wall;

     both as measured from the nearest adjacent finish grade, except that fill exceeding three feet shall be counted as part of the building height.

     This method of measurement avoids a penalty for buildings which step with the terrain.

     2.     Exceptions to the Basic Height Standard. Architectural extensions of up to fifty (50) feet in height are allowed for an area of up to ten percent of a building’s floor area, provided that the horizontal dimension of each individual extension does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the corresponding building dimension.

     3.     Angle-Plane Limit. Any project abutting a single-family residential zone shall comply with R-1 building bulk limits along the common boundary.

     B.     Building Design. Commercial and institutional projects are subject to design review, and also subject to design guidelines which supplement this chapter.

     1.     A project is not limited to a particular style, provided that the project is consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

     2.     Franchise chain stores or other similar uses which utilize fixed or standard building designs shall provide modified designs as necessary to conform to the standards and guidelines set forth in this chapter.

     3.     Glazing and Display.

     a.     No storage areas or mechanical equipment shall be located within three feet of the windows unless screened.

     b.     High-intensity lighting, such as neon perimeter strips, is not allowed.

     4.     Exterior Building Lighting. Exterior lighting mounted upon the building shall be subject to design review, and shall be of minimal intensity, except where oriented toward outdoor areas as security lighting.

     C.     Open Space and Landscaping,

     1.     Lot Coverage. Building area shall not comprise more than fifty (50) percent of the lot area. For the purposes of this section, building area includes all enclosed roofed areas, and all parking areas with a roof four feet or more above natural grade.

     2.     Minimum Lot Area. Minimum area for newly created lots shall be two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. Individual condominium parcels shall not be deemed lots for the purposes of this requirement.

     3.     Required Open Space Area.

     a.     Basic Standards.

     i.      West Gateway/Downtown (east of Commonwealth): ten percent of lot area minimum.

     ii.     Old Town/Downtown (west of Commonwealth): five percent of lot area minimum.

 

     Open-air roofed areas may be counted as open space area. Required setbacks, required landscaping areas within parking lots, and areas used for parking and/or vehicular access shall not be counted toward required open space.

     Lots under five thousand (5,000) square feet in area are not required to meet the open space area standard.

 

     b.     Bonus Open Space Area. Areas may be counted at one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of their actual area if they are:

     i.      Visible from the primary frontage street;

     ii.     Within one hundred (100) feet of the primary frontage street; and

     iii.    No more than fifty (50) percent of the lot frontage.

     Eligible areas include:

     i.      Pedestrian plazas;

     ii.     Courts; and

     iii.    Supporting landscaped areas outside of required setbacks.

     4.     Setbacks. Setback areas shall be completely dedicated to landscaping and pedestrian areas, except for the minimum necessary driving aisles.

     a.     Front and Exterior Side Minimum Setbacks.

     i.      West Gateway/Downtown (east of Commonwealth): fifteen (15) feet average; at no point less than five feet.

     ii.     Old Town/Downtown (west of Commonwealth): five feet average.

     For each two feet of building height exceeding fifteen (15) feet, one additional foot of setback shall be provided. No more than sixty (60) feet of wall length above the height of fifteen (15) feet is allowed within forty (40) feet of a front or exterior side property line.

     b.     Rear and Interior Side Setbacks.

     i.      Adjacent to commercial zone: five feet minimum at rear; no minimum at side.

     ii.     Adjacent to residential zone: setbacks per R-1 standards.

     5.     Parking Area Landscaping.

     a.     Parking areas shall be screened with berms, shrubs and/or landscaped walls, and shall utilize downslope grading where possible for screening effect.

     b.     Interior parking lot landscaping areas (minimum):

     i.      One planter at each end of each parking aisle;

     ii.     One additional planter area for each ten parking spaces.

     Except as required for vehicular movement, planter lengths shall equal the adjacent parking space lengths. Each planter shall average at least five feet in inside width.

     c.     Interior Parking Lot Landscaping Materials.

     At least one tree shall be provided per each prescribed planter. Where clustering is allowed as an alternative planter configuration, the number of trees shall correspond to that of the standard configuration. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four (24) inch box size or greater at planting, and no tree of less than fifteen (15) gallon size shall contribute to the requirement.

     At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required trees shall be of species having a mature canopy index of at least five hundred (500). The canopy index is the product of the canopy width multiplied by the tree height (in feet).

     All remaining areas not used for a functional aspect of the parking area shall be landscaped. Where deemed appropriate in design review, clustered landscaping areas within the parking lot may be substituted for the prescribed planters.

     6.     Equipment and Utilities. Equipment and utilities for such buildings shall meet the following standards:

     a.     Ground-oriented building service equipment shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be located for easily accessible service and screened to minimize noise to neighboring properties.

 

     b.     Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view from adjacent public thoroughfares by integral roof and/or parapet components, and properly located and screened to minimize noise.

     c.     Exterior wall-mounted equipment and utility meters shall be concealed by the project design to the extent possible, and not visible from the public right-of-way.

     d.     Utility service lines shall comply with the underground utilities ordinance.

     e.     Refuse Areas. Each development shall provide at least one screened refuse area, at least ten square feet in area per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area, as follows:

     i.      All refuse storage areas must be accessible for pickup, and shall be situated at the rear or side of the building, out of public view.

     ii.     Each storage area and the access to it shall be smooth, level concrete, and provided with a water line, drain, and self-closing gate.

     iii.    Each refuse storage area shall be screened by plantings and a minimum six-foot high wall constructed of decorative block or other nonflammable material complementary to the project.

     iv.    The requirement for the refuse area or its placement may be modified or waived by the design review board or planning commission if it is determined that site conditions present an undue hardship.

     7.     Lighting.

     a.     Exterior lighting devices for parking and pedestrian walkways shill provide for safety and security, without excessive lighting and glare.

     b.     Accent lighting of buildings and landscaping is encouraged.

     8.     Irrigation and Maintenance.

     a.     An automatic timed underground irrigation system shall be provided for all planter areas.

     b.     All planters shall be permanently maintained with proper care, weeding, pruning, irrigation and plant replacement as needed to comply with approved landscaping plans.

     9.     Walls.

     a.     No wall within a required street-facing setback area shall exceed three feet six inches in height. Walls of less than two feet in height, allowing for seating, are encouraged.

     b.     Where a project abuts a residential zone, a six-foot high screening wall, of solid concrete, brick or stone, is required. The wall shall be of finished appearance on both sides, and shall have any length exceeding twenty-five (25) feet broken up through landscaping, substantial reveals or pilasters, and/or other means. The wall shall be stepped down to a height not to exceed forty-two (42) inches when it is located within the extension of the residential front or side street yard setback area(s). The planning commission may modify or waive wall requirements after notification and an opportunity to be heard has been given to affected property owners of the proposed modification or waiver.

     10.   Outside Merchandise Displays. Outdoor merchandise displays are subject to approval by the director of community development, based on submittal of a written description of the proposed display, a site plan, and a schedule. Guidelines for outdoor displays are:

     a.     The display should be less than twenty (20) square feet in area per business;

     b.     Any adjacent sidewalk should retain at least four feet in width; and

     c.     No packaged goods should be displayed.

     Larger displays are necessary and acceptable for nursery goods, Christmas tree sales and vehicle sales.

     D.    Parking.

     1.     The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided and permanently maintained shall be as follows:

     a.     General commercial (retail sales and service, except as set forth more specifically herein): one parking space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

     b.     Professional or business office: one parking space per two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area.

     c.     Residential: one parking space per bedroom for each unit, provided, however, there shall not be less than two parking spaces per unit plus one additional space per each two units or fraction thereof for guest use.

     d.     Amusement, drinking, eating or entertainment establishments: one parking space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area.

     e.     Schools and Churches.

     i.      Every building used in whole or in part for an elementary school, public or private, having no grade above the 8th, shall have within five hundred (500) feet thereof one parking space for each classroom.

     ii.     Every building used in whole or in part for a school for grades 9 through 12 shall have one parking space for each classroom, plus one additional parking space for each fifty (50) pupils.

     iii.    Every building used in whole or in part for the gathering together of persons for deliberation or worship; or used as a school auditorium of a school in which any pupil is in a grade higher than the 8th, shall have within five hundred (500) feet thereof one automobile parking space for each five fixed seats, and one automobile parking space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of the usable floor area of such auditorium where seats are not fixed, in the largest auditorium used for public assembly.

     f.      Conditional Uses and Uses Not Specified. For any conditionally permitted use, or where parking requirements for any use are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the director of community development finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking. Wherever practical, such determination shall be based upon the requirements of the most comparable use specified in this section.

     g.     Shared parking shall be allowed if sufficient parking is provided during the peak parking demand period as demonstrated by meeting all the following requirements:

     i.      Peak Parking Displacement.

     (A)   Differing Peak Demand Periods—On-Site. Shared on-site parking between land uses with different periods of peak parking demand will be allowed for all uses that can document that the existing or anticipated land use(s) will have different periods of peak parking demand and the shared parking arrangement can accommodate the parking demand for both uses.

     (B)   Differing Peak Demand Periods—Off-Site. Shared off-site parking between land uses with different periods of peak parking demand will be allowed for all uses that can document that the existing or anticipated land use(s) will have different periods of peak parking demand and the shared parking arrangement can accommodate the parking demand without double-counting (double-booking) the parking on the off-site parking lot.

     ii.     Distance to Off-Site Parking. Off-site parking shall be within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet. Further distance may be allowed if there is documentation that a shuttle bus service or valet parking service will be provided.

     iii.    Signage. Signage to direct vehicles to the shared parking facility (for non-valet parking), and pedestrians from the parking facility to each use shall be installed.

     iv.    Barrier-Free Access. Pedestrian accessways from the parking facility to each use shall be free of physical barriers such as walls and significant vegetation.

     v.     Parking Plan. A parking assignment and/or management plan (including graphics) shall be created. This plan shall specify which spaces are available to users of which establishments, or whether spaces are unassigned. It will also detail any permit, time limit or other restrictions to ensure that spaces are available for the intended users.

     vi.    Guaranteed Access. Shared driveway access for all users of the parking facility shall be guaranteed. This will help to ensure that shared parking limits the number of curb cuts.

     vii.   TMA. Participation by the property owners in any future transportation management association or similar organization shall be required.

     viii.  Signed Agreement. A signed agreement between the applicant, the property owners and the city to share their parking shall be reviewed and approved by the city and recorded against the participating properties. The agreement shall obligate the subject parking spaces to their respective uses and users. This agreement will impact other future uses on the respective properties and may limit uses that might otherwise wish to locate on the participating properties. The agreement shall be approved by the city. The agreement shall be based on the model agreement in Appendix C of the Comprehensive Parking Strategy Final Report.

     h.     Adjustments to Parking Quantities. For any permitted or conditionally permitted use, or for any use where parking requirements are not specified, a conditional use permit may be applied for to address adjustments to parking quantity. Parking shall be provided in an amount which the planning commission finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking.

     2.     Drive-through service lanes shall be a minimum ten feet wide and one hundred sixty (160) feet in length (eight car lengths), measured from the service window back toward the point of ingress. The entire length of the designated drive-through service lane shall not encroach upon parking spaces, back-up and maneuvering areas, or driveways essential for proper on-site traffic circulation.

     3.     Parking facilities shall be designed as follows:

     a.     A site plan shall be submitted to the director of community development for review and approval prior to the establishment of any required parking facility. Such plan shall contain a detailed parking arrangement, accurately dimensioned, showing individual parking spaces, driveways, maneuvering aisles, and turnaround areas, and indicating adequate ingress and egress.

     b.     Parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth, except that parking spaces with side(s) abutting a fence, wall, or other similar obstruction higher than eight inches above parking lot grade shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet in width. Up to three feet of the required parking space length may overhang a planter or walkway, subject to design review approval. The table and charts set forth in Exhibit A to this section, shall be referred to in the development of parking lot site plans. (Ord. 411 §§ 1—4, 2013; Ord. 280 § 2, 1997; Ord. 241 § 2, 1995)

 

 



 

 



 

 

 



 

11.14.040 Supplementary regulations.
     All development within the CPD zone is subject to any applicable supplementary design standards and guidelines, and design review requirements, as separately adopted by the city council. (Ord. 439 § 1, 2015; Ord. 429 § 1, 2014; Ord. 418 § 1, 2013)

Chapter 11.15 FOOTHILL COMMUNITY DISTRICT ZONE
11.15.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the foothill community district zone is to achieve the following:

     A.    To protect the existing residential uses within the foothill community district from piece-meal transition to commercial or multifamily land use;

     B.     To provide specific performance development standards needed for the potential orderly transition of single-family residential land uses within the foothill community district;

     C.     To promote high standards of site planning, architecture and landscape design for all permitted and conditionally permitted uses within the foothill community district. (Ord. 147 § 2, 1987)

 

11.15.020 Permitted and conditional uses.
     The following uses in the foothill community district zone shall be permitted where the symbol “P” appears, and shall be permitted subject to a conditional use permit where the symbol “CUP” appears in the column following each use designation:

 

A. Residential.

 

1. Single-family residential

P

2. Multifamily residential

CUP

B. Commercial.

 

All permitted and conditionally permitted uses allowed within the community planned development zone pursuant to Section 11.14.020 of this code.

CUP

(Ord. 147 § 2, 1987)

 

11.15.030 Development standards—Single family.
     The following development standards shall apply to all single-family residential uses in the foothill community zone:

     A.    Lot Area and Width. The minimum lot area shall be seven thousand five hundred (7,500) square feet. The minimum lot width shall be fifty (50) feet. Minimum lot area and width requirements shall be applied to any lots created after the effective date of this chapter. All smaller lots created prior to such date shall be legal nonconforming.

     B.     Building Height. The maximum building height shall be thirty (30) feet measured from any one point on the plane of the ground level to the highest point of the roof directly above the point of measurement, exclusive of chimney and ventilators.

 

     C.     Building Setbacks. Buildings shall be set back from property lines as set forth in this subsection. In case of question as to whether a property line is a front, side or rear line, the decision of the director of community development shall be final.

     1.     Front Yard Setback. A front yard shall be provided with an average depth equal to the average depth of front yards on immediately adjacent parcels; provided, however, that an average exceeding twenty (20) feet shall not be required. Front yards on vacant lots shall be considered as having an average front setback of twenty (20) feet.

     2.     Interior side yard setbacks: five feet from property line.

     3.     Exterior side yard setbacks: ten feet from property line adjacent to streets or alleys.

     4.     Rear yard setback: fifteen (15) feet from the rear property line.

     D.    Distance Between Buildings. No building shall be less than six feet from any accessory building or garage unless such structures are attached by a solid roof.

     E.     Maximum Lot Coverage. Total land area covered by structures, excluding covered patios open on two sides shall not exceed forty (40) percent of the total lot area.

     F.     Fences and Walls. Fences may be placed within required front, side or rear yards, subject to the following:

     1.     A fence or wall up to six feet in height may be installed in the side or rear yard setback. Non-view-obscuring fencing a maximum of forty-two (42) inches in height may be installed within the front yard setback.

     2.     The materials, design and quality of construction of any fence, including color, architecture, shape, pattern and sturdiness shall be consistent with that of other structures on the property on which the fence will be located, as well as on other properties in the neighborhood.

     G.    Automobile Storage. Each lot shall provide for two covered fully enclosed parking spaces. In the event an existing garage is converted to occupiable space, a fully enclosed two-car garage shall be installed on the lot at another location in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 147 § 2, 1987)

 

11.15.040 Development standards—Multifamily residential.
     A.    The purpose of this section is to establish the highest level of development standards to achieve greater flexibility in design, to encourage well planned neighborhoods through creative and imaginative planning of minimum one-acre sites as a unit, and to provide for appropriate use of land compatible with existing land use.

     B.     Multifamily residential use within the foothill community district zone is subject to the issuance of a conditional use permit. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan indicating unit locations, open space and recreational amenities, landscaping and parking facilities. Approval of the conditional use permit by the planning commission shall be based upon findings that the site plan complies with the intent of the development standards of the foothill community district as set forth in this section, for protection of property values and for the preservation of the general welfare of the community, as well as the findings otherwise required for conditional use permits pursuant to the city’s zoning ordinance.

     C.     Multifamily residential use within the foothill community district zone is subject to the following development standards:

     1.     Multifamily residential use shall only be permitted where the proposed development contains not less than one acre of land.

     2.     The maximum density of multifamily dwelling units within the foothill community district zone shall not exceed fifteen (15) residential units per net acre of land.

     3.     Dwelling units shall be in single-family attached structures with no more than three units per structure. Depending upon adjacent development and compensating features of the proposed site plan, the commission may approve places for recreational purposes and accessory buildings if for the primary use of persons residing within the development and located so as not to be detrimental to adjacent properties.

     4.     The maximum building height shall be thirty-five (35) feet; provided, however, that the planning commission may limit the height of any or all buildings in the development when it finds that, due to surrounding neighborhood characteristics, the proposed development could not integrate with existing conditions without causing significant adverse impacts on the neighborhood.

     5.     No building eighteen (18) feet or less in height shall be less than fifteen (15) feet from any other building or structure unless attached by a solid roof, and no building greater than eighteen (18) feet in height shall be less than twenty (20) feet from any other building or structure unless attached by a solid roof.

     6.     The following minimum square footage requirements (calculated center to center wall) shall be applied to all units:

 

     1 bedroom 700 square feet or more

     2 bedrooms 900 square feet or more

     3 bedrooms 1,200 square feet or more

     4 bedrooms 1,350 square feet or more

 

     In no case shall a room used for sleeping purposes be less than one hundred twenty (120) square feet in floor area.

     7.     Off-street parking shall be provided at a ratio of one parking space per bedroom for each dwelling unit; provided, however, that there shall be not less than two parking spaces for each dwelling unit. In addition, there shall be provided not less than one-half parking space for each dwelling unit, distributed throughout the development, so as to be accessible for guest use. Said parking may be along private streets within the project or off-street, and may be open or covered.

     8.     A minimum of four hundred (400) square feet of usable landscaped open area shall be required for each dwelling unit and shall be provided as common open space for the use of the occupants of the dwelling units. However, where the applicant submits evidence to the satisfaction of the planning commission that the particular development will contain compensatory characteristics which will provide open space or recreational uses as well or better than the open space otherwise mandated by this section, the commission may modify such requirement.

     9.     Buildings shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the net lot area, except that the common recreational buildings are excluded from this building coverage limitation. (Ord. 147 § 2, 1987)

 

11.15.050 Development standards—Commercial.
     A.    Commercial use within the foothill community district zone is subject to issuance of a conditional use permit. Any application for such a permit shall be accompanied by a detailed site plan indicating building locations, landscaping and parking facilities. Approval of the conditional use permit by the planning commission shall be based upon findings that the site plan complies with all development standards of the community planned development zone, as set forth in Chapter 11.14 of this code, as well as the findings otherwise required for conditional use permits in the city’s zoning ordinance.

     B.     Commercial uses shall be permitted in the foothill community district zone only where the proposed development contains not less than one acre of land and is contiguous to existing commercially zoned land. (Ord. 147 § 2, 1987)

Chapter 11.16 PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC ZONE
11.16.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the public and semi-public zone is to achieve the following purposes:

     A.    To provide appropriately located areas within the city for public and semi-public uses (those which are institutional and noncommercial in nature), and which are necessary to sustaining an enhanced quality of life in the community;

     B.     To protect properties designated residential in the general plan from noise, vehicular traffic, and other environmental effects associated with public and semi-public uses;

     C.     To promote high standards of site planning, architecture and landscaping for public and semi-public developments within the city;

     D.    To provide specific zoning and performance development standards needed for the orderly development of public and semi-public uses within the city. (Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

 

11.16.020 Permitted uses.
     The following are permitted uses in the public and semi-public zone:

     One detached, single-family dwelling unit per lot. (Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

 

11.16.030 Conditionally permitted uses.
     The following are permitted uses in the public and semi-public zone if authorized by a conditional use permit. All other uses are prohibited; provided, however, that the planning commission may determine that any use not listed is comparable to a listed use and to be treated in a similar manner. All conditional use permits approved by the planning commission are subject to call-up per Section 11.49.050 City council call-up.

     A.    Academies and conservatories, excluding business and trade schools;

     B.     Arboretums and horticultural gardens;

     C.     Churches, temples and other places used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental educational and social activities in conjunction therewith;

     D.    City government offices;

     E.     Community center;

     F.     Convents and monasteries on the same lot or parcel as a legally established church or school;

     G.    Day care, adult or children, only as an accessory use to a legally permitted use;

     H.    Energy and communication control stations, general utility only;

     I.      Fire stations;

     J.      Golf courses, including the customary clubhouse and appurtenant facilities;

 

     K.    Group residential, only as an accessory use to a legally permitted use;

     L.     Libraries;

     M.    Museums;

     N.    Nonprofit educational support centers;

     O.    Parks and playgrounds, with all appurtenant facilities customarily found in conjunction therewith;

     P.     Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the public health, convenience or general welfare in addition to those specifically listed in this section;

     Q.    Recreational facilities, including tennis, polo, swimming, equestrian and similar recreational activities, together with appurtenant clubhouse;

     R.     Schools, through grade 12, appropriately accredited, including appurtenant facilities, which offer instruction required to be taught in the public schools by the Education Code of the state of California, in which no pupil is physically restrained, but excluding business and trade schools;

     S.     Storage, temporary, of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance of streets and highways, sewers, storm drains, underground conduits, flood control works, pipe lines and similar uses for a period not to exceed one year;

     T.     Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water. (Ord. 413 § 12, 2013; Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

 

11.16.040 Development standards.
     The following standards shall apply to all public and semi-public use developments in the public and semi-public zone:

     A.    Area Standards.

     1.     The minimum required lot areas are as follows:

     a.     For the following uses, one-half acre (twenty-one thousand seven hundred eighty (21,780) square feet):

     i.      Single-family residential,

     ii.     Day care, adult or children, only as an accessory use to a legally permitted use,

     iii.    Energy and communication control stations, general utility only,

     iv.    Fire stations,

     v.     Group residential, only as an accessory use to a legally permitted use,

     vi.    Libraries,

     vii.   Museums,

     viii.  Nonprofit educational support centers,

     ix.    Parks and playgrounds, with all appurtenant facilities customarily found in conjunction therewith,

     x.     Storage, temporary, of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance of streets and highways, sewers, storm drains, underground conduits, flood control works, pipe lines and similar uses for a period not to exceed one year,

     xi.    Water reservoirs, dams, treatment plants, gauging stations, pumping stations, tanks, wells, and any use normal and appurtenant to the storage and distribution of water;

     b.     For all other uses, two acres.

     2.     A maximum lot coverage of thirty-five (35) percent of the net area of the lot.

     B.     Siting Standards.

     1.     The minimum required setbacks are as follows:

     a.     Front: twenty-five (25) feet.

 

     b.     Rear: twenty-five (25) feet.

     c.     Corner side: twenty-five (25) feet.

     d.     Interior side: fifteen (15) feet.

     C.     Building Height Standard.

     1.     The maximum height of principal buildings and structures shall be thirty-five (35) feet.

     2.     The maximum height of accessory structures shall be fifteen (15) feet.

     3.     In all cases, height shall be measured from the lowest finished grade adjacent to or directly below the structure or building face.

     4.     Any project abutting a single family residential (R-1) zone shall comply with R-1 building bulk limits along the common property boundary. (Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

 

11.16.050 Parking standards.
     A.    Parking Spaces. The minimum number of parking spaces to be provided and permanently maintained shall be as follows:

     1.     Residential.

     a.     Single-family: two spaces in an enclosed garage.

     b.     Convents, monasteries and other multiple unit developments: one covered or enclosed space per bedroom for each unit, plus one additional space, which may be uncovered, for every four units for guest parking.

     2.     Academies, conservatories, churches and other places used exclusively for religious worship, and schools:

     a.     For grades up to 8: one and one-half space for each classroom used in whole or in part; and

     b.     For grades 9 through 12: one space for each classroom used in whole or in part, plus one space for each fifteen (15) students; and

     c.     One space for each five fixed seats and one space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of usable floor area where seats are not fixed, in the largest room or space used for assembly purposes.

     3.     Other Uses. For any use for which parking requirements are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the planning commission finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion or excessive on-street parking. Wherever practical, such determination shall be based upon the maximum occupancy that can reasonably be expected to occur at the site.

     B.     Dimensions. Parking spaces shall be not less than nine feet in width and twenty (20) feet in depth, except that parking spaces with side(s) abutting a fence, wall or other similar obstruction higher than eight inches above parking lot grade shall be a minimum of eleven (11) feet in width. Up to three feet of the required parking space length may overhang a planter or walkway, subject to design review approval. (Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

 

11.16.060 Site planning and building design.
     All projects, except single-family residential, are subject to design review. A project is not limited to a particular style, provided that the project is consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

     A.    Parking Area Landscaping.

     1.     Parking areas shall be screened with berms, shrubs and/or landscaped walls, and shall utilize downslope grading where possible for screening effect.

     2.     Interior parking lot landscaping areas (minimum):

     a.     One planter at each end of parking aisle;

     b.     One additional planter area for each ten parking spaces;

 

     c.     Except as required for vehicular movement, planter lengths shall equal the adjacent parking space lengths. Each planter shall average at least five feet in inside width.

     3.     Interior Parking Lot Landscaping Materials.

 

     a.     At least one tree shall be provided per each prescribed planter. Where clustering is allowed as an alternative planter configuration, the number of trees shall correspond to that of the standard configuration. At least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four (24) inch box size or greater at planting, and no tree of less than fifteen (15) gallon size shall contribute to the requirement.

     b.     At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required trees shall be of species having a mature canopy index of at least 500. The canopy index is the product of the canopy width multiplied by the tree height (in feet).

     c.     All remaining areas not used for a functional aspect of the parking area shall be landscaped. Where deemed appropriate in design review, clustered landscaping areas within the parking lot may be substituted for the prescribed planters.

     B.     Drive-through Service Lanes. The minimum width shall be ten feet and the minimum length shall be one hundred sixty (160) feet, measured from the service window back to the point of ingress. The entire length of the designated drive-through service lane shall not encroach upon parking spaces, back-up and maneuvering areas, or driveways essential for proper on-site traffic circulation.

     C.     Equipment and Utilities. Equipment and utilities for such buildings shall meet the following standards:

     1.     Ground-oriented building service equipment shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be located for easily accessible service and screened to minimize noise to neighboring properties.

     2.     Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from public view from adjacent public thoroughfares by integral roof and/or parapet components, and properly located and screened to minimize noise.

     3.     Exterior wall-mounted equipment and utility meters shall be concealed by the project design to the extent possible, and not visible from the public right-of-way.

     4.     Utility service lines shall comply with the underground utilities ordinance.

     5.     Refuse Areas. Each developer shall provide at least one screened refuse area, at least ten square feet in area per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area, as follows:

     a.     All refuse storage areas must be accessible for refuse vehicle pickup, and shall be situated at the rear or side of the building, out of public view.

     b.     Each storage area and the access to it shall be smooth, level concrete, and provided with a water line, drain and self-closing gate.

     c.     Each refuse storage area, including to the extent feasible the access thereto, shall be screened by plantings and a minimum six-foot high wall constructed of decorative block or other nonflammable material complementary to the project.

     d.     The requirement for the refuse area or its placement may be modified or waived by the design review board or the planning commission if it is determined that the site conditions present an undue hardship.

     D.    Lighting.

     1.     Exterior lighting devices for parking and pedestrian walkways shall provide for safety and security, without excessive lighting or glare.

     2.     Accent lighting of buildings and landscaping is encouraged.

     E.     Irrigation and Landscape Maintenance.

     1.     An automatic timed underground irrigation system shall be provided for all landscape areas.

     2.     All landscape areas shall be permanently maintained with proper care, weeding, pruning, irrigation and plant replacement as needed to comply with approved landscaping plans.

     F.     Walls. Walls which are proposed, or required to provide a screened buffer or enclosure, shall be developed of a masonry material in conformance with the following:

 

     1.     Walls shall be designed as a decorative feature of the development, consistent with or complimentary to the color, texture, material and design of the primary structure of the development.

     2.     Walls in excess of fifty (50) feet in length shall be interrupted with a decorative treatment.

     3.     Wall height shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches on street frontages and shall not exceed six feet when adjacent to residential property, except as otherwise authorized by the planning commission for any conditionally permitted use.

     4.     The planning commission may approval a wall material other than masonry upon a finding that the alternative material will be consistent with the intent of this section. (Ord. 275 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 11.17 MIXED USE ZONE
11.17.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter it to establish development standards for mixed use projects that combine residential and nonresidential uses in the same building or building site area in order to achieve the following:

     A.    Allow for greater flexibility in development alternatives, especially attractive, mixed income higher density residential development, in appropriate areas of the city;

     B.     Enhance and build upon the city’s commercial/retail base;

     C.     Integrate compatible residential and commercial uses and ensure the compatibility of mixed use projects with surrounding uses and development patterns;

     D.    Encourage a variety of housing types and expand housing opportunities for all income groups within the city, including older people and young professionals;

     E.     Provide housing options for residents of all income levels that allow residents to live near office, retail and other nonresidential uses;

     F.     Facilitate pedestrian and bicycle mobility and promote transit use; and

     G.    Promote the internal compatibility of each project’s architecture, landscaping, and use of open space to achieve a high quality built environment. (Ord. 419 § 38, 2014)

 

11.17.020 Allowed uses and permit requirements.
     The following uses shall be permitted in the mixed use (MU) zone where the symbol “P” appears, and shall be permitted subject to a conditional use permit where the “CUP” symbol appears. The director of community development may determine that any use not listed is comparable to a listed use and is to be treated in a similar manner:

 

 

Table 1. Permitted Uses

 

Use

Permit Required

Retail

 

Alcoholic beverage sales, whether for consumption on- or off-site and whether alone or in conjunction with other uses

CUP

Antique shops

P

Appliance store, household

P

Art galleries

P

Art supply stores

P

Automobile supply stores

P

Bakery shops, including baking only when incidental to retail sales from premises

P

Bicycle shops, including rental

P

Book stores

P

Ceramic shops; manufacturing incidental to retail sales from premises, up to 8 cubic feet kiln volume

P

Clothing stores

P

Confectionery or candy stores; candy making only when incidental to retail sales from premises

P

Delicatessens

P

Department stores

P

Drug stores

P

Electronics stores

P

Florist shops

P

Furniture stores

P

Furrier shops

P

Gift shops

P

Glass/mirror sales

P

Grocery stores

P

Hardware stores

P

Health food stores

P

Hobby supply stores

P

Ice cream shops

P

Jewelry stores

P

Leather goods stores

P

Liquor stores

CUP

Meat markets, excluding slaughtering

P

Millinery shops

P

Music stores

P

Notions or novelty stores

P

Nurseries, including growing of plant stock

P

Office machines and equipment sales

P

Paint and wallpaper stores

P

Pet supply stores, excluding sale of pets other than fish

P

Pet sales, other

CUP

Photographic equipment and supply stores

P

Shoe stores

P

Silver shops

P

Sporting goods stores

P

Stationery stores

P

Tobacco shops

P

Toy stores

P

Yarn and yardage stores

P

Services

 

Bakery goods distributors

P

Banks, savings and loans, credit unions, and finance companies

P

Barber shops

P

Bars and cocktail lounges

CUP

Beauty shops

P

Blueprint shops

P

Book binderies

P

Churches, temples, and other places used exclusively for religious worship, including customary incidental educational and social activities in conjunction therewith

CUP

Communications equipment buildings and antennas

CUP

Community centers

CUP

Day care for children (special home or day nursery)

CUP

Dental clinics, including laboratories in conjunction therewith

P

Dry cleaners

CUP

Electrical shops

P

Film laboratories

P

Frozen food lockers

P

Health clubs or centers, gymnasiums, aerobics studios

CUP

Hospital equipment and supply rentals

P

Hotel, motel

CUP

Interior decorating studios

P

Laboratories, research and testing

P

Locksmith shops

P

Lodge halls

CUP

Medical clinics, including laboratories in conjunction therewith

P

Mortuaries (excluding crematoriums)

CUP

Offices, business, professional, or government

CUP

Pet grooming, excluding boarding

CUP

Photocopying/duplicating services

P

Photoengravers and lithographers

P

Photography studios

P

Plumbing shops

P

Pool service and supply

P

Printers or publishers

P

Public utility service centers

P

Rental business (e.g., party equipment, costumes), excluding tool or vehicle rental

P

Rental of tools, including power equipment but excluding heavy machinery or trucks exceeding 2 tons capacity, within enclosed structure

CUP

Repair shops for household goods

P

Restaurants and other eating establishments, including food take-out, but excluding sale of alcoholic beverages

P

Schools through grade 12, accredited, including appurtenant facilities, which offer instruction required by the State Education Code

CUP

Schools, business/professional, including the arts, grooming, manual training, shop work

CUP

Shoe repair shops

P

Tailor shops

P

Upholsterers, furniture

P

Veterinary clinics, small animal including incidental boarding

CUP

Watch repair shops

P

Recreation

 

Parks and playgrounds with all appurtenant facilities customarily found in conjunction therewith

P

Recreation clubs, including tennis, polo, swimming and similar recreational activities, together with appurtenant clubhouse

CUP

Swimming pools

CUP

Tennis, volleyball, badminton, lawn bowling and similar courts

CUP

Theaters and other auditoriums

CUP

Accessory Uses

 

Accessory buildings and structures

P

Storage, temporary of materials and construction equipment used in construction or maintenance for a period not to exceed one year

CUP

Residential Uses

 

Apartments and condominiums (20—30 dwelling units/acre)

CUP

Rooming and boarding houses

CUP

Public/Semi-Public Uses

 

Air pollution sampling stations

P

Fire or police stations

CUP

Gas metering and control (public utility)

CUP

Institutions for aged persons, private

CUP

Institutions for children, private

CUP

Library

CUP

Museums

CUP

Post office

CUP

Publicly owned uses necessary to the maintenance of the general public health, convenience, or general welfare

CUP

(Ord. 419 § 38, 2014)

 

11.17.030 Development standards.
     The following standards shall apply to all development in the MU zone:

     A.    Density.

     1.     For multifamily residential uses, the minimum density should be twenty (20) dwelling units per acre and the maximum density shall be thirty (30) dwelling units per acre.

     2.     Nonresidential uses shall be developed at a maximum floor-area ratio of 1.5.

     B.     Minimum Lot Area. Minimum area for newly created lots shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet. Individual condominium parcels shall not be deemed lots for the purposes of this requirement.

     C.     Lot Coverage. The maximum lot coverage for projects in the MU zone shall be eighty (80) percent. For the purposes of this section, building area includes all enclosed roofed areas, and all parking areas with a roof four feet or more above natural grade.

     D.    Nonresidential Use. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of a project’s floor area shall be developed and maintained with nonresidential uses.

     E.     Ground Floor Uses.

     1.     Only nonresidential uses are permitted on the ground floor of buildings fronting a primary street such as Foothill Boulevard. Residential uses are permitted on the ground floor of buildings fronting other streets, including internal streets and driveways.

     2.     Main entrances to ground floor, nonresidential uses shall be located on primary streets.

     F.     Setbacks.

     1.     The setbacks in the MU zone shall be as follows:

     a.     Front: up to an average of five feet from the front property line for the ground floor, and a minimum of five feet and a maximum of ten feet from the ground floor front wall for the second and third floor.

     b.     Rear: five feet, or fifteen (15) feet when adjacent to a residential use or zone

     c.     Corner side: zero feet, or fifteen (15) feet when adjacent to a residential use or zone

     d.     Interior side: zero feet, or fifteen (15) feet for the ground floor and twenty (20) feet for the second and third floors when adjacent to a residential use or zone

     2.     If front setbacks are provided, they shall only be used for landscaping, outdoor merchandise display, outdoor dining, or active pedestrian uses such as plazas, entries or seating.

     3.     No wall or architectural feature shall project beyond ground floor setbacks except balconies and bay windows.

     4.     Open air setbacks may be permitted for ground floor, nonresidential uses to allow for outdoor use such as outdoor dining, merchandise display, or entry forecourts. Projects incorporating open air setbacks shall include elements defining the wall plane at the edge of the front property line.

     5.     A ground floor porch, uncovered or covered and open on three sides, may encroach into the front or side setbacks by up to ten feet.

     6.     Any project abutting a single-family residential zone shall comply with R-1 building bulk limits along the common boundary.

     G.    Building Size. The maximum building size in the MU zone shall be thirty-five thousand (35,000) square feet.

     H.    Height.

     1.     With the exception of architectural extensions allowed per subsection (H)(2), no building shall exceed three stories or thirty-five (35) feet to the highest point on the building or thirty (30) feet to the top of the building wall.

     2.     Architectural extensions of up to fifty (50) feet in height are allowed for an area of up to ten percent of a building’s floor area, provided that the horizontal dimension of each individual extension does not exceed twenty (20) percent of the corresponding building dimension.

     3.     No accessory structure shall exceed fifteen (15) feet to the highest point on the structure.

     4.     Height shall be measured from the nearest adjacent finished grade, except that fill exceeding three feet shall be counted as part of the building height.

     I.      Parking.

     1.     Residential Uses. The standards for parking for residential uses are as follows:

     a.     Minimum parking required for residents:

     0 to 1-bedroom units: one space per unit;

     2-bedroom units: two spaces per unit;

     3-bedroom units: two and one-fourth spaces per unit;

     4 or more bedroom units: two and one-half spaces per unit.

     b.     Minimum parking required for guests: one-fourth spaces per unit, in addition to resident parking required in subsection (I)(1)(a).

     c.     At least one parking space per unit shall be covered. Guest parking may be uncovered.

     2.     Restaurants. The minimum parking required for restaurants shall be one space for the first two hundred fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area, and fifteen (15) spaces for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.

     3.     Offices. The minimum parking required for offices shall be three spaces for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.

     4.     All Other Uses. Unless otherwise specified in Chapter 11.38, the minimum parking required for all other uses shall be one space for the first one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area and three spaces for each additional one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.

     5.     Shared Parking. Shared parking shall be allowed if sufficient parking is provided during the peak parking demand period as demonstrated by meeting all the following requirements:

     a.     On-Site. Shared on-site parking between land uses with different periods of peak parking demand is allowed for all uses when written evidence documenting that: (i) the existing or anticipated land use(s) will have different periods of peak parking demand; and (ii) the shared parking arrangement can accommodate the parking demand for all uses, is provided and approved by the decisionmaker.

     b.     Off-Site. Shared off-site parking between land uses with different periods of peak parking demand will be allowed for all uses when written evidence documenting that: (i) the existing or anticipated land use(s) will have different periods of peak parking demand; and (ii) the shared parking arrangement can accommodate the parking demand for all uses, is provided and approved by the decisionmaker and the following conditions are met:

     i.      Off-site parking is located within one thousand two hundred (1,200) feet of the associated use. Further distance may be allowed if approved by the decisionmaker.

     ii.     Appropriate signage to direct vehicles to the shared parking facility, and pedestrians from the parking facility to each use, is installed.

     iii.    Pedestrian access from the parking facility to each use is free of physical barriers such as walls and significant vegetation.

     iv.    A parking management plan is provided specifying parking spaces assignments, as applicable, and detailing any permit, time limit or other restrictions to ensure that spaces are available for the intended users.

     v.     Shared driveway access for all users of the parking facility is guaranteed.

     vi.    A signed agreement between the applicant, the property owners and the city to share their parking is approved by the city and recorded against the participating properties. The agreement shall obligate the subject parking spaces to their respective uses and users. This agreement will impact other future uses on the respective properties and may limit uses that might otherwise wish to locate on the participating properties. The agreement shall be approved by the city.

     6.     Reductions in Minimum Parking. The minimum number of parking spaces provided may be reduced for affordable housing units, senior housing units, or under other appropriate circumstances when written evidence justifying the reduction is provided and approved by the decisionmaker.

     7.     Location. Vehicle parking shall be located behind buildings.

     J.      Landscaping. The standards for landscaping in the MU zone are as follows:

     1.     Minimum Landscaping. A minimum of ten percent of the total lot shall be landscaped unless otherwise specified during review of the proposed project by the planning commission or design review commission.

     2.     Water Efficiency. All landscaped areas shall be designed and maintained in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 4.23 Water Efficient Landscaping.

     3.     Trees. Street trees shall be selected and located in accordance with the city’s standards for street trees, and continuously maintained by the property owner. Any removal or pruning of existing trees shall conform to the requirements of the city’s tree preservation ordinance (adopted by Ordinance No. 178 and any successor thereto).

     4.     Maintenance. Landscaped areas shall be permanently maintained with proper care, weeding, pruning and irrigation. Plants shall be replaced as necessary to maintain conformance with approved landscaping plans.

     5.     Parking Area Landscaping.

     a.     Buffers. Parking areas, including internal circulation areas, parking spaces and turnaround areas, shall be separated from any public rights-of-way by a minimum eight-foot wide (inside dimension) planter area or landscape strip, except at driveway and walkway openings. A minimum five-foot landscaped buffer shall remain between any uncovered parking space and the property line. This requirement may be waived by the community planning director if the project is designed to minimize the visual impact of parking and circulation areas through building orientation or other means.

     b.     All landscaped areas adjacent to parking, circulation and vehicle storage areas shall be enclosed by a raised six-inch concrete curb or low wall.

     c.     All areas not used for vehicle storage or circulation shall be landscaped.

     d.     Parking lots shall include one planter at each end of parking aisles and one additional planter for each ten parking spaces as follows:

     i.      At least one tree shall be provided per each prescribed planter. Trees shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) gallon size at planting and at least twenty-five (25) percent of the trees shall be of twenty-four (24) inch box size or greater at planting. At least seventy-five (75) percent of the required trees shall be of species having a mature canopy index of at least five hundred (500). The canopy index is the product of the canopy width multiplied by the tree height (in feet).

     ii.     Except as required for vehicular movement, planter lengths shall equal the adjacent parking space lengths.

     iii.    Planters shall average at least five feet in width.

     iv.    Where deemed appropriate in design review, clustered landscaping areas within the parking lot may be substituted for the prescribed planters.

     K.    Lighting.

     1.     Exterior lighting devices for parking areas and pedestrian walkways shall be provided at adequate levels for safety and security.

     2.     Lighting shall be designed to conform to city standards and prevent spillover onto adjacent properties.

     3.     Accent lighting of buildings and landscaping is encouraged.

     4.     High-intensity lighting, such as neon perimeter strips, is not allowed.

     L.     Equipment and Utilities. Equipment and utilities for such buildings shall meet the following standards:

     1.     Building service equipment shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be screened to minimize noise and visual impacts to neighboring properties.

     2.     Utility service lines shall comply with the underground utilities ordinance.

     M.    Storage Areas. Storage areas visible from adjacent windows or from the public right-of-way shall be screened.

     N.    Walls.

     1.     No wall within a required street-facing setback shall exceed three and one-half feet in height. Walls of less than two feet in height, allowing for seating, are encouraged.

     2.     Where a project abuts a residential zone, a six-foot high screening wall, of solid concrete, brick or stone, is required. The wall shall be of finished appearance on both sides. Any length exceeding twenty-five (25) feet shall be broken up through landscaping, substantial reveals or pilasters, and/or other means. The wall shall be stepped down to a height not to exceed forty-two (42) inches when it is located within the extension of the residential front or side street yard setback area(s).

     3.     The planning commission may modify or waive wall requirements after notification and an opportunity to be heard has been given to property owners affected by the proposed modification or waiver.

     O.    Refuse Areas. Each development shall provide at least one screened refuse area, at least ten square feet in area per one thousand (1,000) square feet of building area, as follows:

     1.     All refuse storage areas must be accessible for pickup, and shall be situated at the rear or side of the building, out of public view.

     2.     Each storage area and the access to it shall be smooth, level concrete, and provided with a water line, drain, and self-closing gate.

     3.     Each refuse storage area shall be screened by plantings and a minimum six-foot high wall constructed of decorative block or other nonflammable material complementary to the project.

     4.     The requirement for the refuse area or its placement may be modified or waived by the design review board or planning commission if it is determined that site conditions present an undue hardship.

     P.     Outside Merchandise Displays. Outdoor merchandise displays are subject to approval by the community development director, based on submittal of a written description of the proposed display, a site plan, and a schedule for display. Outdoor merchandise displays may be permitted in accordance with the following standards:

     1.     Displays shall be less than twenty (20) square feet in area per business, except that larger displays may be permitted for nursery goods, including Christmas tree sales;

     2.     Any adjacent sidewalk shall retain at least six feet in width;

     3.     Displays should be removed when businesses are closed;

     4.     No packaged goods should be displayed.

     Q.    Residential Standards.

     1.     A minimum of three hundred (300) square feet of open space shall be provided for each dwelling unit, except that lots under five thousand (5,000) square feet in area are not required to meet the open space area standard.

     2.     A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of secure storage per dwelling unit shall be provided in addition to all storage areas located within dwelling units.

     3.     Mixed use projects shall be designed to minimize noise and vibration from commercial uses located below residential uses. (Ord. 419 § 38, 2014)

 

11.17.040 Design standards.
     A.    Building Orientation.

     1.     Buildings should be oriented towards the street, with direct pedestrian entrances off adjacent sidewalks.

     2.     Mid-block pass-throughs, either within structures or exterior, are encouraged to provide ease of access to parking areas and add interest to the pedestrian experience.

     3.     Direct pedestrian connections should be created throughout the project between residential and nonresidential uses and parking areas.

     B.     Curb Cuts. Curb cuts shall be minimized wherever possible.

     C.     Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining is encouraged, provided that any adjacent sidewalk retains at least six feet in width.

     D.    Pedestrian Amenities. Enhanced pedestrian amenities should be provided to create an active street environment. Amenities may include seating, pedestrian area lighting, plazas, courtyards, paseos, paving treatments, public art, street furniture, water features, additional landscaping, additional common open space, or similar items located adjacent to sidewalks.

     E.     Architectural Features.

     1.     Compatibility. Architectural features should be internally consistent, complement the character of the surrounding uses, and be compatible with the design, quality, and scale of buildings in the area, with an emphasis on pedestrian-scale features.

     2.     Façade Elements.

     a.     Carefully detailed elements, such as deep openings, reveals, shadow lines, articulation of edges and surface breaks, and pilasters, are encouraged, with emphasis given to the tops of buildings through cornice or eave treatments. Alcoves, benches, gates, sconces, wall fountains, and such features are encouraged as façade elements.

     b.     “Stage set” façades created by painted images or applying detail to blank walls are prohibited.

     c.     Façades should be articulated within the primary rhythm of fifteen (15) to twenty (20) foot modules, and modulated by pilasters at least every twenty-five (25) to fifty (50) feet.

     3.     Entry Articulation. Entries should be the focus of the architecture of their respective elevations. Landscaping, hardscaping and architecture should be integrated to feature entries as dominant elements of the design.

     4.     Balconies. Balconies are encouraged as amenities to the units and enhancing elements within the building facades. Where balconies at or above the second floor overlook yards of abutting residential properties or parking areas, effective landscaping screening should be provided. Trellises or canopy structures are recommended for privacy where higher units overlook private open space.

     5.     Color. Light reflectance value should not exceed eighty (80) percent for walls or fifty (50) percent for visible roofs. (Ord. 419 § 38, 2014)

 

11.17.050 Project review.
     A.    All projects proposed for the MU zone are subject to review by the design commission or its successor prior to review by the planning commission. The planning commission may remand projects to the design commission or its successor for final details, when appropriate.

     B.     Any decision of the planning commission under the provisions of this chapter is subject to appeal to the city council.

     C.     No occupancy permit shall be granted until plantings as approved on the landscaping plans are established, to be verified by two inspections approximately one month apart. (Ord. 419 § 38, 2014)

Chapter 11.18 STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC RESIDENTIAL USES
11.18.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide for housing to serve the needs of various segments of the population, including lower income families and individuals, the homeless, and individuals with disabilities. This section addresses development standards for emergency shelters, transitional and supportive housing, and single room occupancy (SRO) housing, and reasonable accommodation as required by state law. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

 

11.18.020 Emergency shelters.
     A.    Purpose. In accordance with state law, the city of La Cañada Flintridge has a responsibility to provide adequate sites for emergency shelters that serve homeless individuals and families. This chapter establishes development standards for emergency shelter facilities.

     B.     Definition. As used in this chapter, “emergency shelter” means a temporary residential facility that provides overnight accommodations and residential services for homeless persons and/or families on a short-term basis.

     C.     Standards for Emergency Shelter Facilities.

     1.     Minimum Separation. Emergency shelters shall be located at least three hundred (300) feet away apart, measured in a straight line between property lines of each shelter without regard to intervening structures or objects.

     2.     Maximum Number of Beds. Emergency shelters shall have no more than thirty (30) beds.

     3.     Limited Terms of Stay. The maximum term of stay at an emergency shelter is thirty (30) days in any consecutive twelve (12) month period.

     4.     On-Site Waiting Area. Emergency shelters shall provide an enclosed or screened waiting area that is physically separated from the public right-of-way in order to accommodate clients and to prevent queuing into the public right-of-way. Waiting areas shall be at least ten square feet per bed.

     5.     Lighting. Exterior lighting shall be provided for pedestrian pathways and parking areas that serve emergency shelters. Lighting shall be adequate for security and designed to prevent spillover on adjacent properties.

     6.     Parking. The minimum number of parking spaces required for emergency shelters is one space for every four beds, one-half space for every bedroom designated for families, and one space per each staff member.

     7.     On-Site Security. Emergency shelters shall provide on-site security during all hours when shelters are open.

     8.     Exterior Maintenance. Emergency shelter operators shall ensure that the exterior of shelters, including signs and accessory structures, are properly maintained. Emergency shelter sites shall be kept free of litter and graffiti at all times. Graffiti shall be removed within forty-eight (48) hours of discovery.

     9.     Supervision. Emergency shelters shall provide on-site supervision at all times when shelters are open. Shelter operators or their designees shall patrol areas within one thousand (1,000) feet of the shelter when shelters are open and for one hour after the closing each morning to ensure that shelter residents and/or individuals who have been denied shelter access do not congregate in the adjacent neighborhoods.

     10.   Management Plan. Emergency shelter operators shall provide the city a management plan that addresses management experience, client supervision, client services, standards to govern expulsions, good neighbor issues, transportation, lights-out times, and food services provided. The management plan shall also include a floor plan that demonstrates compliance with the physical standards of this chapter, as well as contact information for the shelter operator. Management plans shall be submitted to and approved by the community development director prior to start of operations.

     D.    Design and Amenities.

     1.     Facility Layout. Living, dining, and kitchen areas within emergency shelters shall be physically separated from sleeping areas.

     2.     Sleeping Area. Sleeping areas within emergency shelters shall be at least thirty-five (35) square feet per bed.

     3.     Secure Area. Secure areas shall be provided for personal property in emergency shelters.

     4.     Bathroom Facilities. Emergency shelters shall provide facilities for personal care (i.e., bathroom and shower facilities).

     5.     Telephone Services. Emergency shelters shall provide telephone services that are separate from the office phones to protect privacy. Any payphone provided at an emergency shelter shall allow for call-out service only.

     6.     Emergency shelters shall post operator contact information at shelter entrances. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

 

11.18.030 Transitional housing.
     A.    Purpose. This section regulates the development and operation of transitional housing uses, which facilitate the transition of homeless individuals and families from temporary to permanent housing. State law requires the city to permit transitional housing as a residential use subject only to those restrictions that apply to comparable residential uses in the same zone.

     B.     Definition. For the purposes of this section, “transitional housing” means buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of assistance.

     C.     Location. Transitional housing units shall be subject to the same permit requirements and development standards that apply to comparable residential uses in the same zone. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

 

11.18.040 Supportive housing.
     A.    Purpose. This section regulates the development and operation of supportive housing uses. State law requires the city to permit supportive housing as a residential use for a target population, subject to those restrictions that apply to comparable residential uses in the same zone.

     B.     Definitions.

     1.     As used in this section, “supportive housing” means housing with no limit on length of stay, that is occupied by the target population, and that is linked to on-site or off-site service that assists the supportive housing resident in retaining the housing, improving his or her health status, and maximizing his or her ability to live and, when possible, work in the community.

     2.     As used in this section, “target population” means persons with low incomes who have one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV, AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health condition, or individuals eligible for services provided pursuant to the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Division 4.5 (commencing with Section 4500) of the Welfare and Institutions Code) and may include, among other populations, adults, emancipated minors, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

     C.     Location. Supportive housing uses shall be subject to the same permit requirements and development standards that apply to comparable residential uses in the same zone. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

 

11.18.050 Single room occupancy facilities.
     A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the development of single room occupancy (SRO) facilities within the city to serve the housing needs of lower-income residents, and to regulate the development and operation of SRO facilities within the city.

     B.     Standards for SROs.

     1.     Unit Size. The minimum size of a single-occupancy SRO unit shall be two hundred (200) square feet. The minimum size of a double-occupancy SRO unit shall be three hundred fifty (350) square feet.

     2.     Occupancy. An SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons. Double occupancy units shall make up no more than ten percent of an SRO facility.

     3.     Common Area. SRO facilities shall provide a minimum of ten square feet of interior common area for each unit within the SRO facility, or two hundred (200) square feet total, whichever is greater. Common areas shall not include: (a) janitorial storage; (b) laundry facilities; (c) shared kitchen facilities; or (d) common hallways.

     4.     Parking. The minimum number of parking spaces required for SRO facilities is one space per employee or resident manager, and one space per unit.

     C.     Design and Amenities.

     1.     Kitchens. Each SRO unit shall have a kitchen sink with hot and cold water, a garbage disposal, a counter top measuring a minimum of eighteen (18) inches wide by twenty-four (24) inches deep, a refrigerator, a stove/oven unit and/or microwave. If the SRO unit does not have a stove/oven unit then at least one stove/oven unit shall be provided on each floor of the structure in a common kitchen available for residents.

     2.     Bathrooms. Each SRO unit shall include a bathroom containing a sink, toilet, and shower or bathtub. If the unit is double occupancy, the bathroom shall be in a separate enclosed compartment within the unit with an interior lockable door. This compartment shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) square feet.

     3.     Closets. Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet located within the unit.

     4.     Laundry Facilities. SRO facilities shall provide laundry facilities in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every ten SRO units, with at least one washer and dryer per floor.

     5.     Cleaning Supply Room. SRO facilities shall provide a cleaning supply room or utility closet on each floor, including a wash tub with hot and cold running water.

     D.    Management.

     1.     A management plan shall be submitted to the community development director for review and approval with the conditional use permit application. Approval or denial shall be at the discretion of the community development director.

     2.     The management plan shall contain management policies and operations, rental procedures and rates, tenant screening procedures, procedures for handling tenant grievances, maintenance plans, residency and guest rules and procedures, security procedures, and staffing expectations.

     3.     A SRO manager shall be on-site at all times.

     4.     The SRO owner shall file an annual report with the community development director that includes the range of monthly rents charged, occupancy rates, and the number of vehicles owned by residents parked at the site.

     5.     SRO units shall be rented for a minimum of one month. Rental terms shall not exceed six months per term. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

 

11.18.060 Reasonable accommodation for individuals with disabilities.
     A.    Purpose. It is the policy of the city, pursuant to the Federal Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 and the California Fair Employment and Housing Act (collectively, the “Fair Housing Laws”), to provide individuals with disabilities reasonable accommodation in rules, policies, practices and procedures to ensure equal access to housing and facilitate the development of housing for individuals with disabilities. The purpose of this chapter is to establish procedures for making requests for reasonable accommodation in land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures of the city and to establish criteria for consideration of such requests.

     B.     Applicability.

     1.     Reasonable accommodation in the land use and zoning context means providing individuals with disabilities or developers of housing for people with disabilities, flexibility in the application of land use, zoning and building regulations, policies, practices and procedures when it is necessary to eliminate barriers to fair housing opportunities.

     2.     An individual with a disability is someone who has a physical or mental impairment that limits one or more major life activities, anyone who is regarded as having such impairment, or anyone who is defined as disabled under the Fair Housing Laws.

     3.     A request for reasonable accommodation may be made by any person with a disability, their representative, or developer of housing for persons with disabilities, when the application of a zoning ordinance, or other building or land use regulation, policy or practice acts as a barrier to fair housing opportunities.

     4.     A request for reasonable accommodation may be made on any property zoned or used for housing and may be filed at any time that the accommodation may be necessary to ensure equal access to housing. If an individual needs and requests assistance in making the request for reasonable accommodation, the city shall provide assistance to ensure that the process is accessible.

     C.     Procedure for Requesting a Reasonable Accommodation.

     1.     A request for reasonable accommodation shall be submitted on an application form provided by the director of community development. The application form shall contain the following information:

     a.     The applicant’s name, address and telephone number.

     b.     If not the applicant, the identity of the disabled person(s), and the applicant’s relation to the disabled person(s).

     c.     A statement that the applicant is either an individual with a disability, is applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability, or is a developer of housing for one or more individuals with a disability.

     d.     The address of the property for which the request is being made, including the name and address of the property owner.

     e.     A description of the current use of the property.

     f.      A description of the requested accommodation.

     g.     The municipal code section for which the request for reasonable accommodation is being made.

     h.     A statement of the reason why the requested accommodation is reasonable and necessary for the needs of the disabled person(s) to eliminate a barrier to fair housing opportunities and provide the identified disabled individual(s) with an equal opportunity to use and enjoy the dwelling.

     i.      A summary of any potential means and alternatives considered in evaluating the need for the accommodation.

     j.      Copies of memoranda, correspondence, pictures, plans, or background information reasonably necessary to reach a decision regarding the need for the accommodation.

     k.     Other supportive information deemed necessary by the city to facilitate proper consideration of the request.

     2.     Along with the application the applicant shall submit a filing fee in an amount established by city council resolution, which may be amended from time to time.

     D.    Reviewing Authority.

     1.     The planning commission shall be the reviewing authority for a request for reasonable accommodation in the following instances:

     a.     Construction of the project for which the reasonable accommodation is being made also requires any of the following discretionary permit(s) or approval(s):

     i.      A planning commission hillside development permit (see Section 11.35.060(C)(2)); and/or

     ii.     Planning commission second floor review (see Sections 11.11.050(A)(3)(a)(ii) and 11.45.050(B)(2)); and/or

     iii.    Floor area review (see Section 11.45.030); and/or

     iv.    Large garage review (see Section 11.45.020).

     b.     The reasonable accommodation would have required a variance, a planning commission setback modification, or a conditional use permit, except that the applicant shall not be required to apply for these approvals; and/or

     c.     The director of community development reasonably determines that a request for reasonable accommodation, for which he or she is the reviewing authority, is more appropriately decided by the planning commission.

     2.     The director of community development, or designee, shall be the reviewing authority in all other instances not addressed in subsection (D)(1).

     E.     Requirement for Public Hearing.

     1.     Unless timely requested by an interested person, no public hearing shall be required for reasonable accommodation requests where the director of community development, or designee, is the reviewing authority.

     2.     Public hearings shall be required for reasonable accommodation requests where the planning commission is the reviewing authority.

     F.     Notice to Surrounding Property Owners.

     1.     Notice Requirements.

     a.     For reasonable accommodation requests where the director of community development, or designee, is the reviewing authority, notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all adjacent properties to the property which is the subject of the request. In the event that the request for reasonable accommodation is being reviewed in conjunction with some other process, notice shall be included with the notice of the other proceeding and comply with the notice requirements thereof. In either instance, the notice shall indicate that any interested person may request a formal hearing with the director of community development, or designee, on the request and shall describe the approval process.

     b.     For reasonable accommodation requests where the planning commission is the reviewing authority, notice shall be mailed to the owners of record of all properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the property which is the subject of the request. In the event that the request for reasonable accommodation is being reviewed in conjunction with some other process, notice shall be included with the notice of the other proceeding and comply with the notice requirements thereof.

     2.     Contents of Notice. The notice shall include the name of the applicant, address of the property subject of the reasonable accommodation request, a description of the reasonable accommodation request, and a statement that an applicant has filed a request for reasonable accommodation with the director of community development.

     G.    Findings for Approval of a Request for Reasonable Accommodation.

     1.     The following findings shall be made by the applicable reviewing authority in order to approve a request for reasonable accommodation:

     a.     Whether the housing, which is subject of the request for reasonable accommodation, will be used by an individual with disabilities protected under the Fair Housing Laws.

     b.     Whether the requested accommodation is reasonable and necessary to make housing available to an individual with a disability as protected under the Fair Housing Laws.

     c.     Whether there are alternatives to the requested accommodation that may provide an equivalent level of benefit.

     d.     Whether the requested accommodation would impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the city.

     e.     Whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the city’s land use and zoning or building program.

     2.     The findings set forth above shall be incorporated into the written decision by the applicable reviewing authority to approve, approve with modifications, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation.

     H.    Conditions of Approval.

     1.     The reviewing authority may impose conditions upon the approval of the reasonable accommodation request deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the reasonable accommodation would comply with the findings required by subsection (G)(1). Conditions of approval may include, but are not limited to, those that provide for any or all of the following:

     a.     That the reasonable accommodation shall only be applicable to a particular individual.

     b.     Inspection of the affected premises prior to and/or after any physical alteration.

     c.     Removal of the alteration if the need for which the accommodation was granted no longer exists.

     d.     That upon transfer of ownership of the property the affected premises be returned to its physical condition prior to the granting of the application unless the transferee of ownership applies for and is granted a new reasonable accommodation.

     e.     That prior to issuance of any permits relative to an approved reasonable accommodation, the reviewing authority may require the applicant to record a covenant in the county recorder’s office acknowledging and agreeing to comply with the terms and conditions established in the decision.

     I.      Written Decision.

     1.     The reviewing authority shall issue a written decision that incorporates the findings set forth in subsection (G)(1), states whether the request is approved, approved with conditions as permitted by subsection H, or denied, and describes the applicable appeal process.

     2.     Where the planning commission is the reviewing authority, the written decision may be set forth by resolution.

     3.     The written decision of the reviewing authority shall be mailed to:

     a.     The applicant at the address listed in the application; and

     b.     Where the director of community development, or designee, is the reviewing authority, the written decision shall be mailed in accordance with subsection (F)(1)(a).

     4.     The written decision by the reviewing authority shall be final unless it is timely appealed as set forth in subsection J.

     J.      Appeal.

     1.     Where the director of community development, or designee, is the reviewing authority, the decision may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Section 11.49.010.

     2.     Where the planning commission is the reviewing authority, the decision may be appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 11.49.020.

     3.     All appeals shall contain a statement of grounds for the appeal.

     4.     Upon appeal, the planning commission or city council, as applicable, shall take action by resolution on the reasonable accommodation application. The planning commission or city council, as applicable, shall consider the reviewing authority’s decision, the required findings in subsection (G)(1), and the claims contained in the appeal. The planning commission or city council, as applicable, can approve, approve with modifications, or reverse the decision of the reviewing authority.

     5.     The decision of the planning commission on appeal is final unless the decision is appealed to the city council in accordance with Section 11.49.020.

     6.     The decision of the city council on appeal is final.

     7.     No reasonable accommodation shall be effective and no development permitted by a reasonable accommodation decision shall be initiated until the appeal period is exhausted without an appeal being filed or until the ruling on any appeal by the planning commission or city council, as applicable, whichever is later. (Ord. 419 § 39, 2014)

Chapter 11.19 AFFORDABLE HOUSING DENSITY BONUS
11.19.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to encourage the production of affordable housing in compliance with California Government Code Section 65915 et seq., and the goals of the city’s housing element, as well as to establish procedures for the granting of affordable housing density bonuses. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.020 Eligibility.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the following:

     A.    Housing developments that include:

     1.     A minimum of five percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units for very low-income households,

     2.     A minimum of ten percent of the total number of proposed dwelling units for low-income households;

     B.     Senior citizen housing developments or mobile home parks that limit residency based on age requirements for housing older persons in compliance with California Civil Code Section 798.76 or 799.5;

     C.     Common interest developments as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351 that include a minimum of ten percent of the total dwelling units for persons and families of moderate income, provided that all dwelling units in the development are offered to the public for purchase;

     D.    Donations of land to the city for very low-income dwelling units in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.19.050;

     E.     The provision of child care facilities in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.19.070;

     F.     Condominium conversions where at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total dwelling units are provided to low- or moderate-income as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, or fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project are provided to lower-income households as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5.

     As used in this chapter, housing development means a development project for five or more dwelling units, and also includes a subdivision or common interest development as defined in California Civil Code Section 1351, approved by the city, which consists of residential units or unimproved residential lots and either a project to substantially rehabilitate and convert an existing commercial building to residential use or the substantial rehabilitation of an existing multifamily dwelling, where the result of the rehabilitation would be a net increase in available residential units. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.030 Allowed density bonus.
     A.    Calculation of Density Bonus. For activities meeting the eligibility requirements of Section 11.19.020, a density bonus shall be calculated as follows:

     1.     For housing developments providing a minimum of five percent very low-income dwelling units as described in Section 11.19.020(A)(1), a density bonus of twenty (20) percent shall be allowed. The density bonus shall be increased by two and one-half percentage points for each one percentage point increase in the number of very low-income dwelling units provided, up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent.

     2.     For housing developments providing a minimum of ten percent lower income dwelling units as described in Section 11.19.020(A)(2), a density bonus of twenty (20) percent shall be allowed. The density bonus shall be increased by one and one-half percentage points for each one percentage point increase in the number of lower income dwelling units provided, up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent.

     3.     For senior citizen housing developments or mobile home parks as described in Section 11.19.020(B), a density bonus of twenty (20) percent of the senior dwelling units shall be allowed.

     4.     For common interest developments providing a minimum of ten percent moderate-income dwelling units as described in Section 11.19.020(C), a density bonus of five percent shall be allowed. The density bonus shall be increased by one percentage point for each one percentage point increase in the number of moderate-income dwelling units provided, up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent.

     5.     For land donations as described in Section 11.19.020(D), a density bonus shall be allowed in accordance with Section 11.19.050.

     6.     For the provision of child care facilities as described in Section 11.19.020(E), a density bonus shall be provided in accordance with Section 11.19.060.

     7.     For condominium conversions as described in Section 11.19.020(F), a density bonus shall be provided in accordance with Section 11.19.070.

     B.     Summary Table. The following table summarizes the allowable density bonuses in this chapter:

 

Table 1. Allowable Density Bonus

 

Category

Min. Qualifying Units

Min. Allowed Bonus

Add’l Bonus for Increase in Qualifying Units

Qualifying Units Required for Maximum Bonus

Housing Development

5% very low-income

20%

2.5

11%

10% lower income

20%

1.5

20%

Senior Citizen Housing Development/ Qualifying Mobile Home Park

100% senior citizen units

20%

NA

100%

Common Interest Developments

10% moderate-income units

5%

1.0

40%

Land Donation

Per Section 11.19.050

Child Care Facility

Per Section 11.19.060

Condominium Conversion

Per Section 11.19.070

 

     C.     For purposes of calculating the amount of the density bonus pursuant to this section, the applicant shall select whether the bonus shall be awarded on the basis of eligible units under Section 11.19.020(A), (B) or (C).

     D.    In no case shall a project be entitled to a density bonus of more than thirty-five (35) percent. However, the city may choose to allow a density bonus greater than thirty-five (35) percent on increase the density bonus allowed a project that does meet all the requirements of this chapter. A developer may also choose to accept a lower density bonus than allowed under this chapter.

     E.     Density bonus units shall not be included when determining the number of units provided to qualify for a density bonus. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     F.     The granting of a density bonus shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.040 Development incentives.
     A.    For the purposes of this chapter, incentive means:

     1.     A reduction in site development standards or a modification of zoning code requirements or architectural design requirements that exceed minimum building standards, including, but not limited to, a reduction in setback and square footage requirements and in the number of required parking spaces that results in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

     2.     Approval of mixed use zoning in conjunction with the project if commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses will reduce the cost of the housing development and if the commercial, office, industrial, or other land uses are compatible with the project and the existing or planned development in the area where the proposed project will be located.

     3.     Other regulatory incentives proposed by the developer or the city that result in identifiable, financially sufficient, and actual cost reductions.

     B.     For activities meeting the eligibility requirements of Section 11.19.020(A) or (C), development incentives shall be provided as follows, unless the city makes a written finding in accordance with subsection F of this section:

     1.     One development incentive for projects that include at least ten percent of the total units for lower income households, at least five percent for very low-income households, or at least ten percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

     2.     Two development incentives for projects that include at least twenty (20) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least ten percent for very low-income households, or at least twenty (20) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

     3.     Three development incentives for projects that include at least thirty (30) percent of the total units for lower income households, at least fifteen (15) percent for very low-income households, or at least thirty (30) percent for persons and families of moderate income in a common interest development.

     C.     For activities meeting the eligibility requirements of Section 11.19.020(E), development incentives shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.19.060.

     D.    For activities meeting the eligibility requirements of Section 11.19.020(F), development incentives shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 11.19.070.

     E.     Summary Table. The following table summarizes the allowable development incentives in this chapter:

 

Table 2. Allowable Development Incentives

 

Category

Min. Qualifying Units

Number of Allowable Incentives

Housing Development

10 percent lower income

1

20 percent lower income

2

30 percent lower income

3

5 percent very low-income

1

10 percent very low-income

2

15 percent very low-income

3

Senior Citizen Housing Development/ Qualifying Mobile Home Park

None

Common Interest Developments

10% moderate-income

1

20% moderate-income

2

30% moderate-income

3

Land Donation

None

Child Care Facility

Per Section 11.19.060

Condominium Conversion

Per Section 11.19.070

 

     F.     Development incentives shall be granted in accordance with this section unless the city makes a written finding, based on substantial evidence, of any of the following:

     1.     The development incentive is not required in order to provide for affordable housing costs or affordable rents.

     2.     The development incentive would have a specific adverse impact upon public health and safety or the physical environment or on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact without rendering the development unaffordable to low- and moderate-income households.

     3.     The development incentive would be contrary to state or federal law.

     G.    The granting of a development incentive shall not be interpreted, in and of itself, to require a general plan amendment, local coastal plan amendment, zoning change, or other discretionary approval. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.050 Land donation.
     A.    When an applicant for a tentative subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development approval donates land to the city in accordance with this section, the applicant shall be entitled to a density bonus. The density bonus for land donations shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) percent for a minimum of ten percent very low-income dwelling units. The density bonus shall be increased by one percentage point for each one percentage point increase in the number of very low-income dwelling units, up to a maximum density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent. All density calculations resulting in fractional units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

     B.     The density bonus for land donation shall be in addition to any density bonus allowed by Section 11.19.030, up to a maximum combined density bonus of thirty-five (35) percent if an applicant is allowed a density bonus under both Section 11.19.030 and this section.

     C.     An applicant shall be eligible for the density bonus described in this section if the following conditions are met:

     1.     The applicant donates and transfers the land no later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or other residential development application.

     2.     The developable acreage and zoning classification of the land being transferred are sufficient to permit construction of units affordable to very low-income households in an amount not less than ten percent of the number of residential units of the proposed development.

     3.     The transferred land is at least one acre in size or of sufficient size to permit development of at least forty (40) dwelling units, has the appropriate general plan designation, is appropriately zoned with appropriate development standards for development at the density described in paragraph (3) of subdivision (c) of California Government Code Section 65583.2, and is or will be served by adequate public facilities and infrastructure.

     4.     No later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or the residential development application, the transferred land shall have all of the permits and approvals, other than building permits, necessary for the development of the very low income housing units on the transferred land including design review approval, if applicable. The city may subject the proposed development to subsequent design review to the extent authorized by subdivision (i) of California Government Code Section 65583.2 if the design is not reviewed by the city prior to the time of transfer.

     5.     The transferred land and the affordable units shall be subject to a deed restriction ensuring continued affordability of the units consistent with this section, which restriction shall be recorded on the property at the time of dedication.

     6.     The land shall be transferred to the city or to a housing developer approved by the city. The city may require the applicant to identify and transfer the land to the developer.

     7.     The transferred land shall be within the boundary of the proposed development or, if the city council agrees, within one-quarter mile of the boundary of the proposed development.

     8.     A proposed source of funding for the very low-income units shall be identified not later than the date of approval of the final subdivision map, parcel map, or residential development application. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.060 Child care facilities.
     A.    For the purposes of this chapter, child care facility means a child day care facility other than a family day care home, including, but not limited to, infant centers, preschools, extended day care facilities, and school age child centers.

     B.     When a developer proposes a project that meets the eligibility requirements described in Section 11.19.020(A) through (C) and includes a child care facility, other than a family day care home, that will be located on the premises of, as part of, or adjacent to the project, the city shall grant either of the following:

     1.     A density bonus of additional residential space that is equal to or greater than the square footage of the child care facility;

     2.     An additional development incentive that significantly contributes to the economic feasibility of the construction of the child care facility.

     C.     The city shall also require that:

     1.     The child care facility remains in operation for a period that is as long as or longer than the length of time during which the affordable housing units must remain affordable; and

     2.     The percentage of children of very low-, low-, or moderate-income households who attend the child care facility shall be the same or greater than the minimum percentage of dwelling units in the project that are required for households at each income level as described in Section 11.19.020.

     D.    Exception. The city shall not be required to provide a density bonus or development incentive for a child care facility if it finds, based on substantial evidence, that the community has adequate child care facilities. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.070 Condominium conversions.
     A.    When an applicant for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project in accordance with California Government Code Section 65915.5 agrees to provide at least thirty-three (33) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to persons and families of low- or moderate-income as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093, or fifteen (15) percent of the total units of the proposed condominium project to lower income households as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50079.5, and agrees to pay for the reasonably necessary administrative costs incurred by the city pursuant to this section, the city shall either: (1) grant a density bonus; or (2) provide other incentives of equivalent financial value.

     B.     The city may place such reasonable conditions on the granting of a density bonus or incentives as it finds appropriate.

     C.     The density bonus for apartment conversions shall be an increase of twenty-five (25) percent over the original number of apartments, to be provided within the existing structure or structures proposed for conversion.

     D.    “Equivalent financial incentives” shall not be construed to require the city to provide cash transfer payments or other monetary compensation but may include the reduction or waiver of requirements that the city might otherwise apply as conditions of conversion approval.

     E.     An application for approval to convert apartments to a condominium project with an affordable housing component shall be processed in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 11.64. An applicant may submit to the city a preliminary proposal prior to the submittal of any formal requests for subdivision map approvals. The city shall, within ninety (90) days of receipt of a written proposal, notify the applicant in writing of the manner in which it will comply with this section.

     F.     Nothing in this section shall be construed to require the city to approve a proposal to convert apartments to condominiums.

     G.    An applicant shall be ineligible for a density bonus or other incentives under this section if the apartments proposed for conversion constitute a housing development for which a density bonus or other incentives were provided under Section 11.19.030 or 11.19.040. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.080 Waiver of development standards.
     A.    For the purposes of this chapter, development standard means a site or construction condition, including, but not limited to, a height limitation, a setback requirement, a floor area ratio, an on-site open space requirement, or a parking ratio that applies to a residential development pursuant to any ordinance, general plan element, specific plan, or other city condition, law, policy, resolution, or regulation.

     B.     In addition to development incentives described in Section 11.19.060, a developer may request the waiver or reduction of any development standard that has the effect of physically precluding a project that meets the eligibility requirements in Section 11.19.020 at the densities or with the incentives permitted by this chapter.

     C.     A proposal for the waiver or reduction of development standards shall neither reduce nor increase the number of incentives permitted in accordance with Section 11.19.060.

     D.    The city shall not be required to grant a waiver or reduction in development standard that would have a specific, adverse impact, as defined in California Government Code Section 65589.5, on health, safety or the physical environment, and for which there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific adverse impact.

     E.     The city shall not be required to grant a waiver or reduction in development standards that would have an adverse impact on any real property that is listed in the California Register of Historical Resources.

     F.     The city shall not be required to grant a waiver or reduction in development standards that would be contrary to state or federal law. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.090 Design standards for affordable housing projects.
     A.    Concurrent Construction. Required affordable dwelling units shall be constructed concurrently with market-rate dwelling units unless the final decisionmaker approves an alternative schedule for construction.

     B.     Integration of Affordable Dwelling Units. Affordable dwelling units shall be dispersed throughout the development and integrated with market-rate units so that affordable and market-rate units are not distinguishable from each other.

     C.     Quality. The design, construction, and quality of materials used in affordable dwelling units shall be the same as market-rate dwelling units. Affordable dwelling units shall be constructed to assure durability and minimize future maintenance costs.

     D.    Project Layout. Floor plans of affordable dwelling units shall be similar to market-rate dwelling units. The number of bedrooms in affordable dwelling units shall be consistent with the mix of bedrooms in market-rate dwelling units.

     E.     Required Parking. Upon request of the developer, the minimum number of parking spaces required for affordable dwelling units may be modified in accordance with California Government Code Section 65915. Consistent with the requirements of California Government Code Section 65915, parking spaces for affordable dwelling units may be provided as tandem or uncovered spaces. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.100 Continued availability.
     A.    In accordance with California Government Code Section 65915, affordable dwelling units that qualify a project for a density bonus or incentive shall continue to be made available as follows:

     1.     Duration.

     a.     The city shall assure the continued affordability of very low- and low-income dwelling units for thirty (30) years, or a longer period of time if required by the construction or mortgage financing assistance program, mortgage insurance program, or rental subsidy program.

     b.     Where there is a direct financial contribution to a housing development through participation in cost of infrastructure, write-down of land costs, or subsidizing the cost of construction, the city shall assure the continued affordability of low- and moderate-income units for thirty (30) years.

     c.     The city shall assure that the initial occupant of any moderate-income dwelling unit in a condominium or planned development is a person or family of moderate income as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50093.

     2.     Cost.

     a.     Rents for lower income density bonus dwelling units shall be set at an affordable rent as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50053.

     b.     Owner-occupied units shall be available at an affordable housing cost as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 50052. The city shall enforce an equity sharing agreement for owner-occupied units, unless it is in conflict with the requirements of another public funding source or law, in accordance with California Government Code Section 65915. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.110 Application procedures.
     The proposal for a density bonus, incentive(s) and/or waiver(s) pursuant to this chapter shall be submitted concurrently with application materials required for the proposed project, and shall include the following information:

     A.    Eligibility Information. The proposal shall provide evidence demonstrating that the project meets eligibility requirements as described in Section 11.19.020.

     B.     Requested Density Bonus. The proposal shall provide calculations showing the maximum base density for the project, the number and percentage of qualifying units, the number of additional market rate units resulting from the density bonus, and the resulting density of the project with the density bonus.

     C.     Requested Development Incentive(s). The proposal shall identify the requested development incentives, document the number and percentage of qualifying units, and provide a pro forma or other report demonstrating that the requested incentive(s) result in identifiable, financially sufficient and actual cost reductions.

     D.    Requested Waiver(s). The proposal shall identify the development standard(s) requested to be waived and provide information demonstrating why the waiver(s) are necessary to make the construction of the project physically possible.

     E.     Land Donation. Projects requesting a density bonus for a land donation shall provide information demonstrating that the facility meets the requirements of Section 11.19.050.

     F.     Child Care Facilities. Projects requesting a density bonus or development incentives for the provision of child care facilities shall provide information demonstrating that the facility meets the requirements of Section 11.19.060.

     G.    Fee. Payment of the fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council to reimburse the city for staff time spent reviewing and processing the application submitted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

 

11.19.120 Affordable housing agreements.
     A.    An affordable housing agreement shall be executed prior to final map approval, or, where a map is not being processed, prior to issuance of building permits for any parcels in the affordable housing agreement. The agreement shall be recorded on any parcels on which incentives or density bonuses are approved, and shall be binding to all future owners and successors in interest. The city attorney shall approve the form of the agreement.

     B.     The affordable housing agreement shall include the following:

     1.     The total number of units approved for the housing development including the number of affordable units.

     2.     A description of the household income group to be accommodated by the housing development, and the standards for determining the corresponding affordable rent or affordable housing cost.

     3.     The location, unit sizes (square feet), and number of bedrooms of the affordable units.

     4.     Affordability restrictions for lower income and very low income target units of at least thirty (30) years.

     5.     A schedule for completion and occupancy of the affordable units.

     6.     A description of the incentives, development standard waivers, and any other optional additional assistance being provided by the city.

     7.     A description of remedies for breach of the agreement by either party (the city may identify tenants or qualified purchasers as third party beneficiaries under the agreement).

     8.     Other provisions to ensure implementation and compliance with this chapter and state law.

     C.     In the case of for-sale housing developments, the affordable housing agreement shall provide for the following regarding the initial sale and use of affordable units during the applicable use restriction period and for the respective affordability period:

     1.     Affordable units shall, upon initial sale, be sold to eligible seniors, very low-income, lower-income or moderate-income families or individuals consistent with the requirements of this chapter.

     2.     Affordable units shall be initially owner-occupied by eligible very low-, lower-income, or moderate-income individuals or families, or by seniors in the case of senior housing developments.

     3.     The agreement shall provide for the continued affordability of the lower income and very low-income target units for the applicable affordability period.

     4.     The agreement shall provide for the recapture by the city of its proportionate share of appreciation upon the resale of moderate income affordable units in accordance with this chapter.

     D.    In the case of rental housing developments, the affordable housing agreement shall provide for the following conditions governing the use of affordable units during the affordability period:

     1.     The rules and procedures for qualifying tenants, establishing affordable rent, filling vacancies, and maintaining affordable units for qualified tenants.

     2.     Provisions requiring the owner to verify tenant incomes and maintain books and records to demonstrate compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 419 § 40, 2014)

Chapter 11.20 ESOZ EMERGENCY SHELTER OVERLAY ZONE
11.20.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the emergency shelter overlay zone is to achieve the following:

     A.    To provide for areas within the community planned development (CPD) zone where emergency shelters, in accordance with Government Code Section 65583, are allowed without a conditional use permit or other discretionary permit.

     B.     To establish designated boundaries in appropriately located CPD zoned areas to maximize the potential for provision of emergency shelters in the city.

     C.     To permit emergency shelter uses in areas that have a realistic potential for development or reuse opportunities for emergency shelters. (Ord. 428 § 2, 2014)

 

11.20.020 Applicability.
     The ESOZ shall apply to several areas of the CPD zone as specified in reference maps adopted with the emergency shelter overlay zone and available in the community development department. All land use regulations and development standards for commercial uses as specified in Chapter 11.14 shall remain in effect. The effect of the emergency shelter overlay zone shall be to define the area of applicability within the CPD zone where emergency shelters shall be permitted with director approval, in compliance with the development standards for emergency shelters as specified in Section 11.18.020. (Ord. 428 § 2, 2014)

 

11.20.030 General provisions.
     A.    Emergency shelters located in the emergency shelter overlay zone shall be developed and operated according to the land use regulations, development standards and design guidelines for the CPD zones, as applicable, as well as Chapter 11.20, and Section 11.18.020.

     B.     Emergency shelters shall be permitted with the approval of an administrative permit within the emergency shelter overlay zone as specified in Table 11.14.020 of Chapter 11.14.

     C.     In accordance with Government Code Section 65583(4), one emergency shelter is permitted by right in the city. Additional emergency shelters beyond those necessary to meet the needs of the city’s homeless population, as required by state law, would require a conditional use permit (CUP) in accordance with Section 11.14.020. (Ord. 428 § 2, 2014)

Chapter 11.24 SPECIAL PURPOSE ZONES—O-S OPEN SPACE ZONE
11.24.010 Intent and purpose.
     Zone O-S is established to provide adequate recreational and open space opportunities for the needs of the population; to preserve and protect natural resources, including those areas necessary for the managed production of resources; and to prevent incompatible development of areas that should be preserved or regulated for scenic, historic, conservation or public health and safety purposes. Provisions of this zone also provide for limited recreational development of land and necessary public facilities. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 299, 1974)

 

11.24.020 Permitted uses.
     Land in zone O-S may be used for the following, provided that such usage is essentially unimproved:

     A.    Outdoor recreation including, but not limited to, parks and other areas of active recreational usage, trails and other suitable corridors; and areas for the preservation of outstanding scenic, geologic, historic and cultural value;

     B.     The preservation of natural resources including, but not limited to, areas required for the preservation of plant and animal life;

     C.     The managed production of resources including, but not limited to, forest lands, rangeland, agricultural lands, mineral deposits and areas of economic importance for the production of food or fiber;

     D.    The regulation of areas for public health and safety including, but not limited to, areas which require special management or regulation because of hazardous or special conditions;

     E.     The conservation of water supply lands including, but not limited to, watershed and groundwater recharge areas. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 299.1, 1974)

 

11.24.030 Uses subject to director’s review and approval.
     If site plans thereunder are first submitted to and approved by the director pursuant to the following findings:

     A.    That such site plans comply with the provisions of this code; and

     B.     That the facilities are clearly accessory and subordinate to, will not alter the nature of, and are limited to these facilities necessary for public utilization of the open space land; the open space land may be used for the following uses:

     1.     The following accessory buildings and structures:

     a.     Comfort stations,

     b.     Maintenance buildings, not to exceed four hundred (400) square feet,

     c.     Residence, caretaker, for use by a caretaker or supervisor and his or her immediate family where continuous supervision is required.

 

     C.     Access to property lawfully used for a purpose not permitted in zone O-S, provided no other practical access to such property is available, and such access will not alter the character of the premises in respect to permitted uses in zone O-S. (Ord. 154 § 2, 1987; LACC Ord. 1494 § 299.5, 1974)

 

11.24.040 Uses subject to permits.
     Premises in zone O-S may be used for:

     The following uses, provided a conditional use permit has first been obtained as provided in Chapter 11.43, and while such permit is in full force and effect in conformity with the conditions of such permit for:

     Additional facilities as long as such facilities are clearly secondary and subordinate to, will not alter the nature of, and are limited to those facilities necessary for public utilization of the open space land. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 299.7, 1974)

Chapter 11.26 PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICE(S) FACILITIES
11.26.010 Purpose and Intent.
     Personal wireless service(s) facilities (PWSF), if not properly integrated or screened from view, will adversely affect the character and visual appearance of the city. It is the purpose of this chapter to establish uniform and comprehensive development standards that will maintain and enhance the city’s character as being a low-density, wooded, predominantly single family residential and hillside community. These standards and controls are intended to ensure that the design and location of these antennas and related facilities are consistent with previously adopted policies of the city as set forth in the general plan; to guide the orderly development of the community; to promote the public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city; to encourage wireless telecommunications service providers to co-locate on new and existing monopole sites; to encourage wireless telecommunications service providers to configure monopoles and antennas in a way that minimizes any adverse visual impact; to enhance the ability of wireless telecommunications service providers to provide such services throughout the city quickly, effectively and efficiently; and to provide all users of real property affected by the placement of PWSF with the opportunity to comment on the placement of such facilities. Furthermore, it is the intent of this chapter to permit PWSF where they can be installed without creating adverse economic, or safety impacts on neighboring property owners and the overall community. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.020 Definitions.
     “Applicant” means a provider of personal wireless services who applies to the city to install a PWSF.

     “Abandonment” means inoperative or unused for a period of one hundred-eighty (180) days or more.

     “Antenna” means that part of a PWSF designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals.

     “Antenna height” means the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure, even if the highest point is an antenna. Measurement of antenna height shall include the antenna, base pad and other facilities, equipment and appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade.

     “Base of Antenna Support Structure” means the lowest point of the base or base pad, whichever is lower.

     “Cell site” or “site” means a parcel of land that contains a PWSF including any antenna, support structure, accessory building, or other components associated with, or ancillary to, the use of the PWSF.

     “Co-location” means the sharing of one PWSF cell site amongst different providers of personal wireless services.

     “COW” means a “cell on wheels” which is a PWSF temporarily rolled in or temporarily installed.

     “Fixed Wireless” means a wireless operation providing services such as local and long distance telephone and high-speed internet to residential and business customers by means of a small, fiat, equipment installation approximately twelve inches by twelve inches (12″ by 12″) (the “fixed wireless remote unit”) on the exterior of each home or business that elects to use this service.

     “Microcell” means a PWSF having a total antenna area that is no more than three hundred (300) square inches in visual cross-section from any direction and no one dimension exceeding four feet.

     “Major facilities addition” means any addition to a PWSF which is not a minor facilities addition.

     “Minor facilities addition” means an addition to a PWSF which does not increase (1) the base of the mounting surface area by more than ten percent, or (2) increase the total antenna surface area by more than ten percent with no single antenna being larger than the largest antenna before the addition, where all percentage increases are measured against the original PWSF approved plans.

     “Monopole” means the type of antenna mount that is with a single shaft (typically of wood, steel or concrete) and has antennas attached to it.

     “Mount” means the structure or surface upon which antennas are mounted. There are three types of mounts: (1) Roof mounted—mounted on the roof of a building, (2) Side mounted—Mounted on the side of a building, and (3) Ground mounted—Mounted on the ground, including but not limited to, monopoles.

     “Personal wireless services (PWS)” means commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services.

     “Personal wireless service facility (PWSF)” means a facility for the provision of personal wireless services.

     “Site users” means those individuals who live at, work at, or regularly visit a site, or who are members of an organization operating on the site; all of whom are readily identifiable from the records of owners or tenants of the site. For illustrative purposes only, primary users of a site based on membership include the members of a church located on the site, the parents of children who attend a school located on the site, those holding membership in a YMCA operating on the site and members of a fraternal organization operating on the site.

     “Stealth” means: (1) not easily identifiable as a PWSF by a casual observer that is located on property other than the cell site, (2) is aesthetically compatible and blends with the cell site and immediate surroundings. Stealthing may be achieved by any means or combination of means including, but not limited to, the use of camouflage, textures, screening, painting or architectural integration with the surroundings (e.g., church steeple or bell tower within a church, unobtrusive penthouse on a roof, false rock, false structure or a tree amongst other trees.)

     “Unlicensed wireless service” means the offering of telecommunications services using duly authorized devices, which do not require individual license, but does not mean the provision of direct-to-home satellite services as defined in section 303(v) of Title 47 of the United States Code. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.030 Applicability.
     Excepting only city-owned or -leased lots or parcels, and the public right-of-way, the procedures and rules set forth in this chapter are applicable to all PWSF sites built, modified or additions thereto after the date this chapter is effective. This chapter does not apply to the use or location of private, residential citizen band radio towers, amateur radio towers, television antennas, fixed wireless facilities as defined in this chapter or private residential dish antennas less than one meter in diameter, used for receiving radio frequency or television signals as defined in section 303(v) of Title 47 of the United States Code, or public safety communications facilities owned or operated by the city. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.040 Submittal requirements.
     No PWSF shall be built, modified or added to without first applying for and obtaining approval from the city as required in this chapter.

     A.    Applications for PWSF or Major Facilities Additions in the Community Planned Development (CPD), Residential Multifamily (R-3), Residential Planned Development (RPD), Public/Semi-Public (PS), Institutional (I), Mixed Use 1 (MU1), Mixed Use 2 (MU2) or Park Zones. Applicants requesting approval for a new PWSF, a new co-location to an existing PWSF or a major facility addition in the above zones shall be required to apply for a telecommunications permit (TP) using the city’s TP application, and to the design commission using the city’s standard design review application. Submittal requirements shall be as contained in these applications, and as required in Section 11.26.050 of this chapter. The planning commission shall hear all TP applications, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 11.49 of the zoning code. The applicant may apply for a preliminary review by the design commission prior to or concurrently with application to the planning commission.

     B.     Applications for Microcells or Minor Facilities Additions in Residential Single-Family (R-1) or Open Space (OS) Zones. All applications for microcells or minor facilities additions to PWSF located in open space (OS), residential single-family (R-I), or within one hundred (100) feet of a residential single-family zone, shall be required to apply for a telecommunications permit (TP) using the city’s standard TP application, and to the design commission using the city’s standard design review application. Submittal requirements shall be as contained in these applications, and as required in Section 11.26.050 of this chapter. The planning commission shall hear all TP applications, subject to appeal pursuant to Chapter 11.49 of the zoning code. The applicant may apply for a preliminary review by the design commission prior to or concurrently with application to the planning commission.

     C.     Applications for Microcells or Minor Facilities Additions Not in Residential Single-Family (R-1) or Open Space (OS) Zones. All applications for microcells or minor facilities additions to PWSF located in zones other than OS, R-1, and greater than one hundred (100) feet from a R-1 zone, shall be subject to the director’s review process using Section 11.45.060 Procedures and requirements for director’s review, modifications and special reviews, and to the design commission using the city’s standard application. Submittal requirements shall be as contained in these applications, and as required in Section 11.26.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 413 § 13, 2013; Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.050 Application content.
     Applications for the approval of PWSF shall include the following information in addition to all other information required in the city’s TP application.

     A.    Notice Requirements. A map depicting all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the project site, a list of the names and addresses of all current owners of these depicted properties, two sets of envelope labels for the property owners and a notice list affidavit are required. Notice of the TP hearing shall be given at least twenty (20) days prior to the hearing to the property owners within five hundred (500) feet of the project site.

 

     B.     Special Notice Requirements. If applicable, based on the submittal site, applicants subject to the city’s standard TP process shall not only comply with all the city’s standard TP public notice requirements, but shall be required to certify that notice will be given by mail to all site users of the proposed site and that the site will be conspicuously posted for notice in compliance with this chapter. Notice shall be posted of the hearing along each three hundred (300) feet or fraction thereof of street frontage of the site of the contemplated work (all sites shall have a minimum of one sign posting). Site posting shall include two-foot-high by four-foot-wide signs containing the city’s case number, description of the request, applicant’s name and contact phone number, the community development department phone number, and the time, place and date of the public hearing. The site shall be posted at least twenty (20) days before the public hearing. For notice by mail, where names and addresses of the site users are only ascertainable from private records, the applicant shall provide a signed affidavit as part of the application package pledging that the holder of such private records shall give notice to all site users at least ten days prior to the public hearing for the TP. The applicant shall certify, in writing to the community development department that he or she has complied with this section.

     C.     Visual Impact Analysis. The applicant shall submit a visual impact analysis, which may include photomontage, field mock-up or other techniques, which demonstrates the potential visual impacts of the proposed facility. Consideration shall be given to views from public areas as well as from private residences. The analysis shall assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and other existing and foreseeable telecommunication facilities in the area, and shall identify and include all feasible mitigation measures consistent with the technological requirements of the proposed telecommunication service. All costs for the visual analysis, and applicable administrative costs, shall be borne by the applicant.

     D.    Co-Location/Height Justification. The applicant must provide justification as to why the proposed height is necessary and why co-location on an existing site is not feasible or desirable (if applicable).

     E.     Justification for R-1 or OS Zone Locations. The applicant must provide justification as to why location in the R-1 or OS zone is necessary and why a PWSF location in CPD, PS, R-3, RPD, MU1, MU2 or Park zones is not feasible (if applicable).

     F.     FCC Standards. A report certified by the radio frequency engineer stating that emissions from the facility will not exceed standards set by the Federal Communication Commission (FCC).

     G.    Maps. A map and narrative description of all existing cell site(s) used by the applicant which are located within the city, and any adjoining cell sites located outside the city that provide coverage area within any portion of the city.

     H.    Coverage Assessment. A report setting forth how and why the proposed site will improve the quality of coverage and indicate the areas where coverage will be improved. The report may include a capacity analysis, a propagation analysis and/or a decibel level report as appropriate to indicate the improved quality of service.

     I.      Licenses. Documentation certifying the applicant has obtained all applicable licenses or other approvals required by the Federal Communications Commission to provide the services proposed in connection with the application.

     J.      Waiver. Any application for a proposed PWSF, which has been identified as not meeting the general requirements or restrictions of this ordinance, may request a waiver as set forth in Section 11.26.080 of this chapter.

     K.    Independent Consultant. At the discretion of the director of community development, the applicant may be required to provide authorization to permit the city to hire an independent, qualified consultant to evaluate any technical aspect of the proposed PWSF, including, but not limited to, compliance with applicable federal emission standards, potential for interference with existing or planned public safety emergency response telecommunication facilities or analysis of the feasibility of alternate stealthing methods. Any authorization for this purpose shall include a deposit by the applicant and an agreement by the applicant to reimburse the city for all reasonable costs associated with the consultation. Any proprietary information disclosed to the city or the consultant is hereby deemed not to be a public record and shall remain confidential and not be disclosed to any third party without the express consent of the applicant. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.060 Location and Development Standards for PWSF.
     To reduce site proliferation and reduce visual impacts throughout the city, co-location is the preferred site placement, provided that such co-location does not create a visual anomaly or significantly impact stealthing requirements.

     A.    Location: Subject to the restrictions and requirements of Section 11.26.040 and other sections of this chapter, all PWSF types may be permitted in the public/semi-public (PS), residential planned development (RPD), multi-family residential (R-3), community planned development (CPD), mixed use 1 or 2 (MU1, MU2), park (P), or institutional (I) zones. Only microcells may be permitted in open space (OS), or residential single-family (R-l) zones.

     B.     PWSF Preferences. Based on potential aesthetic impact, the order of preference for PWSF type is (1) roof mounted, (2) side mounted, and (3) ground mounted. If a ground mounted PWSF is proposed, the application must include an explanation as to why other PWSF types are not being considered. In all cases, especially monopoles, antenna elements are encouraged to be flush mounted.

     C.     Setbacks. No PWSF shall be located within or extend into the required setbacks established in the applicable zone.

     D.    Additional Stealthing and Impact Criteria in R-1 or OS Zones. In reviewing applications for microcells in the single-family residential (R- 1) or open space (OS) zones, the antenna size and ability to stealth shall be strictly scrutinized for minimal impact to the neighborhood.

     E.     Lights, Signals and Signs. PWSF signals, lights or signs shall be designed so as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for security, safety or FAA regulations. Beacon lights shall not be included in the design of PWSF unless required by the FAA. Any required lighting shall be shielded to eliminate, to the maximum extent possible, impacts on the surrounding neighborhoods.

     F.     Dish Antennas. Satellite dish or parabolic antennas shall be situated so as to minimize visual impact without compromising their function. No such antenna shall be located in any front yard or a corner side yard unless no reasonable alternative location is available.

     G.    Equipment Structures. Ground level equipment, buildings and any monopole base shall be screened from public view.

     1.     Accessory Equipment. All accessory equipment associated with the operation of a PWSF shall be located inside an existing building, a new addition to an existing building, an underground vault, within an above-ground stealth structure or within a stealthed above-ground enclosure. All modifications to the existing structure or underground vaults shall comply with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located. Depending upon the aesthetics and other issues, the city may approve multiple equipment structures or one or more larger structures.

     2.     Security. All PWSF shall be designed so as to be resistant to and minimize opportunities for unauthorized access, climbing, vandalism, graffiti and other conditions which would result in hazardous conditions, visual blight or attractive nuisances.

     H.    Building Codes. PWSF shall comply with all applicable building codes.

     I.      Height. Roof mounted antennas shall be constructed at the minimum height possible to serve the operator’s service area. The height of such facilities shall not be subject to the height limitations of the underlying zone but shall be controlled through the telecommunications permit process.

     J.      Signal/Power Cables. All PWSF cables, wires or similar electrical transmission devices must be placed underground or be placed within the existing structure or in cableways and properly stealthed to the maximum extent possible.

     K.    Co-Location Requirements:

 

     1.     Co-locate. Except for microcells, owners or operators shall share sites where PWSF are located with other owners or operators where feasible, thereby reducing the number of PWSF that are stand-alone facilities. Microcells are specifically encouraged not to co-locate in order to minimize visual impacts.

     2.     No Preclusion. All mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future co-location by other providers.

     3.     Good Faith Effort. All applicants for a TP for a PWSF shall demonstrate a good-faith effort to co-locate with other carriers. The city may deny a TP application to an applicant who has not demonstrated a good-faith effort to co-locate on an existing facility. Such good-faith effort includes demonstration by the applicant of:

     a.     Contact with all the other licensed carriers for PWSF operating in the city in the area of coverage.

     b.     Sharing non-proprietary technical information necessary to determine if co-location is feasible under the design configuration most accommodating to co-location. This does not require disclosure of proprietary information.

     In the event co-location is found to be infeasible, a written statement of the reasons for the unfeasibility shall be prepared. In the event co-location is found to be feasible, the applicant shall include provisions for co-location of PWSF.

     4.     Numerical Limits. The city shall retain the authority to limit the number of antennas to be located at any one site or adjacent sites in order to prevent negative visual impact associated with multiple facilities. Architectural and other camouflaging treatment shall be coordinated between all users on each site.

     L.     Parking. Proposed facilities shall not reduce the number of available parking spaces below the amount required by the city’s codes.

     M.    FCC Requirements. All existing and future PWSF shall meet all applicable FCC emissions and exposure standards for electromagnetic radio frequency radiation, and all required notices and signs shall be posted on the site as required by the FCC and PUC and as approved by the director of community development.

     N.    Contact Information. The owner or operator of any PWSF shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information on a form to be supplied by the city. Applicant shall notify city of any changes to the information submitted within thirty (30) days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited to the following:

     1.     Identity, including name, address and telephone number, and legal status of the owner of the PWSF including official identification numbers and FCC certification, and if different from the owner, the identity and legal status of the person or entity responsible for operating the PWSF;

     2.     Name, address and telephone number of a local contact person for emergencies and type of service provided. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.070 Design criteria for PWSF—Criteria to be used by the design commission.
     A.    Pre-existing Character. Site location and development shall preserve the preexisting character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. The design commission shall evaluate the effectiveness of visual mitigation techniques.

     B.     Stealthing. All PWSF shall be stealthed to the greatest extent feasible, considering technological requirements, by means of placement, screening, camouflage, color choice, architectural compatibility and other site characteristics. The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the owner/operator’s coverage objectives.

     1.     View Corridors. Due consideration shall be given so that placement of monopoles, antennas and PWSF do not significantly obstruct or diminish views.

     2.     Blending Methods. Ground-mounted PWSF shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility, unless the FCC, FAA, or other government agency requires a different color. Monopoles shall be painted or finished and maintained in good condition from an aesthetic standpoint. Roof mounted or side mounted PWSF shall be constructed, painted, finished or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and/or wall on which it is mounted. Facade mounted equipment shall be camouflaged by incorporating the antenna into the design elements of the building; they shall be painted and textured to match the existing structure. Other stealthing techniques such as disguising the PWSF may also be required as determined by the design commission.

     C.     Landscaping. Where appropriate, facilities shall be installed so as to maintain and enhance existing landscaping on the site, including trees, foliage and shrubs, whether or not utilized for screening. Additional landscaping shall be planted where such vegetation is deemed necessary to provide screening or to block the line of sight between facilities and adjacent residential uses and residentially zoned properties.

     D.    Screening. Ground level buildings shall be screened from view by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate means.

     E.     Architectural Integrity. Equipment buildings or stealthing enclosures mounted on a roof shall be architecturally consistent with the building, such as having a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof mounted antenna may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.080 Waiver request.
     A.    Waive.: A waiver of any of the siting, design or other requirements or restrictions set forth in this chapter, may be granted by the planning commission at a noticed hearing upon the request of the applicant where the applicant demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that such restriction or requirement:

     1.     Prohibits or has the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services; or

     2.     Unreasonably discriminates against the applicant when compared to others who are providing functionally equivalent services.

     B.     Independent Consultant. The city shall have the right to have an independent consultant, at the applicant’s expense, evaluate the issues raised by the waiver request. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.090 Findings.
     Any decision to deny, in whole or in part, a request to place, construct or modify a PWSF shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.

     A.    Telecommunications Permit. A telecommunications permit shall be approved unless upon substantial evidence it is found that:

     1.     The project fails to comply with the criteria of Section 11.26.050 or

     11.26.060 of this chapter; or

     2.     The proposed height of PWSF is not necessary; or

     3.     Co-location at another site is feasible (if applicable); or

     4.     Location in the R-l or OS zones is not necessary and placement in the CPD, PS, R-3, RPD, MUl, MIJ2 or park zones is feasible (if applicable).

     B.     Design Review. A Design review application shall be approved unless the design commission finds, upon substantial evidence that the project fails to comply with the criteria of Section 11.26.070 of this chapter. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.100. Periodic reviews, additional conditions and term of permit.
     A.    Periodic Review. Each permit issued shall be subject to review by the city every five years. The director of community development shall notify the applicant at their last known address at least thirty (30) days prior to the review hearing. The review shall be by the same body that approved the original application. The review is to insure that the facility is still in operation, that it has been properly maintained and that the original conditions of approval have been adhered to and whether they are to remain the same or need to be modified.

     B.     Additional Conditions. Pursuant to the review, the city may add conditions to any permit as necessary to advance a significant governmental interest related to health, safety or welfare, provided, however, that any added condition shall comply with applicable FCC and PUC regulations and standards, and that reasonable advance notice thereof has been provided to all affected parties.

     C.     Term of Permit. Each permit issued shall be issued for a term of twenty (20) years. The permit shall expire at the end of the permit term unless the applicant submits a written request to extend the term to the director of community development prior to expiration. If a request to extend the term is timely received, the permit shall remain in effect until a decision is made. The planning commission shall hear requests for extension of term and shall consider the following factors, among others, in determining whether to grant an extension of time and the length of the extension:

     1.     The condition of the PWSF;

     2.     The current technology and the ability to upgrade the PWSF to better meet the purpose, intent, goals and provisions of this chapter;

     3.     The character of the neighborhood and the detrimental impact, if any, on the use, enjoyment or valuation of the property in the vicinity by the continued use of the PWSF;

     4.     The amount of the applicant’s investment in the PWSF improvements and the amount of time required to amortize the investment (the applicant may submit as evidence the depreciation schedule attached to the applicant’s latest federal income tax return).

     If the planning commission approves a request to extend the term, the planning commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to ensure that the approval will be in accord with the findings. Any decisions of the planning commission may be appealed pursuant to Chapter 11.49 of the zoning code. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.110 Revocations.
     At any time, the planning commission or city council may initiate proceedings to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter. Upon making a determination that the permit should be revoked, the deciding body may, at their discretion, initiate a nuisance abatement action pursuant to the city’s nuisance abatement ordinance. Grounds for revocation shall be limited to a finding that:

     A.    The owner or operator has abandoned the PWSF; or,

     B.     The owner or operator has failed to bring the PWSF into compliance with the conditions of approval, or the requirements of this chapter, within the period of time provided in a written notice sent by the city requiring the PWSF to be brought into compliance; or,

     C.     The PWSF is no longer in compliance with applicable FCC or FAA regulations; or,

     D.    The city determines, based upon substantial evidence, that revocation would be in the best interests of the public health, safety or welfare. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.120 Maintenance Requirements.
     All PWSF shall comply at all times with the following operation and maintenance standards:

 

     A.    Equipment. All PWSF, including lighting, fences, shields, cabinets and poles, shall be maintained by the owner or operator in good repair, free from trash, debris, litter and graffiti and other forms of vandalism, and any damage from any cause shall be repaired as soon as reasonably possible so as to minimize occurrences of dangerous conditions or visual blight.

     B.     Landscaping. Each PWSF which contains trees, foliage or other landscaping elements, whether or not used as screening, shall be maintained in good condition at all times, and the owner or operator of the PWSF shall be responsible for replacing any damaged, dead or decayed landscaping as promptly as reasonably possible. If a landscape plan was required and approved, the site shall be maintained in accordance with the approved landscape plan at all times. Amendments or modifications to the plan shall be submitted for approval to the director of community development.

     C.     Noise. Each PWSF shall be operated in such a manner so as to minimize any possible disruption caused by noise. Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. At no time shall equipment noise from any source exceed an exterior noise level of sixty-five (65) dB at the property line.

     D.    Inspections. Each owner or operator of a PWSF shall routinely and regularly inspect each site to ensure compliance with the standards set forth in this section. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.130 Monitoring requirements.
     After the PWSF is operational, the applicant shall submit, within ninety (90) days of beginning operations, and at annual intervals from that date, a report prepared by a qualified engineer, certifying facility compliance with all applicable city and federal regulations. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.140 Abandonment.
     A.    Notice. At such time that an owner or operator plans to abandon, or is required to discontinue operation of a PWSF or portion thereof, the owner or operator will notify the city by certified U.S. mail of the proposed date of abandonment or discontinuation of operations and the date the PWSF shall be removed. The notice should be given no less than thirty (30) days prior to abandonment. Failure to give notice shall not affect the owner or operator obligation to remove an abandoned PWSF.

     B.     Removal. Upon abandonment, the owner or operator shall physically remove the PWSF or abandoned elements within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of abandonment or discontinuation of use. “Physically remove” shall include, but not be limited to:

     1.     Removal of antennas, mounts, equipment cabinets and security barriers from the subject property;

     2.     Transportation of the antennas, mount, equipment cabinets and security barriers to an appropriate repository;

     3.     Restoring the site of the PWSF to its natural condition except for retaining the landscaping improvements and any other improvements at the discretion of the city.

     C.     Stay. The city may stay the requirement to remove an abandoned PWSF upon written request and evidence submitted by the owner or operator that another carrier is in reasonable negotiation to acquire and use the PWSF.

     D.    Nuisance Abatement. If an owner or operator fails to remove a PWSF in accordance with this chapter, the PWSF shall be deemed a public nuisance. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

 

11.26.150 PWSF emergency deployment.
     A COW shall be permitted in all zones for the duration of an emergency declared by the city or at the discretion of the director of community development. (Ord. 323 Exh. A, 2001)

Chapter 11.32 ANIMAL KEEPING AND ANIMAL CLUBS IN RESIDENTIAL ZONES
11.32.010 Purpose.
     The city council has determined that ownership of horses and other animals is an important tradition and an asset to the community. The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations as they pertain to the density of horses and other similar animals, and general standards for their maintenance. This chapter also establishes regulations governing animals for the personal use of the family residing on the premises in the primary dwelling unit where accessory to the residential use of property as opposed to maintenance for commercial purposes. Such regulations presume a significant effort on the part of the animal owner to recognize the rights of surrounding neighbors by maintaining and controlling his or her animals in a safe and healthy manner that does not significantly impact the use and enjoyment of a neighbor’s property. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.020 Prohibition on animal keeping.
     A person may keep or maintain an animal on any lot or parcel zoned for residential purposes or on any parcel where the principal use listed in this title is residential provided the property is being legally used as a single-family residence, only as specifically authorized by this chapter of the city’s zoning ordinance. If not specifically authorized by this chapter, such animals shall be prohibited. This chapter shall also regulate the manner in which animals are maintained on these lots within the city. Solely for purposes of supplemental maintenance regulations, the provisions of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 1494, Title 10, adopted by reference, shall apply. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.030 Hogs and roosters prohibited.
     A person shall not keep or maintain any live pig or hog of any age, or any rooster over two months old, in any residential zone, whether such pig or hog or rooster is kept or maintained for the personal use of the occupant or otherwise. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008: LACC Ord. 1494 § 205, 1974)

 

11.32.040 Animals in residential zones.
     A person shall not keep or maintain any animal of any age in any residential zone, whether such animal is kept or maintained for the personal use of the occupant or otherwise, except that for each parcel with a primary dwelling unit, the occupant may keep for his or her personal use:

     A.    The following animals:

     1.     Tropical fish excluding caribe;

     2.     White mice and rats.

     B.     The following animals, but in no event more than three such animals in any combination on a parcel of land with a primary dwelling unit having an area of less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet:

     1.     Canaries;

     2.     Chinchillas;

     3.     Chipmunks;

     4.     Finches;

     5.     Gopher snakes;

     6.     Guinea pigs;

     7.     Hamsters;

     8.     Hawks;

     9.     King snakes;

     10.   Marmoset monkeys;

     11.   Mynah birds;

     12.   Parrots, parakeets, amazons, cockatiels, cockatoos, lories, lorikeets, love birds, macaws, and similar birds of the psittacine family;

     13.   Pigeons;

     14.   Ravens,

     15.   Squirrel monkeys;

     16.   Steppe legal eagles;

     17.   Toucans;

     18.   Turtles;

     19.   White doves;

     20.   Rabbits.

     C.     Other similar animals which, in the opinion of the planning director, are neither more obnoxious or detrimental to the public welfare than the animals enumerated in this section. Such animals shall be kept or maintained at a place where the keeping of domestic animals is permitted. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008: LACC Ord. 1494 § 205.5, 1974)

 

11.32.050 Dogs, cats and chickens.
     In any residential zone, for each parcel with a primary dwelling unit, the occupant may keep for his or her personal use not more than three dogs over four months of age, not more than five cats over four months of age, and not more than three chickens over the age of five months. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008: LACC Ord. 1494 § 206, 1974)

 

11.32.060 Livestock and farm fowl permitted as an accessory use.
     A.    Horses, donkeys, mules, cows, steers, sheep, goats, and other hoofed animals may be kept or maintained for the personal use of the occupants of premises in the R-1 zones on parcels having a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and containing a single-family residential dwelling structure, subject to the following restrictions:

     1.     Any combination of up to two horses, donkeys, mules, cows, steers, sheep or goats, and other hoofed animals may be kept on a parcel having a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. One additional horse, donkey, mule, cow, steer, sheep goat, or other similar hoofed animal shall be permitted for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

     2.     No combination of more than five horses, donkeys, mules, other hoofed animals cows, steers, sheep or goats may be kept on any one lot or parcel. For purposes of this section, all lots comprising the premises of one residence shall be deemed to constitute one parcel.

     3.     Horses, donkeys, mules, cows, and steers, or other large hoofed animals up to the age of one year, sheep and goats up to the age of six months may be kept on the premises in addition to the animals specified in subsections A and B of this section, provided:

     a.     Such animals are otherwise kept and maintained as set forth in this section;

     b.     The mother of such young hoofed animal is also kept on such premises; and

     c.     A permit for such young hoofed animal is first obtained from the director of community development. Such a permit shall be issued upon receipt of a written application therefor with a fee to be established by resolution of the city council, unless the director of community development determines that breeding of animals is being conducted as a commercial activity on the premises, in which case said permit shall be denied, and the applicant notified of such decision. No more than two such permits shall be issued for such property during any twenty-four (24) month period. The decision of the director may be appealed by the applicant by filing a written appeal with the director within thirty (30) days of the date of the director’s decision. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee established by resolution of the city council. The appeal shall proceed as set forth in Section 11.32.140 of this chapter.

     4.     Any barn, facility or other area which such animal(s) are allowed to occupy shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from the main dwelling structure on any adjacent property, or at such greater distance as is required by any applicable law or ordinance.

     5.     No barn, structure or other area used for keeping any such animal(s) shall be located between the front property line or corner side property line and the main dwelling structure on the site.

     6.     Adequate fences, walls or other barriers shall be installed and maintained on the premises so that each such animal is so adequately confined on the premises that such animal cannot damage adjoining property.

     B.     Chickens, ducks and geese (herein defined as farm fowl) may be kept or maintained for the personal use of the occupants of premises in the R-1 zones on parcels having a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet and containing a single-family residential dwelling structure, subject to the following restrictions:

     1.     Any combination of up to six chickens or ducks may be kept on a parcel having a minimum area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. Up to three additional chickens or ducks shall be permitted for each five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area in excess of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet.

     2.     Geese may be substituted for the chickens or ducks above on a one for one basis to a maximum limit of three.

     3.     No combination of more than twenty (20) chickens or twelve (12) ducks or three geese, may be kept on any one lot or parcel. For purposes of this section, all lots comprising the premises of one residence shall be deemed to constitute one parcel.

     4.     Chickens, ducks and geese up to the age of five months may be kept on the premises in addition to the animals specified in subsections 1, 2 and 3 of this section, provided such animals are otherwise kept and maintained as set forth in this chapter.

     5.     At least one coop of adequate size shall be provided for all farm fowl on a lot. Coops shall be located not less than thirty-five (35) feet from the main dwelling structure on any adjacent property, or at such greater distance as is required by any applicable law or ordinance, except as permitted through exemption herein.

     6.     Coops shall be located out of all required R-1 zone setbacks. Additionally, no coop shall be located between the front property line or corner side property line and the main dwelling structure on the site.

     7.     On R-1 lots where the thirty-five (35) foot distance radius to offsite main dwellings cannot be achieved, or a coop setback does not meet the required R-1 zone setbacks, the director of community development may exempt the distance requirement if:

     a.     The coop is set as far from any offsite main dwelling as possible;

     b.     The coop is designed and constructed in a manner that minimizes emanation of noise and odors;

     c.     The animal owner has maintained the property in accordance with the standards referenced in this chapter;

     d.     The use is not found to be a nuisance.

     8.     Adequate fences, walls or other barriers shall be installed and maintained on the premises so that each such animal is so adequately confined on the premises that such animal cannot damage adjoining property.

     9.     Owners of chickens, ducks, and geese shall be given twelve (12) months from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter to comply with the regulations contained herein. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.070 Maintenance of premises.
     The occupant of the premises on which any horse, donkey, mule, other similar animals, cow, steer, sheep, goat, chicken, duck or goose is kept shall keep and maintain the animal(s) and premises in such a manner as not to be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of any person on any adjoining property or of the general public, nor be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or value of property of other persons in the vicinity of the premises. Such maintenance shall be at least sufficient to keep dust, odors, flies and waste from having an adverse effect on any other property. The following techniques are recommended to meet the maintenance standard specified by this section and shall be utilized if no other alternative techniques sufficient to meet that standard are utilized:

     A.    A sprinkler system adequate to control dust in corrals, turn-out areas, riding rings, or animal pens shall be installed and utilized as necessary on the premises.

     B.     Lime, sand or other appropriate materials shall be utilized on the premises to eliminate odor problems.

     C.     All manure shall be removed from the ground, stalls, coops and pens at least once in every twenty-four (24) hour period and placed in a covered container(s). All manure shall be removed from the premises at least once every seven days.

     D.    Chemical spray and/or bait shall be utilized as frequently as necessary for fly control. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.080 Boarding of livestock.
     Not more than two horses, donkeys, mules, cows, steers, other similar animals, sheep or goats which are not for the personal use of the occupant of the parcel may be kept, maintained or otherwise boarded on the parcel, whether or not consideration in the form of money, goods, services or other valuable consideration is received from the owner or user of the animal, subject to the following conditions:

     A.    Such boarding shall not be conducted as a commercial enterprise. For purposes of this subsection, boarding shall be deemed a commercial enterprise if the occupant advertises in any manner whatsoever the availability of boarding of animals on the lot or parcel, conducts the boarding with the intent or result of generating profit, or otherwise engages in activities such as are commonly associated with commercial activity.

     B.     Any animals boarded pursuant to this section shall be counted as part of the total number of animals allowed on the lot or parcel.

     C.     All requirements of this chapter as to the maintenance of animals shall be complied with. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.090 Property registration.
     Every property in any single-family residential zone on which any animal subject to Section 11.32.060(A), is kept or maintained shall be registered with the city on forms provided by the city clerk or designee, accompanied by a registration fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. The application for registration shall provide sufficient information for the city to determine the nature and extent of animal keeping activities, including, but not limited to, a diagram of the property with a description of the type (e.g., barn, corral, etc.), nature (e.g., wood frame) and size of animal keeping facilities; the size of the property (square footage) and measurements of the distances from the animal keeping facilities to the property lines; a statement of the number and type of such animals kept or maintained on the property and whether each such animal is owned or used by the occupant of the property or is boarded for a nonoccupant pursuant to Section 11.32.080; the address of the property; the name of the occupant of the property; and, if the occupant of the property is not also the owner of the property, the name of the owner of the property. Registration shall be renewed annually; provided, however, that only changes from the previous year’s application form need be shown on the application for renewal. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.100 Excess animal permit.
     In addition to those animals specifically authorized by the provisions of this chapter to be kept in a residential zone, an animal may be kept or maintained as a pet or for the personal use of the occupants of the premises if any one of the following criteria is met and an animal permit is first obtained:

     A.    The animal is of a species not specifically permitted or prohibited by any law, and will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare.

     B.     Addition of the animal to others on the premises would cause the total number of such animals to exceed the maximum number otherwise permitted, but will not be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or value of property of other persons in the vicinity of the premises. An animal permit shall not be issued to permit any horse, donkey, mule, cow, steer, other similar animals, sheep, goat to be kept or maintained on any parcel with an area of less than fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.110 Application for excess animal permit.
     A.    Any person desiring an animal permit may file an application with the city, except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by either the planning commission or city council on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same permit.

     B.     An application for an animal permit shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name and address of the applicant and of all persons owning any or all of the property proposed to be used;

     2.     Evidence that the applicant is the owner of the premises involved, or has written permission of the owner or owners to make such application;

     3.     The location of the subject property (address or vicinity);

     4.     The legal description of the property involved, and square footage of the property;

     5.     The type and number of animals requested;

     6.     Staff finding that all the current animals are otherwise in compliance with all the provisions of this code;

     7.     A site plan indicating:

     a.     The area and dimensions of the building or enclosure for the use or keeping of the animal or animals as well as the locations and dimensions of all other structures within a distance of fifty (50) feet from the exterior boundaries of such building or enclosure, and

     b.     Site drainage patterns where appropriate;

     8.     A list of the names and addresses of all: (i) owners of the property on which the animal is to be maintained; (ii) owners of the property adjacent to the exterior boundaries of such property; and (iii) occupants of property adjacent to the exterior boundaries of such property. For purpose of this section, owners shall be those persons who are shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles;

     9.     Such other information as the director of community development may require to substantiate the following facts:

     a.     That the requested animal(s) at the location proposed will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare, and

     b.     That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the animal(s) requested without material detriment to the use, enjoyment or valuation of the property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site;

     10.   All of the information submitted by the applicant shall be certified to be correct by a statement under penalty of perjury pursuant to Section 2015.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure.

     C.     The application shall be accompanied by a filing fee in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.120 Notice of application for excess animal permit.
     A.    Upon receipt of an application for an animal permit, the director of community development shall send the following persons a notice stating the applicant’s request, and that any individual so notified may express opposition to the granting of the permit by filing a written protest with the director of community development within fifteen (15) days after the date of such notice:

     1.     All persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles as owning property adjacent to the exterior boundaries of the property on which such animal(s) are to be maintained; provided, however, that where the closest point that such animal(s) is to be kept or maintained is five hundred (500) feet or more from such adjoining property this subsection shall not apply; and

     2.     A notice addressed to “occupant” or “occupants” in all cases where the mailing address of any owner of property required to be notified under the provisions of subsection (A)(1) of this section is different than the address of such adjacent property.

     B.     The director of community development shall also notify the director of the department of animal control and the director of the department of health services, requesting their technical opinion relative to maintaining such animals properly as indicated in the application and site plan.

     C.     The director of community development shall also notify those other persons whose property might in the judgment of the director of community development be affected by such application or permit. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.130 Approval or denial of excess animal permit.
     A.    The director of community development shall approve an application for an animal permit where no written protest to the granting of such permit is received from any person notified pursuant to Section 11.32.120 within the specified protest period.

     B.     If only one such protest is received, the director shall evaluate such protest to determine if the permit should be granted. The decision to grant or deny the permit shall be within the discretion of the director.

     C.     The director shall deny an application for an animal permit in all cases where two or more such protests are received. Protests received from both the owner and the occupant of the same property shall be considered to be one protest for purposes of this section.

     D.    Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections (A) and (B) of this section, the director shall deny an application for an animal permit in all cases where the report of the department of animal control or health services indicates that such animal(s) may not reasonably be maintained as specified in the application.

     E.     In approving an application for an animal permit, the director may impose such conditions as he or she deems necessary to insure that the animal(s) will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare, and that there will be no material detriment to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site.

     F.     The director shall inform in writing the applicant and any persons who filed written protests of his or her decision. Any decision of the director may be appealed by the applicant or by any interested party by filing a written appeal with the director within thirty (30) days of the date of the director’s decision. The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee, established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.140 Appeal procedure.
     A.    Upon receipt of an appeal from a decision of the director of community development filed pursuant to Section 11.32.130(F), the director shall notice a public hearing before the planning commission. Notice of such hearing shall be sent to all persons to whom notice of the application was sent pursuant to Section 11.32.120.

     B.     The planning commission shall conduct a hearing on the matter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine whether to affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the director; provided, however, that the planning commission shall approve or conditionally approve an application for an animal permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at the public hearing substantiates the following findings:

     1.     That the requested animal(s) at the location proposed will not jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

     2.     That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the animal(s) requested without material detriment to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site.

     C.     The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the planning commission’s decision. at the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following such filing, the city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall determine if the hearing is to be a de novo review or limited to a review of the record to determine if the planning commission order is supported by reasonable evidence. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.150 Animal permit validity.
     A.    An animal permit is issued for the benefit and use of the applicant therefor and for members of the applicant’s family residing with said applicant and shall terminate and be of no further force or effect when said applicant and family cease to occupy the premises described in the animal permit application.

     B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an animal permit originally issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 712.7 of Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 1494 shall be deemed issued for the benefit of those persons occupying the premises for which such permit was issued as of the effective date of this section, and shall terminate and be of no further force or effect when said occupants cease to occupy said premises, or at the end of twenty years from the effective date of this section, whichever is longer.

     C.     An animal permit may be revoked for the reasons and pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.50. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.160 Animal club permit.
     A.    The city council finds and determines that club activities which involve people assembling on a regular basis on residential properties with animals owned by those people for recreational or other purposes have the potential for generating adverse impacts on neighboring properties. The city council further finds, however, that the animal clubs in the city have generally been operated in such a way as to minimize such adverse impacts, and therefor need not be subject to extensive review of their operations unless complaints are received about such operations. The purpose of this section is to provide a mechanism for control of animal clubs in those cases where club activities have generated complaints.

     B.     Any group, club or association operated on a nonprofit basis for recreational purposes may conduct regular, periodic meetings of people and animals owned by those people on any property with a minimum area of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet in a residential zone; provided that an animal club permit is first obtained pursuant to the provisions of this section.

     1.     The owner of the property on which the animal club is to meet shall file an application for an animal club permit with the city, containing the following information:

     a.     The name of the club;

     b.     A site plan depicting lot area, existing and proposed improvements, topography, etc;

     c.     The address at which meetings are to be held;

     d.     The proposed day(s) and time(s) when meetings will be held;

     e.     The maximum number of persons who will be attending any one meeting;

     f.      The type and number of animals accompanying the attendees;

     g.     The name and telephone number of the individual responsible for club activities on the property.

     2.     Upon submittal of an application, any animal club which conducted regular, periodic meetings during the six-month period prior to the effective date of this section shall be issued an animal club permit without further hearing for the premises at which the club’s meetings were last held immediately prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section. A new permit shall be required any time an animal club moves its regular, periodic meetings to a new site. Such new permit shall be subject to the provisions of sub 3 of this section.

     3.     Upon receipt of an application for an animal club permit, the director of community development shall send a notice to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles as owning property adjacent to the boundaries of the property on which the animal club is to meet, stating that such application has been filed and that any individual so notified may express opposition to the granting of the permit by filing a written protest with the director of community development within fifteen (15) days after the date of such notice. If no written protest is received within the time period allocated, the director shall issue the permit. If one or more written protests are received, the director of community development shall conduct a hearing to determine if the permit shall be issued. The applicant and protestor(s) shall be given an opportunity to be heard on the matter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the director of community development may grant or deny the permit, or may grant the permit subject to conditions.

     4.     An animal club permit shall be valid for a period of one year. The permit may be renewed by filing an application for renewal containing any change in the information on file with the city. The city shall renew the animal club permit for the premises if no written complaint has been received about club activities during the prior year on that property. If any such complaint has been received within the year prior to the renewal application, the director of community development shall conduct a hearing to determine if the permit shall be renewed. The applicant and complainant(s) shall be given an opportunity to be heard on the matter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the director of community development may approve or deny the renewal, or may approve the renewal subject to conditions.

     5.     Any decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission, provided a written appeal is filed within ten days after the director renders his or her decision. The planning commission shall hold a hearing on the matter prior to rendering its decision. The decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council pursuant to the provisions of subsection C of Section 11.32.140.

     C.     Except as otherwise provided by law, all animals brought to the premises by any person not residing on the premises in connection with animal club activities shall be removed from the premises upon conclusion of such activities on any day. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.170 Abatement of excess animals.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all horses, donkeys, mules, cows, steers, other similar animals, sheep, goats, chickens, ducks or geese kept or maintained on any lot or parcel which are in excess of the number of such animals permitted by this chapter shall be removed from the lot or parcel within one year from the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, unless a permit to maintain such excess animals is obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.175 Nuisance defined.
     For purposes of this chapter, a nuisance shall be defined to include, but not be limited to, issues relating to excessive noise, odors, flies, and/or dust. The community development director in conjunction with the city’s code enforcement officer shall have the authority to determine what level of excess constitutes a nuisance under this chapter. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008)

 

11.32.180 Abatement of violation.
     Any violation of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance, which shall be abated by rehabilitation, demolition, repair, removal or other action as may be necessary. The procedures set forth in this chapter shall not be exclusive and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law, including, but not limited to Chapters 1.07 and 4.33 of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.190 Declaration of nuisance.
     Whenever the community development director determines that there may be a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter on a lot or parcel, he or she may cause notice to be given in the manner provided in this chapter for the holding of a hearing to ascertain whether the same does in fact constitute a public nuisance, the abatement of which is appropriate under the police power of the city, or he or she may cause citations to be issued or other remedies as provided in the law. If a hearing is to be held, the notice shall set forth a description of the condition(s) constituting the nuisance and the action(s) needed to correct the condition(s) and shall further state that if such action(s) are not taken within the time provided in the notice or as otherwise determined at the conclusion of the hearing, the city may take any and all action necessary to correct the condition(s) and all costs incurred by the city shall be a lien upon the property where the violation was located until paid. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.200 Serving notice.
     If it is determined that there will be hearing, notice shall be served upon the owner of the property where the violation is located by personal service at least ten days before the time fixed for hearing, or by depositing a copy of the notice in the United States mail with postage thereon fully prepaid at least fifteen (15) days prior to the time fixed for hearing. Service is complete at the time of such delivery or deposit. “Owner” as used in this chapter means any person in possession of the property, and each person shown as owner on the latest equalized property tax assessment roll. If the addressee is unknown, the notice shall be mailed to “occupant” at the property address. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of the proceedings under this chapter. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.210 Hearing by community development director.
     A.    At the time stated in the notice, the community development director shall hear and consider all relevant evidence, objections or protests, and shall receive testimony from the owner(s) and city personnel relative to the alleged public nuisance and the proposed action necessary to abate such nuisance. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     B.     Upon or after the conclusion of the hearing, the community development director shall determine whether a violation of the provisions of this chapter exists and constitutes a public nuisance. If the community development director finds that a public nuisance does exist and that there is sufficient cause to abate the same, the community development director shall make a written order setting forth his or her finding and ordering the owner to abate such nuisance by having the appropriate property, building or structure rehabilitated, repaired, demolished or removed, any animal on said property relocated on the site or removed, or such other work performed, as set forth in the order. The order shall set forth the time within which such work shall be commenced and completed. The order shall be served in the manner set forth in Section 11.32.200. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.220 Appeals of hearing orders.
     A.    Within ten days from the date of personal service of the community development director’s order as a result of the hearing, or fifteen (15) days if such service is by mail, the owner may appeal all or part of the community development director’s order to the planning commission by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. A hearing upon such appeal shall be held at the regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission held after the time for notice of such hearing has passed. Notice of the hearing date and time shall be served upon the appellant in the manner set forth in Section 11.32.170.

     B.     The planning commission shall adopt a written statement of its decision on the appeal, which shall include its findings as to the facts of the case, and its order, if any, for rehabilitation, repair, demolition, relocation, removal or such other work as may be necessary to abate the nuisance. A copy of said statement shall be served upon the appellant in the manner set forth in Section 11.32.200.

     C.     Within ten days from the date of personal service of the planning commission’s statement, or fifteen (15) days if such service is by mail, the owner may appeal all or part of the planning commission’s order to the city council by filing a written appeal with the city clerk. At the next regularly scheduled city council meeting following such filing, the city council shall set a date for hearing the matter and shall determine if the hearing is to be a de novo review or limited to a review of the record to determine if the planning commission order is supported by reasonable evidence. Notice of the hearing date shall be served upon the appellant in the manner set forth in Section 11.32.200. The council may affirm, reject or modify the order of the planning commission. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.230 Abatement of nuisance.
     A.    All work performed to abate a nuisance shall comply with all applicable laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, building codes, zoning requirements, and architectural review. Upon such abatement in full by the owner, proceedings under this chapter shall terminate.

     B.     If a condition found to be a nuisance under this chapter is not completely abated by the owner as directed within the designated abatement period, the community development director is authorized to cite the property owner, cause the same to be abated by city forces or private contract, and the community development director is expressly authorized to enter upon the property or to authorize such entry for such purpose. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.240 Cost of abatement.
     A.    The city manager shall keep an account of the cost (including incidental expenses) of abating any nuisance on each separate parcel of land where the work is done and shall submit a bill for such amount to the owner, together with a notice that the owner may request a hearing on the correctness and/or reasonableness of the bill by filing a written request for hearing within ten days of the date of the bill. Failure to request a hearing shall be deemed acceptance by the owner of the amount billed as correct and reasonable.

 

     B.     The planning commission, upon request, shall conduct a hearing to determine the correctness and/or reasonableness of such costs of abatement, and may make such revision, correction or modification in the bill as it deems just.

     C.     A report shall be made to the city council describing the location of the lot or parcel, the work performed thereon, and the costs of such work, as determined pursuant to this section. The city council may conduct a hearing on the report. The city council shall reject, confirm or modify the amount to be imposed as a lien against the property.

     D.    As used in this section, “incidental expenses” include, but are not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, in inspecting the work, and for printing and mailing required under this chapter. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

 

11.32.250 Assessment of costs against property—Lien.
     The total cost incurred by the city in abating a nuisance, as determined by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the respective lot or parcel of land to which it relates and, upon recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of such assessment. A certified copy of the charges shall be sent to the tax division of the county auditor-controller to add the amounts of the respective assessments to the next regular tax bill levied against the respective lots or parcels of land for municipal purposes. Thereafter, the amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected, and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. (Ord. 368 § 1, 2008; Ord. 128 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 11.33 ACCESSORY DWELLING UNITS
11.33.010 Accessory dwelling units—Purpose.
     The purpose of this section is to allow and regulate accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) in compliance with California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.020 Accessory dwelling units—Effect of conforming.
     An ADU or JADU that conforms to the standards in this section will not be:

     A.    Deemed to be inconsistent with the city’s general plan and zoning designation for the lot on which the ADU or JADU is located.      

     B.     Deemed to exceed the allowable density for the lot on which the ADU or JADU is located.    

     C.     Considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth.  D.       Required to correct a nonconforming condition, as defined in Section 11.33.030. This does not prevent the city from enforcing compliance with applicable building standards in accordance with California Health and Safety Code Section 17980.12. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.030 Accessory dwelling units—Definitions.
     As used in this section, terms are defined as follows:

     “Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated and include a separate exterior access. An accessory dwelling unit also includes the following:

     1.     An efficiency unit, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1; and

     2.     A manufactured home, as defined by California Health and Safety Code Section 18007.

     “Accessory structure” means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, and which is located on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or use.

     “Complete independent living facilities” means permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated.

     “Efficiency kitchen” means a kitchen that includes each of the following:

     1.     A cooking facility with appliances.

     2.     A food preparation counter or counters reasonable size in relation to the size of the JADU.

     3.     Food storage cabinets reasonable size in relation to the size of the JADU.

     “Floor area (accessory dwelling unit) [FA(ADU)]” means the total square footage of the accessory dwelling unit (as measured from the inside perimeter of the exterior walls) under solid roof including, but not limited to, habitable attics and basements and lofts, but excludes eaves up to four-feet in depth.

     “Floor area (existing or proposed single-family dwelling) [FA(SFD)]” means the total square footage of the primary single-family dwelling under solid roof including, but not limited to, habitable attics and basements, lofts and attached garages, but excludes volume space (as calculated within Section 11.11.050(B)(2)), porches, patios, eaves, breezeways and any legally permitted attached ADU or JADU.

     “Junior accessory dwelling unit” or “JADU” means a residential unit that:

     1.     Is no more than five hundred (500) square feet in size;

     2.     Is contained entirely within an existing or proposed single-family dwelling;

     3.     Includes its own separate sanitation facilities or shares sanitation facilities with the existing or proposed single-family dwelling; and

     4.     Includes an efficiency kitchen.

     “Nonconforming condition” means a physical improvement on a property or a use of the property that does not conform with current zoning standards.

     “Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street, whether public or private, or a private driveway to one entrance of the ADU or JADU.

     “Proposed single-family dwelling” means a dwelling that is the subject of a building permit application and that meets the requirements for permitting.

     “Public transit” means a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or future train station, where the public may access buses, trains, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

     “Tandem parking” means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.040 Accessory dwelling units—Approvals.
     The following approvals apply to ADUs and JADUs under this section:

     A.    Requirement for ministerial approval. If an ADU or JADU complies with each of the general requirements in Section 11.33.050 and specific requirements within Section 11.33.060, it shall be allowed with only a zoning clearance and applicable building permits, without discretionary review or hearing, in the following scenarios:

     1.     Conversion associated with a single-family dwelling. Only one ADU and/or JADU on a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling, where all of the following apply:

     a.     The ADU and/or JADU is within the space of an existing or proposed single-family dwelling or within the original footprint (same physical dimensions and location) of a legally constructed accessory structure, plus up to one hundred fifty (150) additional square feet if the expansion is limited to accommodating ingress and egress.

     b.     The space has exterior access that is independent of that for the single-family dwelling.

     c.     Has side and rear setbacks sufficient for fire and safety, as dictated by applicable building and fire codes.

     d.     The JADU complies with the requirements of Section 65852.22 of the California Government Code.

     2.     New construction associated with a single-family dwelling. One, attached or detached, new-construction ADU on a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling (in addition to any JADU that might otherwise be established on the lot), if the ADU satisfies the following limitations:

     a.     The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four feet.

     b.     The total FA(ADU) is eight hundred (800) square feet or smaller.

     c.     The peak height above grade is sixteen (16) feet or less, as measured consistent with Section 11.11.050(A)(1)(a).

     3.     Conversion associated with multifamily dwellings. Multiple ADUs within portions of existing multifamily dwelling structures that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, if each converted ADU complies with state building standards for dwellings. At least one converted ADU is allowed within an existing multifamily dwelling, and up to twenty-five (25) percent of the existing multifamily dwelling units may each have a converted ADU under this subsection.

     4.     New construction associated with multifamily dwellings. No more than two detached ADUs on a lot that has an existing multifamily dwelling if each detached ADU satisfies the following limitations:

     a.     The side- and rear-yard setbacks are at least four feet.

     b.     The total FA(ADU) is eight hundred (800) square feet or smaller.

     c.     The peak height above grade is sixteen (16) feet or less.

     B.     Timing.

     1.     The city shall act on an application to create or construct an ADU or JADU within sixty (60) days from the date that the city receives a completed application if there is an existing single-family or multifamily dwelling on the lot.

     2.     Where a permit application for an ADU or JADU is submitted concurrently with a permit application to create a new single-family dwelling on the lot, the city may delay acting on the permit application for the ADU or JADU until the city acts on the permit application to create the new single-family dwelling, but the application to create the JADU will still be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing.

     3.     If the applicant requests a delay, the sixty (60) day time period shall be tolled for the period of the requested delay. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.050 Accessory dwelling units—General requirements.
     The following requirements apply to all ADUs and JADUs that are approved under this section:

     A.    Zoning. An ADU or JADU subject only to a Zoning Clearance and a building permit under Section 11.33.040 may be created on a lot in any R 1, R-3 zone or residential planned development (RPD) zone, public and semi-public zone, or mixed use zone if all of the applicable standards are met.

     B.     Property Line Survey Required. Where an ADU or JADU is proposed, either as a conversion of an existing structure or new construction, with setbacks of five feet or less from a property line or applicable easement, a property line survey shall be provided at time of application.

     C.     Fire Sprinklers. Fire sprinklers are required for an ADU if sprinklers are required in the primary residence or residences.

     D.    No separate conveyance. An ADU or JADU may be rented, but no ADU may be sold or otherwise conveyed separately from the lot and the primary dwelling (in the case of a single-family lot) or from the lot and all of the dwellings (in the case of a multifamily lot) unless the property was built by a nonprofit corporation organized pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code that has received a welfare exemption under Section 214.15 of the Revenue and Taxation Code for properties intended to be sold to low-

income families who participate in a special no-interest loan program and all of the conditions under California Government Code Section 65852.26 are met.

     E.     Public Sewer Connection. If public sewers are available to the lot, both the existing or proposed single-family dwelling or multifamily and the ADU and/or JADU must be connected to the sewer service in order to receive a building permit. Further, if access to the public sewer is feasible for the lot subsequent to the initial issuance of a building permit, the permit shall be subject to connection of both the existing or proposed single-family or multifamily dwelling and ADU and/or JADU to such sewer service.

     F.     Septic System. Where connection to the public sewer is not feasible, as part of the application for a permit to create an ADU or JADU connected to a conventional or non-conventional onsite water treatment system, an approval from the Los Angeles County Department of Public Health shall be provided in compliance with the adopted Local Agency Management Program ordinance.

     G.    Owner Occupancy.

     1.     Existing and new ADUs created prior to January 1, 2025, are not subject to owner-occupancy requirements.

     2.     All ADUs that are created on or after January 1, 2025, are subject to an owner-occupancy requirement. A person with legal or equitable title to the property must reside on the property as the person’s legal domicile and permanent residence.

     3.     All JADUs are subject to an owner-occupancy requirement. A person with legal or equitable title to the property must reside on the property, in either the primary dwelling or JADU, as the person’s legal domicile and permanent residence. However, the owner-occupancy requirement of this subsection does not apply if the property is entirely owned by another governmental agency, land trust, or housing organization.

     H.    Conversion restriction. A legally constructed ADU or JADU may not be converted to any other use for a period of ten years from the date final permit approval is granted for the ADU or JADU.

     I.      Utilities. The ADU may have wet and dry utilities that are separate from those of the primary dwelling unit, including gas, electricity, water and telephone service. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.060 Accessory dwelling units—Specific requirements.
     A.    Maximum size. Every proposed ADU and/or JADU shall comply with all of the following:

     1.     The size of the ADU, JADU, any existing or proposed single-family dwelling and any other existing or proposed accessory structure shall comply with the total floor/roofed area as contained within Chapter 11.11 and any applicable slope factor guideline contained within Chapter 11.35; and

     2.     The total FA(ADU) of an attached ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of the FA(SFD); and

     3.     The total FA(ADU) of a detached or attached ADU shall not exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; and

     4.     Notwithstanding the maximum size requirements above, the City shall permit a total FA(ADU) of at least eight hundred (800) square feet.

     B.     Setbacks. ADUs shall comply with the setbacks identified below. Setbacks shall be measured from property lines or vehicular access easement, as verified by a survey pursuant to Section 11.33.050(B), whichever is applicable.

     1.     Attached and detached ADUs, new construction.

     a.     Front yard setbacks must comply with the underlying zoning requirement.

     b.     Side and rear yard setbacks: four feet.

     2.     Detached ADUs, existing or replacement. An existing legally constructed detached accessory structure may be demolished and rebuilt in the original location and to the same physical dimensions for the pur-

poses of conversion to an ADU. This may include an expansion of not more than one hundred fifty (150) square feet beyond the original footprint to accommodate ingress and egress. This replacement structure converted to an ADU shall not be subject to any setback requirements provided that the original side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire safety

     C.     Height.

     1.     An attached ADU or JADU is subject to the applicable height limit of the zone.

     2.     A detached, new construction ADU may not exceed 16 feet in height, measured to the peak of the structure consistent with Section 11.11.050(A)(1)(a).

     D.    Passageway. No passageway, as defined within Section 11.33.030, is required for an ADU.

     E.     Parking.

     1.     Generally. One off-street, on-site parking space is required for each ADU, in addition to the parking requirement for the existing or proposed single-family dwelling, except as provided in subsection (E)(2) of this section. The additional parking space may be provided in setback areas or as tandem parking unless specific findings are made that parking in setback areas is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety conditions. The additional space need not be covered but shall be paved or constructed utilizing an equivalent surface and accessible from a single, common driveway for both the existing or proposed single-family dwelling and the accessory units.

     2.     Exceptions. No additional parking is required for an ADU in any of the following situations:

     a.     The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit, as defined in Section 11.33.030.

     b.     The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district.

     c.     The ADU is attached to or located within an existing or proposed single-family dwelling or an existing accessory structure.

     d.     When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU.

     e.     When there is an established car share vehicle stop located within one block of the ADU.

     3.     No replacement. When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those off-street parking spaces are not required to be replaced.

     F.     Architectural Requirements.

     1.     The ADU shall provide architectural continuity with the existing or proposed single-family dwelling, blending into the existing setting through the use of appropriate building form, height, materials, color and landscaping. Elevations and floor plans shall be submitted as part of the building permit process.

     2.     The ADU must have an independent exterior entrance, apart from that of the primary dwelling. The ADU entrance shall not be on the same elevation/side of the primary dwelling entrance, unless this entrance is screened from public views.

     G.    Historical Protections. Where an ADU is proposed on real property that is listed in the California Register of Historic Resources or on a lot that has an identified historical resource listed on the federal, state, or local register of historic places, the exterior architectural treatment of the must comply with all applicable ministerial requirements imposed by the Secretary of the Interior. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.070 Accessory dwelling units—Hillside development.
     Any ADU which is proposed on a lot which otherwise qualifies as a hillside lot under Chapter 11.35 of this code shall also meet the following requirements. No discretionary review or approval for a hillside development permit shall be required.

     A.    Grading, or any movement of earth, required for the ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) cubic yards.

     B.     The vertical height of any finished fill slope created for the purpose of developing an ADU shall not exceed ten feet.

     C.     The vertical height of any finished cut slope created for the purpose of developing an ADU shall not exceed ten feet.

     D.    For a new driveway or roadway, the maximum total vertical height of any combination of finished cut and fill slopes from grade shall not exceed eight feet. The finished grade of any new driveway shall not exceed an average of seventeen (17) percent, with an absolute maximum grade of twenty (20) percent.

     E.     Proposed building sites and/or structures shall not be allowed within one hundred (100) feet of a ridgeline or knoll identified in the environmental resources management element of the general plan, or within fifty (50) feet of a blue line stream identified on a USGS map.

     F.     No ADU shall block a watercourse, canyon or streambed.

     G.    Any retaining wall less than twenty (20) feet from an ADU building wall shall be considered a part of that building wall for the purposes of calculating building height.

     H.    The architectural style and the roof pitch of the ADU shall be compatible with that of the proposed or existing single-family dwelling.

     I.      The light reflectance value (LRV) for an ADU shall not exceed fifty (50) percent for walls or fences, or thirty (30) percent for roofs.

     J.      Site lighting shall be oriented away from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

 

11.33.080 Accessory dwelling units—Nonconforming ADUs and discretionary approval.
             Any proposed ADU or JADU that does not conform to the objective standards set forth in Sections 11.33.010 through 11.33.070 may be allowed by the city with a conditional use permit, in accordance with the other provisions of this title. (Ord. 492 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 11.34 SPORTS COURTS
11.34.010 Purpose.
     In this city, there are a number of private batting cages, private tennis-courts, and other private sport courts located in residential neighborhoods. The purpose of this chapter is to establish standards and regulations for all private batting cages, private tennis courts, and other private sport courts within any residential zone in the city. The standards and regulations adopted herein are designed and intended to minimize the negative impacts that can result to residents when these uses and structures are located in residential neighborhoods. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

 

11.34.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions apply:

     A.    A private sport court is a generally square or rectangular space that has a playing surface, paved or unpaved, designed to be used for playing or practicing tennis, badminton, paddle-tennis, volleyball, basketball, squash, or similar outdoor games. temporary playing surfaces on grass or dirt are not regulated by this zoning code.

     B.     A batting cage is a permanent or non-permanent outdoor space that is generally enclosed by fencing, netting, or some other barrier, and which is used for practicing baseball or softball hitting. A batting cage does not include equipment used in baseball or softball that is not generally enclosed, used for a temporary period and which can be dissembled, or compressed and moved after use (i.e. backstop, hitting nets, etc.).

     C.     A temporary batting cage is a batting cage that is non-permanent in nature, and shall be disassembled, or compressed and stored after each use. If the temporary batting cage is not disassembled, or compressed and moved, after each use, then it shall be considered a batting cage and be subject to all the applicable regulations for that use. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

 

11.34.030 Batting cage and private sport court use permit required.
     No person or persons shall construct, erect and maintain, or modify a batting cage, or private sport court in a residential zone without a use permit issued by the director of community development. No use permit shall be issued for a batting cage, or private sport court in a residential zone unless it conforms to the requirements of this chapter, and is an accessory use to a primary residential use on the same lot. A use permit will not be issued for a batting cage, or private sport court on a vacant residential parcel. A temporary batting cage shall be exempt from the requirement for a use permit and from the requirements of this chapter except for Sections 11.34.040(F) and (H) and 11.34.050. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

 

11.34.040 Construction and operation standards.
     Batting cages and private sport courts located in any residential zone, including any slabs, fences, overhead light-standards, or other fixtures accessory thereto, shall comply with the following subsections:

     A.    Location of Courts. Batting cages and private sport courts shall comply with the following location standards:

     1.     Side yard—Private sport courts, including any slabs, fences, overhead light-standards, or other fixtures accessory thereto, shall set back at least fifteen (15) feet from all side property lines. batting cages, including any slabs, fences, or other fixtures accessory thereto shall set back at least ten percent of the average width of the subject lot but in no case shall the required setback be less than five feet (5) or more than fifteen (15) feet. The director of community development may approve an encroachment into the side setback for batting cages upon a determination that the encroachment will not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent or adjoining property, and that such use is consistent with the residential use of the neighborhood.

     2.     Rear yard—Private sport courts, including any slabs, fences, overhead light-standards, or other fixtures accessory thereto, shall set back at least fifteen (15) feet from the rear lot line. Batting cages, including any slabs, fences, or other fixtures accessory thereto shall set back at least ten feet from the rear property line. The director of community development may approve an encroachment into the rear setback for temporary batting cages upon a determination that the encroachment will not interfere with the reasonable use and enjoyment of adjacent or adjoining property, and that such use is consistent with the residential use of the neighborhood.

     3.     Front yard—Batting cages and private sport courts shall not be located in the front yard unless a conditional use permit is reviewed and approved by the planning commission.

     B.     Grade. The grade for a batting cage or private sport court proposed on sloping terrain shall be established as the surface level of the court at the lowest elevation of the natural terrain. Grading in excess of fifty (50) cubic yards shall require review and approval of a conditional use permit by the planning commission. No grading is permitted in connection with the construction or use of any temporary batting cage.

     C.     Fencing. The height of any fence enclosing a private sport court shall not exceed ten feet above the finished surface of the court, and all portions of such fence shall be mesh, chain-link type fencing. Fencing for batting cages shall not exceed a height of twelve (12) feet, and shall be constructed of materials which reduce noise associated with their use. All fencing for batting cages must be lined with a mesh-netting interior to capture balls and reduce noise during use. For all batting cages, padding and a hanging net in front of the rear backstop shall be provided behind home-plate to reduce noise resulting from balls hitting the back of the cage. All structural support posts and framing shall be padded to reduce noise.

     D.    Lighting. All batting cages and private sport courts shall be unlighted unless a conditional use permit has been obtained by the applicant from the planning commission. The following minimum standards shall be met in the installation of lights. In addition to the following standards, the planning commission may impose other conditions which are deemed appropriate.

     1.     Height. Light standards and fixtures for private sport courts shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height, measured from the finished surface of the court. Light standards and fixtures for batting cages shall not exceed fifteen (15) feet in height.

     2.     Hours of Illumination. Lights for private sport courts and batting cages shall be turned off between ten p.m. and seven a.m. A timer shall be installed on each private sport court and batting cage light such that it automatically shuts off within one hour of non-use.

     3.     Intensity Level. Lights for private sport courts and batting cages shall not blink or flash. Lighting shall be shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are confined to the maximum extent feasible within the boundaries of the site, and shall be directed downward and away from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way. The intensity of lighting shall be measured by the director of community development to ensure that the light projected across property lines is not more than one footcandle above ambient levels.

     4.     Agreement Required. Each property owner and contractor installing light fixtures for private sport courts and batting cages shall execute an agreement available at the planning department, agreeing that the lights shall be installed and shielded so that the light source shall not be visible beyond the property line, and the light intensity shall not exceed one footcandle above ambient at the property line, and that, if it does, the conditional use permit issued pursuant to this chapter may be subject to revocation by the planning commission, in addition to other remedies available pursuant to law.

     5.     Existing Lighted Batting Cages and Private Sport Courts. Batting cages, temporary batting cages, and private sport courts constructed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall comply with the hours of illumination as stated in this section. If the existing light standards and fixtures are changed, or new light standards and fixtures are added, the new lighting shall comply with the provisions of this chapter in all respects.

     6.     Existing Unlighted Batting Cages and Private Sport Courts. No existing unlighted batting cage or private sport court shall have lights installed unless a conditional use permit is obtained, and the cage or court is brought into full compliance with the requirements of this chapter.

     E.     Landscape Plan. A landscape plan for the area between the private sport court or batting cage, and the adjacent property lines shall be submitted to and approved by the director of community development.

     F.     Batting Cage and Temporary Batting Cage Size. Batting cages and temporary batting cages shall be no larger than seventy (70) feet in length; twelve (12) feet in width; and twelve (12) feet in height.

     G.    Public Notification and Comment on Use Permit Applications for Cages. Upon receipt of a completed application for batting cage use permit written notice will be mailed by the director of community development to property owners within a three hundred (300) foot radius of the subject property, indicating that such an application has been filed with the city. The notice will invite written comment on the subject from said property owners.

     H.    Equipment for Batting Cages and Temporary Batting Cages. Composite baseball bats or wooden baseball bats shall be used in all batting cages and temporary batting cages subject to this chapter. Aluminum or other metal bats shall not be permitted. Pitching machine dimpled baseballs, soft covered baseballs, and other similar types of balls shall be used to decrease the noise associated with batting practice. Regulation baseballs and softballs are prohibited because of the loud noise that accompanies their use during batting practice. Pitching machines shall be low-noise emitting, and approved by the director of community development.

     I.      Batting Cage Review. Use permits obtained for batting cages shall be reviewed by the director of community development one year following the issuance of said permit, in order to ensure compliance with the zoning code regulations in existence at the time of issuance of the permit, and to ensure compliance with any conditions of approval regarding its use. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

 

11.34.050 Commercial use prohibited.
     A batting cage, temporary batting cage, or private sport court subject to the provisions of this chapter shall only be used by the occupants of the main residential dwelling on the same lot, or by their invited guests. A batting cage, temporary batting cage, or private sport court shall not be rented nor used as a private club, nor used for commercial purposes, except that batting or tennis instruction may be permitted on an individual basis provided a home occupation permit has been obtained. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

11.34.060 Minor deviations to requirements.
     The director of planning development may grant minor deviations to the construction and operation standards of unlit batting cages, temporary batting cages, or private sport courts, without an advertised public hearing, if it is determined that the deviations are warranted due to special circumstances on the property, and the applicant has received written approval of the deviation from all adjacent property owners. The director of planning development shall not grant deviations for lit batting cages or sport courts. (Ord. 372 § 1, 2008; Ord. 89 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 11.35 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT
11.35.010 Purpose.
     It is the city’s position that its hillsides are a valuable resource to the community, providing a visible geographical boundary to the city and aesthetic relief to the viewscape from virtually every location in La Cañada Flintridge. To date, hillside development in this community has generally avoided creating the significant negative effects common to the practice of mass grading to provide building sites. The end product of past development practices in La Cañada Flintridge has largely been the retention of natural land forms and the community’s “semi-rural” character. However, much of the remaining undeveloped acreage in the city can best be described as steep, consisting of slopes in excess of thirty (30) or forty (40) percent, and/or visually prominent. Further, the city’s hillsides contain or surround several significant environmental and aesthetic resources and are traversed by hiking and riding trails.

     The purpose of this chapter’s development standards and guidelines is to protect existing open space and to ensure that any hillside development is orderly and consistent with desirable existing surrounding development patterns, is carried out in a manner which promotes and enhances public safety and general welfare, and is not disruptive of the predominant hillside character of the community. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.020 Policies.
     The following policies are reflective of community standards and shall apply to all hillside development projects undertaken in the city:

     A.    Existing community character, as defined by such factors as visual appearance, density, road widths and vegetation shall be preserved and/or enhanced;

     B.     Prominent landforms within the community, including, but not limited to ridgelines, knolls, valleys, creeks (either dry or active), or other unique topographic features or viewscapes, shall be maintained. The most

     significant of such landforms are identified in the prominent landform policy of the city’s general plan.

     C.     Major hillside viewscapes visible from points within the city shall not be detrimentally altered by the intrusion of highly visible cut and/or fill slopes, building lines and/or road surfaces;

     D.    The visual impact of grading shall be minimized;

     E.     Levels of development shall be coordinated with available and potential circulation capacities and shall be controlled by the ability to provide adequate access within the constraints defined in this chapter;

     F.     Development in areas of exposure to high fire risk shall be subject to reasonable mitigation measures formulated during the project review process to reduce such risk;

     G.    Development shall be planned in such a manner as to avoid flood, mudslide, and subsidence to residents and structures on or near hillside areas as well as downstream of any project;

     H.    Significant environmental and recreational resources shall be maintained and enhanced, including measures to prevent visual or physical encroachment into such resources; and

     I.      New lots created under the provisions of this chapter shall be properly planned and designed to result in development which is in conformance with this chapter. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.030 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to any lot or parcel of land, residentially zoned and in residential use, which has an average slope of fifteen (15) percent or greater. Additionally, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to previously graded hillside lots, the slope of which had been equal to or greater than fifteen (15) percent prior to grading, and for which no building permits currently in effect have been issued.

     B.     For the purposes of this chapter, “average slope” shall be defined as the relationship between the change in elevation (rise) of the land and the horizontal distance (run) over which that change in elevation occurs. The average slope “S” is computed on the net area of a parcel by the following formula:

 

S = 100IL

          A

Where:

S = Average percent slope

I = Contour interval in feet

L = Summation of length of all contours in feet

A = Area, in square feet, of parcel being considered

 

     C.     City hillside development permit approval is required of any project requiring a building permit on a hillside lot as described in the preceding subsections A and B. The level of said approval shall be according to the following schedule:

 

     1.     New Development: Planning Commission Hearing

 

     2.     Existing Development:

 

     Addition ground floor:

     600 sf or less: Director’s review

     601-1200 sf: Administrative hearing

     Greater than 1200 sf: Planning commission hearing

 

     Addition, second floor:

     600 sf or less: Administrative hearing

     Greater than 600 sf: Planning commission hearing

 

     Enclosure under existing roof, second floor:

     600 sf or less: Directors review

     Greater than 600 sf: Administrative hearing

 

     Retaining walls, conventional:

     3 feet or lower: Director’s review

     Higher than 3 feet;

     up to 6 feet: Administrative hearing

     Higher than 6 feet: Planning commission hearing

 

     Retaining walls, crib type*:

     8 feet or lower: Director’s review

     Higher than 8 feet: Planning commission hearing

 

     * Crib type retaining walls (cribwalls) are, for the purpose of this chapter, constructed of modular units between which planting areas are provided. Cribwall product certification shall be provided to the satisfaction of the building department, along with evidence that septic drainage will not undermine the cribwall structure.

 

     Additional thresholds are contained under subsequent sections of this chapter.

 

     D.    In instances where this chapter conflicts with any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the provisions of this chapter shall take precedence and apply. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.040 Standards, guidelines, and thresholds.
     Each hillside parcel is unique. For many criteria, a fixed standard may not be an appropriate means of ensuring harmonious development, due to the complexities of topography, the varying degree of site visibility, the effects of local soil conditions on prospective landscaping, and many other variables.

     Thus this chapter contains not only development standards (mandatory or “shall” statements), but also guidelines (qualified “shall” statements). Thresholds are also included, indicating the level of review required for a given category of project, as outlined in Section 11.35.030(C). The intent is not to discourage appropriate project characteristics which require higher levels of review, but rather to ensure that the opportunity is provided for public review of projects of any theoretical potential for disruption of the hillside environment. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.041 Parcel standards and guidelines.
     A.    Density.

     1.     Newly Created Lots—Density Standards. Density overlay zones A and B, established in the environmental resources management element of the general plan, are shown in Map 1 of the general plan. For every property in any single family residential zone which is subject to the provisions of this chapter, there shall be an additional overlay zone designated by the respective zoning symbol plus either of the letters “A” or “B”;

     for example, R- 1-20,000-A; R-1-15,000-B, etc. The zone designated prior to the letters “A” or “B” (in the examples given, R-1-20,000 and R-1-15,000) shall be known as the basic zones and shall determine permitted use and minimum lot size. The overlay zone shall determine maximum development base densities as follows:

     a.     Density overlay zone “A” shall maintain development densities not exceeding one dwelling unit per one acre of site area as to any tract map (i.e. the creation of five or more lots).

     b.     Density overlay zone “B” shall maintain development densities not exceeding one dwelling per five acres of site area for any land division. This zone is applied to severe hillside areas of the city where developments with higher use densities could not be achieved in compliance with the policies and standards of this chapter and without detrimental effects upon public safety and aesthetics.

     Density shall be subject to additional reduction with increasing slope when necessary to meet required findings per Section 11.35.060(D), using the slope factor (subsection (A)(2)).

     2.     Slope Factor. The slope factor is a development standard for land divisions, and a guideline for floor area restrictions. As average lot slope increases, allowable minimum size of newly created lots shall increase per the following Table 1. Additionally, for existing lots, allowable floor area shall be lowered per the following Table 1, unless the required findings per Section 11.35.060(D) can otherwise be made.

     The slope factor is applied to land divisions and floor area as follows:

     a.     Minimum lot size standard for land divisions:

     Underlying zoning or overlay zone minimum lot area, divided by slope factor (from 1.0 to 0.2, depending on average slope — see Table 1)

     b.     Allowable floor area guideline (structures):

     Underlying maximum floor area for lot size (see Chapter 11.11), multiplied by slope factor (see Table 1).

 

Table 1. Slope Factor as Related to Average Slope

 

Slope

(%) Factor

20 or less

1.00

21

0.99

22

0.98

23

0.97

24

0.96

25

0.95

26

0.94

27

0.93

28

0.92

29

0.91

30

0.90

31

0.88

32

0.86

33

0.84

34

0.82

35

0.80

36

0.78

37

0.76

38

0.73

39

0.70

40

0.67

41

0.64

42

0.60

43

0.57

44

0.54

45

0.50

46

0.45

47

0.40

48

0.35

49

0.30

50

+ 0.20

 

     B.     Lot Configuration.

     1.     Minimum Lot Dimension Standards.

     Width: fifty-five (55) feet.

     Depth: one hundred fifty (150) feet.

     Frontage: forty (40) feet.

     2.     Excluded Areas Guidelines. No site portions of less than the following width, or separated from the main building pad by any strip of less than the following width, shall be included in the tabulation of lot area for the purposes of calculating allowable lot size, density, lot coverage, or floor area, unless the required findings in Section 11.35.060(D) can otherwise be made:

     R-1-40,000 or “B” density overlay: fifty-five (55) feet

     Other zones: forty (40) feet

     3.     Flag Lots.

     Flag lots shall be prohibited in proposed subdivisions or lot line adjustments. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.042 Grading.
     A.    General Grading.

     1.     Review Threshold. Any grading volume exceeding fifty (50) cubic yards, whether or not retained, is subject to director’s review approval or incorporation into a higher level of approval.

     2.     Preservation of Landforms. Policy “B” of this chapter shall be upheld: Prominent landforms within the community, including, but not limited to ridgelines, knolls, valleys, creeks (either dry or active), or other unique topographic features or viewscapes, shall be maintained.

     B.     Slopes. The height of retaining wall(s) exposed to view shall be deducted from the permitted height of the slope.

     1.     Cut Slopes.

     a.     Height Threshold. Unless approved at an administrative (or higher) hearing, the sum of the vertical heights, at any one section through the site, of any finished cut slopes created for the purpose of developing a residential dwelling or accessory use site, shall be limited to the height of the proposed structure wherever it is to be concealed from general view by that structure, or to a maximum of ten feet where exposed to general view.

     b.     Width Standard. Unless approved at an administrative (or higher) hearing, the lateral extension (width) of the finished cut slope shall not exceed the maximum width of the structure by more than twenty (20) feet, with an additional twenty (20) feet allowed for tapering to existing grade.

     c.     Gradient Threshold. Unless approved at an administrative (or higher) hearing, maximum exposed cut slope at any one section through the site shall not exceed that allowed by the city’s building code in effect at the time of grading permit issuance, and shall be further limited to the average existing grade plus twenty (20) percent grade. The existing and modified slopes shall be indicated on the topographical map by section cut lines spaced not more than twenty (20) feet apart.

     2.     Fill Slopes.

     a.     Height Threshold. Unless approved at an administrative (or higher) hearing, the vertical height of any finished fill slope created for the purpose of developing a residential dwelling site shall not exceed ten feet.

     b.     Gradient Threshold. Unless approved at an administrative (or higher) hearing, maximum fill slope shall not exceed that allowed by the city’s building code in effect at the time of grading permit issuance, and shall be limited to the average natural grade plus twenty (20) percent grade. The existing and modified slopes shall be indicated on the topographical map by section cut lines spaced not more than twenty (20) feet apart.

     3.     Slope Contours. Any manufactured slope, and the radius of any slope forming a transition between manufactured and natural slope shall follow the natural topography to the greatest extent possible. In no event

     shall less than a twenty-five (25) foot radius be used for the convex blending curvature at the outside corners and edges of any cut slope or fill slope or for the concave curvature where a cut slope or fill slope meets natural grade. The top and bottom of any cut slope or fill slope shall be rounded with a radius of not less than five feet.

     4.     Road or Driveway Cut/Fill. For a driveway or roadway, the maximum total vertical height of any combination of finished cut and fill slopes from grade shall not exceed eight feet unless approved through administrative (or higher) review.

     C.     Drainage.

     1.     Debris Collection. Where applicable, lot designs and the location of proposed improvements shall permit accommodation of debris from potential land slippage and/or erosion without damage to improvements or other properties downslope, and with access to a street to provide for cleanup and removal.

     2.     Runoff and Subsurface Discharge. Passage for bulked-flow and subsurface runoff shall be provided to a safe point of discharge, such as a street, channel or debris basin, in a manner such that damage to improvements, slopes, or other properties will not result. Natural stream gradients should not be flattened.

     3.     Overflow Route. An emergency overflow route for flood and debris flows which exceed the design capacity of planned drainage, flood control and debris facilities and devices shall be provided. Overflow routes shall direct overflows away from slopes and improvements and toward safe points of discharge.

     4.     Downdrains. All required exposed downdrains shall follow an oblique, rather than vertical, path down the slope, and shall be screened to the maximum extent possible by color and/or appropriate vegetation.

     D.    Other Requirements. All other city regulations and code requirements pertaining to grading shall also apply, unless specifically in conflict with the requirements set forth herein. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.043 Siting.
     A.    Minimum Setback Dimensions. Minimum setback dimensions shall conform to the standards for the underlying zone, except that a front setback reduction for one-story construction to no less than twenty (20) feet may be approved through an administrative (or higher) hearing, upon finding that the reduced setback:

     1.     Minimizes grading, building visibility, or paving; and

     2.     Achieves compatibility with the neighborhood setting.

     B.     Ridgeline Protection.

     1.     Sites and Structures. Proposed building sites and/or structures shall not detrimentally impact a primary ridgeline or knoll as identified in the environmental resources management map contained with the city’s general plan. Development on any parcel within one hundred (100) feet of an identified ridgeline shall be subject to planning commission approval.

     2.     Fences and Freestanding Walls. Fences and freestanding walls shall be located away from any ridgeline or crest of any slope so that such fences and walls are not visible against the sky from offsite.

     C.     Watercourse Protection.

     1.     Blockage. Blockage of watercourses, canyons, or streambeds is prohibited, and any alteration of such features is discouraged.

     2.     Approval by Other Agencies. Development in the vicinity of Blue Line Streams is subject to Army Corps of Engineers and California Department of Fish and Game approval prior to any issuance of grading or building permits.

     D.    View Preservation. For any project subject to public review, the project shall conform to the following guidelines to the extent possible and to the extent appropriate to its setting:

     1.     Building(s) shall be placed in a manner which minimizes blockage of neighboring views, especially those portions of any view which are central to the total view, and/or are viewed from primary living areas (living rooms, dining rooms, or foyers).

     2.     Landscaping height at maturity shall be consistent with preservation of neighbors’ views. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.044 Vehicular access.
     A.    Driveways.

     1.     Minimum Width—Standard. For private driveways in excess of one hundred fifty feet in length, minimum graded and paved width shall be ten feet if only one dwelling unit is served, or twenty (20) feet if more than one dwelling unit is served.

     2.     Maximum Grade. The finished grade of any driveway shall not exceed an average of seventeen (17) percent, with an absolute maximum grade of twenty (20) percent. Transitional top and bottom slopes shall be provided to the satisfaction of the director of community development and the director of public works.

     B.     Streets.

     1.     Minimum Width. The minimum street width for local and cul-de-sac streets (those streets used primarily to serve abutting property) shall be twenty-eight (28) feet from curb facing to curb facing, in a fifty (50) foot right-of -way; except that this fifty (50) foot right-of-way requirement may be waived and a lesser width prescribed by the planning commission for single-loaded streets or under such other circumstances as the planning commission determines are appropriate.

     2.     Maximum Length. No cul-de-sac street or other single entry access shall exceed seven hundred (700) feet in length.

     3.     Minimum Cul-de-Sac Diameter. Minimum roadway radius of thirty-two (32) feet at the terminus shall be maintained.

     4.     Improvements. Curbs and gutters, of a design to be determined by the director of public works, shall be required improvements for all proposed public streets. The director of public works may also determine that sidewalks will be required based on consistency with the pattern and needs of the neighborhood.

     5.     Maximum Grade. The finished grade of any dedicated public street or private street shall not exceed an average of seventeen (17) percent, with an absolute maximum grade of twenty (20) percent. Transitional top and bottom slopes shall be provided to the satisfaction of the director of community development and the director of public works.

     C.     Parking. Any lot or building site developed under the provisions of this chapter shall provide and maintain a minimum of four off-street parking spaces which shall not be developed in tandem and which shall be readily accessible from the street from which access to the lot or building site being developed is derived. However, if grading, building massing, landscaping, and/or pedestrian access qualities are enhanced, this requirement may be waived, to the extent that it exceeds the basic zoning ordinance requirements, as part of an administrative (or higher) hearing if the width of the street upon which the lot or building site is located is thirty-six (36) feet or greater, provided that the city may additionally require greater unobstructed width or curves and turns to accommodate the turning requirements of emergency vehicles as a condition of waiver of this additional onsite parking. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.045 Building dimensions.
     A.    Height. Maximum allowed building height is twenty-eight (28) feet as measured from the lowest finish grade adjacent to the building or directly beneath a projecting wall surface, to the highest roof structure, aside from the following exceptions as measured from the same grade:

     1.     Downslope Wall Height. Maximum allowed height of the downslope wall, aside from architectural extensions per the following subsection, shall be twenty (20) feet as measured from the lowest finish grade adjacent to the wall or directly beneath its outermost projection, except that for any project on a lot or parcel

     with an average slope of less than forty (40) percent, an upper wall section set back 6 feet or more from the building line established by the lower wall may be considered a separate wall.

     2.     Architectural Extensions. A maximum height of forty (40) feet for architectural extensions of up to twenty (20) feet in width or depth may be allowed, subject to approval through an administrative (or higher) hearing. Such extensions shall not be used for inhabited floor area above the highest floor level of the rest of the house.

     3.     Stepped Massing. A maximum overall height of thirty-five (35) feet may be allowed, subject to approval through an administrative (or higher) hearing, for buildings which, in stepping down the slope, diminish effectively viewed bulk, provided that at no point around the perimeter of the building is the twenty-eight (28) foot height limit exceeded except for architectural extensions per preceding subsection (A)(2) of this section. A building is considered to step down the slope if the line connecting its corresponding components is no steeper than the average of the natural slopes adjacent to the entire structure.

     4.     Vertical Additions. Any vertical addition to any habitable structure shall be subject to approval through an administrative (or higher) hearing.

     5.     Retaining Walls Adjacent to Buildings. Any retaining wall less than twenty (20) feet from a building wall may be considered a part of that building wall for the purposes of calculating building height.

     B.     Overall Horizontal Dimension Guideline. Maximum horizontal dimension shall not exceed one hundred twenty (120) feet, unless the required findings in Section 11.35.060(D) can otherwise be made.

     C.     Floor Area. As average lot slope increases, underlying zoning limits on total floor area in relation to lot size shall be lowered per Table 1 in Section 11.35.041(A), unless the required findings per Section 11.35.060(D) can otherwise be made. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.046 Architectural design guidelines.
     The following guidelines shall apply, unless it can be demonstrated that the project, though not complying, is consistent with the findings in Section 11.35.060(D):

     A.    Roof Pitch. The dominant roof pitch at the downslope side shall correspond to the natural slope of the site, and no more than twenty-five (25) percent of the total roof area should be flat.

     B.     Vertical Accents. Vertical accents are encouraged (see Building Height, Section 11.35.045(A)), and shall be accompanied by a vertical break in wall surface.

     C.     Symmetry. Overall symmetry is strongly discouraged.

     D.    Wall Modulation.

     1.     Separation Between Breaks. A vertical break or breaks in each wall surface shall be provided at least each forty (40) feet on the first floor and each twenty (20) feet on the second floor.

     2.     Break Dimensions. The breaks in plane recommended in preceding subsection (D)(1) of this section shall consist of significant projecting or recessed areas.

     E.     Surface Depth. Creation and expression of surface depth, through the use of deeply recessed wall openings, reveals, moldings, cornices, and similar devices, are encouraged.

     F.     Cantilevers. Cantilevers and dominant overhangs, except for eaves, are discouraged.

     G.    Brightness. Reflectance value (LRV) shall not exceed fifty (50) percent for walls or fences, or thirty (30) percent for roofs.

     H.    Reflectivity. Reflective glass and glossy roofing materials are discouraged.

     I.      Roof Elements. Reflective roof elements such as skylights and solar panels shall not produce substantial glare from offsite view, and shall not dominate the view of the building from close range.

 

     J.      Retaining Walls. Retaining walls constructed of materials architecturally consistent with the development may be permitted in lieu of or in combination with cut or fill slopes. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.047 Landscaping and lighting guidelines.
     The following guidelines shall apply, unless it can be demonstrated that the project, though not complying, is consistent with the findings in Section 11.35.060(D):

     A.    Planting and Maintenance. Plants shall be established and maintained in accordance with the approved plan. Planting should be installed as early as possible following finish grading in order to allow timely granting of occupancy permits Landscaping proposed to screen any part of the project must reasonably be expected to grow to an effective level in four years (see Section 11.35.070).

     B.     Environmental Control.

     1.     Fuel Modification. A fuel modification program, correlated to Los Angeles County Fire Department guidelines, shall be provided.

     2.     Irrigation. No automatic irrigation system shall be allowed unless moisture sensor shutoff is provided to prevent over-saturation. Drip irrigation is encouraged wherever consistent with soil retention. Plant materials of similar water needs shall be grouped on the same irrigation valve.

     C.     Screening.

     1.     Retaining Walls. Any retaining wall over three feet in height shall be screened from offsite view by a building or by landscaping.

     2.     Building Screening. Where building bulk as seen from downslope is a concern, effective mitigation through landscape screening shall be provided. Blockage by such landscaping of neighboring views over the site is discouraged.

     3.     Accessory Structures. Accessory structures shall be screened from offsite view.

     D.    Plant Characteristics. The plant palette shall be consistent with the objectives of erosion control, overall drought tolerance, and incorporation of native plants. Transitional plant character shall be provided in areas separating natural slope growth from planted and irrigated areas.

     E.     Tree Sizes and Quantities. Sizes and quantities of new trees and existing trees to remain shall maximize retention and planting of mature trees, with a guideline of twenty-five (25) percent of the new and existing trees either mature or of minimum thirty-six (36) inches box size at planting.

     F.     Tree Protection. Any removal or pruning of existing trees shall conform to the requirements of the city’s tree preservation ordinance, Municipal Code Chapter 4.26 (adopted by Ordinance No. 178 and any successor thereto).

     G.    Site Lighting. Site lighting shall be oriented away from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.050 Application materials.
     A.    Submittal Requirements. In addition to all materials required by the city’s subdivision, zoning, building and grading regulations and environmental review procedures applicable to projects falling within the scope of this chapter, submittal of the following application materials shall be required for all projects provided for herein. Items (A)(1) through (3) may be combined as one or more drawings as prescribed by the director.

     1.     A site or plot plan, drawn to a scale prescribed by the city planner, but not less than a scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet for lots or parcels less than two acres, reflecting the proposed project, including representations of property lines and all recorded and proposed easements and public rights-of-way. All structures including but not limited to retaining walls shall be shown.

     2.     A topographical map prepared by a licensed civil engineer or licensed surveyor, of the project site, unless the director determines that the level of information is appropriate to the scale of the project without detailed topographical information. This map shall be drawn to the same scale as the site plan required in subsection (A)(1) of this section, with a maximum contour interval of five feet, or less as prescribed by the director, used consistently throughout the map.

     3.     A grading plan for the project, drawn to the same scale as prescribed above, unless no grading requiring a permit is proposed.

     4.     Cross section(s) of the site and nearby affected areas, cutting through the major slope, showing all buildings, fences, walls, and landscaping at mature height anticipated under the planting conditions onsite.

     5.     Elevation drawings at a scale of at least one-fourth inch equals one foot zero inches, with materials, colors, finishes, and critical vertical dimensions clearly indicated. As deemed appropriate by the director or designee, proposed and existing-to-remain landscaping at maturity shall be shown in a manner that allows full visibility of building elevations beyond. Indication of nearby structures or features offsite shall also be shown where deemed appropriate by the director or designee.

     6.     Superimposed on a copy of the topographic map required by Section 11.35.050(A)(2) a landscaping plan which shall accurately show:

     a.     Those existing trees on the project site within one hundred (100) feet of any proposed grading or construction with a trunk diameter of six inches or greater at a height of four feet above grade, and/or having a vertical height from the ground level to treetop level of fifteen (15) feet or greater;

     b.     Species of all such trees and their appropriate trunk diameter, height and condition;

     c.     Final disposition of all existing trees;

     d.     The type and extent of proposed vegetation, including provisions for ongoing maintenance and irrigation thereof; and

     e.     Evidence of slope stability through vegetation of created slopes.

     This plan shall be drawn to or keyed to a master map the same scale as is prescribed for the application materials required by subsection (A)(1) of this section, and shall be completed by a professional landscape architect registered with the state of California.

     7.     Where alteration to existing topography is proposed:

     a.     A soils engineering report which shall contain, but not be limited to:

     i.      Data regarding the nature, distribution and strengths of existing soils,

     ii. Relationship of soil characteristics to drainage related to lot coverage and landscaping/irrigation design,

     iii. Conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures,

     iv. Design criteria for any identified corrective measures, and

     v.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability.

     This investigation and report shall be performed by a professional soils engineer who is experienced in the practice of soil mechanics and who is registered with the state of California.

     b.     A geology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     i.      The surface and sub-surface geology of the site,

     ii. Strike angle of bedrock strata,

     iii. Degree of seismic hazard,

     iv. Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development,

     v.     Analysis of the project in relation to regional water quality control board standards, and

     vi. A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability.

 

 

     This investigation and report shall be completed by a professional geologist who is experienced in the practice of engineering geology and who is registered with the state of California.

     c.     A hydrology report which shall include, but not be limited to:

     i.      The hydrologic conditions on the site,

     ii.     Possible flood inundation,

     iii.    Downstream flood hazards,

     iv.    Natural drainage courses,

     v.     Analysis of the project, including its septic system, in relation to regional water quality control board standards,

     vi.    Design criteria to mitigate any identified hydrologic hazards consistent with applicable regulations,

     vii.   Account of all runoff and debris from tributary areas,

     viii.  Consideration for each lot or dwelling unit site in a proposed development project,

     ix.    Runoff and debris amounts computed using the Los Angeles County flood control district criteria, and

     x.     A concluding statement evaluating the impact of the project on slope stability, water quality, and downstream drainage.

     This investigation and report shall be completed by a professional civil engineer experienced in the science of hydrology and hydrologic investigation and who is registered with the state of California.

     d.     If the project requires planning commission review and is not served by sewers, a percolation test report that has been reviewed and approved by the Los Angeles County health department and which shall include, but not be limited to:

     i.      Data regarding the nature and distribution of soil characteristics relative to absorption capacity,

     ii.     A site or plot plan, drawn to a scale prescribed by the city planner, but not less than a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet, reflecting the location on the site where such test(s) were conducted, including: (A) representations of property lines and all recorded and projected easements and public rights-of-way, and (B) the topography of the site which is within a one hundred (100) foot radius of such test locations,

     iii.    A concluding statement evaluating the ability of the project’s sewage disposal system to meet the absorption capacity requirements of Los Angeles County’s standards for private sewage disposal systems.

     8.     Photographs of the site and its surroundings as prescribed by the director. Normally, such photos should include views of the site and properties adjacent for a distance of three hundred (300) feet from each end of the principal street frontage, as well as properties opposite the subject and adjacent properties. Photos should be mounted color prints, spliced from continuous views along the principal street(s), with a key map provided indicating relationship of views to parcels, streets, and features.

     9.     Color chips including reflectance values (LRVs) and keyed to elevation drawings.

     10.   Recommended for complete understanding of the proposal where appropriate, a three-dimensional scale model of the project site, on-site erection of a full-size mockup (either balloons denoting building corners or a story pole frame), perspective views, building plans or such other graphic information.

     11.   A completed initial study questionnaire, on forms provided by the city.

     12.   Where the impact of noncompliance with specified guidelines and/or standards of this chapter cannot be determined by the city following public review, the applicant will be required to provide alternative project plans which are in conformance with said guidelines and standards for the purpose of comparative evaluation.

     B.     Waiver of Requirement for Application Materials. The requirement to submit any or all of the materials enumerated above may be waived by the director, under any of the following conditions:

 

     1.     There is no evidence that project characteristics warrant technical review by the planning commission to supplement the technical review provided by the plan check process.

     2.     For any addition to an existing housing development, the materials are not applicable to the scope of the project and not pertinent to any of the findings contained in subsection (B)(7) of this section.

     3.     The existence of recently completed and satisfactory reports covering the same subject matter on the same site.

     4.     Inclusion of any or all of the above reports as part of an environmental impact report or negative declaration, if either is required or has been satisfactorily completed for the proposal on the site.

     5.     The existence of reports as described in subsections (A)(7)(a) and (b) of this section, previously prepared for a site or area adjacent to the project site, if the project site and such adjacent site or area may reasonably be expected to possess similar characteristics relative to the development issues addressed by this chapter. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.060 Project approval.
     A.    Initiation. A proposal for hillside development may be initiated by application. An administrative hearing may also be initiated by referral by the director. A planning commission hearing may also be initiated by referral by the administrative hearing authority, or by appeal of an administrative hearing action by any party.

     B.     Notification. Notice of director’s review shall be subject to neighbor notification per Section 11.45.060(C)(2)(a). Notice of the administrative hearing or planning commission hearing shall be provided to all owners of property located within eight hundred (800) feet of any subject site within the R1-20,000 or R1-40,000 base zones or within the “B” overlay zone, and to all owners of property located within three hundred (300) feet of any other subject site. Such notice shall be mailed no less than ten days prior to the hearing date and shall include the date, time and location of the hearing and a brief description of the project and site location.

     C.     Authority.

     1.     Conditions of Approval. At any level of review, conditions may be imposed as a part of any approval such as are deemed necessary to fulfill the purposes of the zoning ordinance and may include reasonable guarantees and evidence that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with.

     2.     Director’s Review. Applications for hillside development shall be reviewed by the director of community development, or designee. The director or designee shall determine that all applicable provisions of this chapter are met by the project, and that the project is found not to be in conflict with or potentially detrimental to the public health, safety or welfare or other community standards, and conforms to the city’s general plan and all other ordinances and regulations of the city. Director’s review shall be subject to planning commission call-up per Section 11.45.060(D)(1). Any project which exceeds the thresholds established by this chapter or does not meet the standards of this chapter may not be approved, unless an administrative hearing or planning commission public hearing is held, in accordance with procedures contained herein.

     3.     Administrative Hearing. Applications for administrative hearing review shall be acted upon by the planning commission. The planning commission may delegate administrative hearing authority to a subcommittee of that body, or to the director or designee.

     The administrative hearing authority may approve, approve with conditions, disapprove, or forward to the planning commission, with or without recommendation, any administrative hearing application.

     4.     Planning Commission Hearing. Projects exceeding the threshold for planning commission review as established in Section 1l.35.030(C), single lot development projects referred from the administrative hearing authority to the planning commission, and all applications for multiple lot development projects, as defined in this section, shall be subject to review and action by the planning commission. For the purposes of this section, a multiple lot development project shall be considered to be any development of two or more contiguous lots or parcels of land.

     D.    Required Findings. The administrative hearing authority or planning commission may approve an application following a determination that all of the following findings can be met:

     1.     The project, through elements of architectural and landscape design, will uphold the policies of this chapter, and will be harmonious with the better aspects of the built and natural setting;

     2.     The project will maximize potential for sensitive use and effective preservation of open space;

     3.     The project will not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare;

     4.     The project will not adversely affect the orderly development of property within the city;

     5.     The project will conform to the goals and policies set forth in the general plan;

     6.     The project will not create a nuisance, hazard or enforcement problem within the neighborhood or the city or require the city to provide an unusual or disproportionate level of public services;

     7.     There are special conditions or unique characteristics of the subject property and its location or surroundings, such as minimal views or the potential for reducing effectively viewed bulk, which justify exceeding the provisions of one or more of the provisions set forth in this chapter to permit project development;

     8.     Any potential for the project to present visibly excessive bulk from any vantage point, near or far, is mitigated by screening or siting characteristics;

     9.     The project does not create an avoidable or unreasonable impairment of the view from any other property;

     10.   Additionally, for any project on a lot or parcel with an average slope of forty (40) percent or greater:

     a.     The height of the project, or any part of the project, does not present visibly excessive bulk from any vantage point, near or far,

     b.     The project will not create an undue fire, flood, mudslide, subsidence, seismic safety, or other environmental risk for any persons or their property,

     c.     The privacy of the residents of other properties will not be unreasonably compromised.

     E.     Expiration. Approvals shall automatically expire if the use or action authorized by such approval is not commenced or construction necessary and incident thereto is not begun on or before the time limit specified in such permit, and thereafter diligently advanced, or if no time is specified, within twelve (12) months after the date such approval was granted. However, if the approved documents are unchanged, the director may grant one additional twelve (12) month extension of time; provided, that, no changes to the code affecting the project were instituted subsequent to the approval. (Ord. 413 §§ 19, 20, 2013; Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.070 Granting of permits.
     A.    No building permit shall be issued except in accordance with the terms of conditions of the hillside development permit approval.

     B.     No occupancy permit shall be granted until plantings as approved on the landscaping plans are established, to be verified by two inspections approximately one month apart.

     C.     No permit shall be issued for upstream facilities with significant unmitigated downstream impacts until mitigating measures have been implemented downstream. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.080 Appeals.
     Actions by the city on hillside projects may be appealed by any person upon filing of written notice of such appeal to the city within fifteen (15) days of the action, as follows:

     A.    Any action by the director under this chapter is subject to appeal to an administrative hearing;

     B.     Any action by an administrative hearing authority under this chapter is subject to appeal to the planning commission;

     C.     Any decision of the planning commission under the provisions of this chapter is subject to appeal to the city council. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.090 Fees.
     Reasonable fees may be imposed by the city for review of project applications and appeals as provided for in this code. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

 

11.35.100 Severability.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this chapter is, for any reason, held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such division shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. The city hereby declares that it would have adopted this chapter, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof separately from any portion ever declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 329 § 1.2, 2002)

Chapter 11.36 GENERAL REGULATIONS AND AREA REQUIREMENTS
11.36.010 Buildings moved.
     No building or structure shall be moved from one lot or premises to another unless such building or structure shall thereupon be made to conform to all the provisions of this code relative to buildings or structures hereafter erected upon the lot or premises to which such building or structure shall have been moved, and shall be made to conform to the general character of the existing buildings in the neighborhood or better. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 702, 1974)

 

11.36.020 Buildings converted or altered.
     No building or structure existing at the time of the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter or any amendment thereof which is designed, arranged, intended for or devoted to a use not permitted in the zone in which such building or structure is located, shall be enlarged, extended, reconstructed, built upon or structurally altered unless the use of such building or structure is changed to a use permitted in the zone in which such building or structure is located. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 703, 1974)

 

11.36.030 Temporary housing in disaster areas.
     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, where an existing residence is damaged or destroyed by a major disaster such as fire, flood or earthquake so declared by the Governor of the state of California during the previous six months, a mobilehome may be used as a residence on the same lot or parcel of land by the owner and his or her family for a period not to exceed one year. This section authorizes only the temporary replacement of a damaged or destroyed residence and not an increase in the number of living quarters permitted on the property. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 705.5, 1974)

 

11.36.040 General prohibition.
     A person shall not use or cause or permit to be used any building, structure, improvement or premises located in any zone described in this code contrary to the provisions of this code. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 706, 1974)

 

11.36.050 Investigative powers of commission.
     Every member of the commission, the director, and authorized representatives may enter any premises, building or structure at any reasonable hours for investigation or inspection as to whether or not any portion of such premises, building or structure, is being used in violation of this code. Every person who denies or prevents, obstructs or attempts to deny, prevent or obstruct, such access is guilty of a misdemeanor. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 707, 1974)

 

11.36.070 Required area reduced by public use.
     If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required area and after creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for a public use other than for highway purposes, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel has not less than eighty (80) percent of the area indicated by the number which follows the zoning symbol, such remainder shall be considered as having the required area. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 722, 1974)

 

11.36.080 Required area reduced for highway purposes.
     If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required area, as defined in Section 11.01.030, and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for highway purposes exclusively, in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and if the remainder of such lot or parcel has not less than seventy-five (75) percent of the required area, then such remainder shall be considered as having the required area, provided the remaining portion of said lot or parcel of land has an area of not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, or an area as is otherwise provided herein. The director, without notice or hearing, may approve a reduction of lot area to seventy-five (75) percent of the required area where the remaining parcel would have less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet, but not less than two thousand (2,000) square feet, where topographic features, subdivision design or other conditions create an unnecessary hardship or unreasonable limitation making it obviously impractical to comply with the stated minimum. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 722.3, 1974)

 

11.36.090 Required width reduced by public use.
     If a lot or parcel of land has not less than the required width and after the creation of such lot or parcel of land a part thereof is acquired for public use in any manner including dedication, condemnation or purchase, if the remainder of such lot has an average width of not less than forty (40) feet, such remainder shall be considered as having the required width. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 722.5, 1974)

 

11.36.100 Required area to be in accordance with zoning densities.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 11.36.060(B), a lot or parcel of land having less than the minimum square footage provided for in the zoning on said property shall not be considered to have the “required area” necessary for the erection, construction or use of a building or structure if:

     A.    The lot or parcel of land is vacant; and

     B.     The owner or person having a right of possession of said lot or parcel is also the owner or has a right of possession to any contiguous parcel or property. (Ord. 28 § 1, 1977)

 

11.36.110 Area or width diminished by public use.
     Where a building or structure is lawfully located on property acquired for public use (by condemnation, purchase or otherwise) such building or structure may be relocated on the same lot or parcel of land, although such building or structure is existing as a nonconforming use or although the area or width regulations of this code or both cannot be complied with. Where any part of such building or structure is acquired for public use, the remainder of such building or structure may be repaired, reconstructed or remodeled, with the same or similar kind of materials as used in the existing buildings. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 736, 1974)

 

11.36.120 Reduction of lot area or width.
     Except a conveyance for public use or as otherwise provided in this chapter, a person shall not divide any lot or parcel of land, and shall not convey any lot or parcel of land or any portion thereof, if as a result of such division or conveyance the area or average width of any lot or parcel of land is so reduced, or a lot or parcel of land is created, which lot or parcel of land has an area or average width less than:

     A.    Sufficient so that the number and type of structures on such resulting lot or parcel of land comply with the provisions of this chapter;

     B.     The required area, or required width of the applicable zone. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 737, 1974)

 

11.36.130 Rescission.
     Any deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell made contrary to the provisions of this chapter is voidable at the sole option of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, his or her heirs, personal representative, or trustee in insolvency or bankruptcy within one year after the date of execution of, the deed or conveyance, sale or contract to sell, but the deed of conveyance, sale or contract to sell is binding upon any assignee or transferee of the grantee, buyer or person contracting to purchase, other than those above enumerated, and upon the grantor, vendor or person contracting to sell, his or her assignee, heir or devisee. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 738, 1974)

Chapter 11.37 SIGN REGULATIONS
11.37.010 Purpose.
     The intent and purpose of this chapter is to upgrade the viability of the business district by making its environment more attractive to customers. Improvement of the business district would be achieved by regulating the size, height, construction, location, graphic qualities and general upkeep of signs and sign structures. This chapter will enhance the physical beauty and business climate within the city; provide for public safety; encourage local shopping; protect property values and work toward preserving and enhancing the overall beauty of the city. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.020 Applicability.
     All signs are subject to the provisions of this chapter. A “sign” is: any physical form of visual communication, including its structure and component parts, which is exposed to exterior view to attract attention to or provide information about the subject matter, through use of any combination of words, letters, figures and/or symbols.

     For further definitions of terms used within this chapter, refer to Section 11.01.030. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.030 General policies.
     The city has adopted the following general policies for signage:

     A.    Advertising clutter shall be minimized and effectiveness of allowed signage maximized.

     B.     Design integrity and harmony with the underlying structure and nearby signs shall be required.

     C.     Flexibility shall be allowed in the interest of creative design and commercial viability.

     D.    Identity of the foothill boulevard districts shall be enhanced. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.040 Standards and guidelines.
     Allowable signs are generally subject to review for conformance with the general policies of this chapter and with standards set forth below. Temporary and other signs not subject to review are set forth in subsection (A)(2) of this section. Prohibited signs are listed in subsection D of this section.

     A.    Allowable Signs.

     1.     Signs Subject to Review.

     a.     Commercial Signage Standards (see also Bonuses, subsection (1)(b))

 

 

 

Maximum Size/Area

Max. # per Business

Placement

Form/

Materials

Color

Illumination

Typestyle/

Graphics

General Notes:

Total 1 square foot per linear ft. of bldg. frontage, + Bonuses (subsec. b)

 

At least 15 square feet allowed for each tenant

 

Letter height 18″, + Bonuses (subsec. b)

2 + Bonuses (subsec. b) + monument signs

No part of sign above parapet or more than 2′ above eave

 

No more than 35% of maximum allowable signage area may be more than 12′ above adjacent grade

 

Margin distance from copy to edge of sign shall be at least 15% of the corresponding total dimension of copy

Plexiglass or plastic material may not be glossy, may not be used for pictorial graphics

 

Min. 3/4″ returns are required on copy

 

No exposed conduit, raceways, or other mechanical fixtures allowed

Colors shall be compatible with surroundings

 

Colors from District palette as adopted by separate Planning Commission resolution are required

 

Letters and/or field shall be opaque

 

White or bright backgrounds discouraged

Illumination of all signs shall be limited to subdued lighting

 

Internally illuminated and neon signs shall be at least 7′ above grade, except indirect neon

 

No internal illumination is allowed in Old Town District (La Cañada Blvd. to Alta Canyada Road)

Exposed neon may be used for script and/or pictorial graphics only

 

Typestyles from District palette as adopted be separate Planning Commission resolution are required

 

The name of the center or business shall be the dominant focus of the sign

Wall signs:

See General Notes total; see subsection b for bonuses

1 + Bonuses (subsec. b)

Freestanding above or below bldg. projection encouraged (see Bonus subsection b)

 

Alignment of top of sign with top of adjacent sign(s) req’d in multi-tenant building

Geometric signs of plastic materials prohibited

 

Depth of small sign to be limited, especially when close to street

Letter color same as background color encouraged (see Bonuses subsection b)

 

Unless waived through review, an outline of the copy is required in contrasting color for painted signs

Projecting signs:

3′ Width; 6′ Height

 

Min. 2:1 Height to Width ratio if width exceeds 2′

1 + Bonuses (subsec. b)

Min. distance from neighboring projecting sign: 50′ or tenant width, whichever is less

 

Min. 7′ clearance above grade (8′ req’d above public right-of-way)

Flexible materials allowed if mounted on opposite ends

 

 

 

Awning signs:

Letter height: max. 8″ if used w/ wall sign &/or projecting sign

1 + valance signs per Bonuses (subsec. b)

Adequate distance from neighboring signage as to not block view from 30° angle

 

Valance min. 7′ above grade, w/4′ max. encroachment

 

Lettering on valance only, if used in conjunction with a wall sign or projecting sign

No glossy materials allowed

 

Open framework allowed beneath awning only

 

No general illumination of awning is allowed

 

Ground signs:

6′ above grade

 

Width: 8′

 

Area: 30 sq. ft.

1 per 100′ of street frontage of parcel

 

Max. 2 per property

50′ min. distance from neighboring ground sign

Plastic and plexiglass are prohibited

 

Landscaping at base required unless waived through review

 

Geometric signs of plastic materials prohibited

 

Exposed neon and internal illumination prohibited

 

Indirect neon encouraged

No more than 8 tenants may be identified on a directory monument sign, unless provided for under Section 11.37.050, “Exceptions”

Window signs

(permanent):

See General Notes total; see subsection b for bonuses

 

Within 3′ of window

 

White, pastel, and satin-finish metallic encouraged

Direct lighting of signs within windows prohibited

Only business name/ logo or generic product service/type

 

 

     b.     Bonuses. Bonuses are applicable to adjust the standards set forth in subsection A of this section. See also Section 11.37.050, Exceptions.

     If the city finds the resulting signage consistent with the general policies of this chapter, allowable sign area and total maximum allowable area may be increased due to the following site and design characteristics. The cumulative total of area bonuses, except as listed below under subsections (b)(ii), (iii) (iv), shall not exceed fifty (50) percent of underlying maximum area.

     Bonuses Based on Site Characteristics.

     i.      Distance of sign from lot frontage on Foothill Boulevard, at the rate of one percent additional sign area and/or letter height allowed for each four feet of distance, for a bonus of up to fifty (50) percent.

     ii. Narrow Building Relative to Lot. If the building frontage is less than fifty (50) percent of the lot frontage, an additional one square foot is allowed for each five linear feet of lot frontage.

     iii. Secondary Street Frontage. An additional one square foot per two linear feet of building frontage upon a secondary street is allowed for signage to face that street.

     iv. Frontage Facing Side or Rear Parking Lot or Alley. An additional ten square feet of sign area is allowed for signs facing an alley or parking area of at least fifteen (15) spaces to the side or rear of the building.

     Bonuses Based on Sign Design Characteristics.

     v.     Thin Lettering. Allowable sign area may be increased up to fifty (50) percent by multiplying the allowable area by the bonus factor:

 

B = A - 100,

LW

where: B= bonus factor (% of underlying allowable area);

L = number of letters;

A = sign area (sq. in.); and

W = width of stroke inches)

 

     vi.    Spacing between letters may be omitted from area calculations to the extent that spacing exceeds one-half the average letter width.

     vii.   Appendages to letters shall be exempt from the city’s margin distance requirements on signs with fields, and shall be omitted from tabulation of sign area on signs without fields.

     viii.  Wall sign area and total maximum allowable area may be increased due to:

     (A)   Letters matching the color of the wall to which they are directly affixed shall be counted at 0.75 of actual area.

     (B)   Freestanding letters atop or below a building projection, provided that their depth is at least three inches, shall be counted at 0.9 times their actual frontal area.

     Exclusion from Tabulation of Sign Area and Number.

     ix.    Suspended projecting signs shall be omitted from calculation of sign area if:

     (A)   Said signs do not exceed two feet in height and width;

     (B)   Said signs are more than fifty feet apart within the same tenant frontage; and

     (C)   Said signs are less than ten feet in height directly above grade.

     x.     Awning valance signs containing only the name of the business, limited to one per awning and not exceeding eight inches in height.

     xi.    Window signs (permanent) are not to be counted as part of overall sign area, provided that the lettering on such signs does not exceed six inches in height and that no portion of the exempt signage be at an elevation higher than four feet above the adjacent grade.

     B.     Residential Zone Signage. The only signs permitted in a residential zone are those signs designated in subsection C of this section as review-exempt, and the following:

     1.     Single-Family Zones. Permanent subdivision identification signs shall be permitted. Any illumination shall be limited to subdued lighting. Subdivision identification signs shall be subject to the restrictions imposed on commercial ground signs (see subsection (A)(1)(a)) of this section, except that height may not exceed three feet.

     2.     Multifamily Zones. One multifamily housing complex identification sign shall be permitted. Any illumination shall be limited to subdued lighting. Identification signs shall be subject to the restrictions imposed on commercial ground signs (see subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section), except for size. The sign area shall not exceed eight square feet for each multifamily complex containing one to nine units, nor sixteen (16) square feet for each multifamily complex containing ten to twenty-nine (29) units, nor thirty-two (32) square feet for each multi-family complex with thirty (30) or more units.

     3.     Temporary Subdivision Signs.

     a.     Regulations. Temporary subdivision signs shall be limited to forty (40) square feet of sign area, and located no closer than ten feet to a paved right-of-way. No tag sign, streamers or other appurtenances shall be affixed to a subdivision sign. All temporary subdivision signs shall be removed upon sale of all homes in the subdivision or model complex advertised. Any change of copy to advertise a different subdivision shall require a new permit.

     b.     Permit. A permit is required for any temporary subdivision sign. The permit application shall be accompanied by a fee and surety bond or cash deposit in an amount established by resolution of the city council to guarantee removal of the sign within fifteen (15) days after termination of the permit. A permit shall be valid for one year and shall be renewed by the director of community development for subsequent one-year periods following approval of an application for renewal accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council, as long as any unit with the subdivision remains unsold.

     4.     Nonresidential Uses in Residential Zones. One nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated sign may be used for an allowed nonresidential use, subject to restrictions on commercial ground signs (see subsection (A)(1)(a) of this section).

     C.     Review-Exempt Signs. The following signs are permitted on private property without discretionary city approval; provided, that the signs conform to the following standards. Signs within review-exempt categories exceeding the limits set herein shall be subject to discretionary review.

     1.     Temporary Signs.

     a.     Noncommercial Signs.

     i.      Political Signs. Total sign area shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet per parcel.

     ii.     Election Signs. Display of election signs shall be removed within five days after such election. Election signs placed on one lot shall not exceed a total area of eighty (80) square feet.

     iii.    Civic Event and Public Service Signs. Display of civic event and public service signs shall not exceed three thirty (30) day periods in one year. Total sign area shall not exceed eighty (80) square feet per parcel.

     iv.    Government Posters.

     v.     Property Regulation Signs. Property regulation signs shall not be illuminated and shall not exceed three square feet in area for each occupancy or for each one hundred (100) feet of building frontage of a single occupancy.

     2.     Temporary commercial signs allowed without review are limited to the following:

     a.     Temporary signs, including banner or fabric signs, for the sole purpose of marking the opening of a new business, displayed upon the building containing such new business and for no more than thirty (30) days after its opening. Area shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) percent of the allowable area for permanent signage.

     b.     Temporary window signs or non-paper promotional banners not exceeding twenty-four (24) square feet in sign area. The sole purpose of these signs shall be to advertise a sale of merchandise or services. Such signs shall cover no more than twenty-five (25) percent of total window display area eight feet or less above grade and on the same building face. No more than two of such signs may be displayed, and display shall not exceed a period of fifteen (15) days in a forty-five (45) day period. Color of temporary window signs shall conform to the standards for the district in which the sign is located, as shown in the official color palette.

     c.     Realty Signs.

     i.      Number. One “For Sale” or “For Lease” sign may be displayed per street frontage of the property to which it refers. One “Open House” sign may be displayed on the property during the hours of the open house.

     ii.     Size. No realty sign shall exceed twelve (12) square feet in area or six feet in height.

     iii.    Location. Realty sign shall be placed inside the subject property lines unless an agreement is made to display the sign on another private parcel or on the public right-of-way through an encroachment permit. Realty signs shall not block line of sight for ingress and egress.

     iv.    Construction and Trades Signs. Only one such sign per project is allowed, with a maximum twelve (12) square feet in area or six feet in height. The sign shall not be located closer than five feet to the property line. The sign may not be erected more than sixty (60) working days before beginning construction and must be removed within five (5) days following the completion of the work.

     3.     Permanent Signs.

     a.     Permanent Commercial Signs.

     i.      Address number signs not exceeding the minimum size required by the fire department.

     ii.     Incidental identification signs shall be limited to the following: Sign(s) not exceeding a total of four square feet in area per occupancy, and not more than four feet in height above the adjacent grade, designating the owner and/or occupant of the property, hours of operation, and/or address, or designating “manager” or “office” or the availability of major credit cards or other nonadvertising designations; provided, that said signs are not internally illuminated.

     iii.    “Open/closed” sign, limited to the following: One sign not to exceed four square feet attached to the building of business indicating that the establishment is open or closed for business.

     iv.    Directional on-site signs, limited to one per vehicular entrance or exit, not exceeding two square feet in area or three feet in height from grade to top of sign.

     v.     Service Station Signs. In addition to the basic allowed signs established by the frontage of the enclosed building, service stations may be permitted up to twenty-four (24) square feet of review-exempt sign area for signs denoting gasoline prices or trading stamps, credit card, or other related information, and additional review-exempt sign area as required by governing public agencies. Digital signage shall not be permitted as part of the twenty-four (24) square feet of review-exempt sign area, except as follows in subsection a.

     a.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, fuel pricing numerals may incorporate digital LED signage, not subject to Section 11.37.040(D), provided:

     i.      The combined area of the pricing portions of the display (price numerals) does not exceed four square feet total per sign face measured with the smallest rectangle drawn per each numeral set (e.g., where the price for gas is $3.59 9/10 per gal; the rectangle will circumscribe the numerals 3.59 9/10); and

     ii.     Any digital display containing animation, streaming video, or text or images which flash, pulsate, move, or scroll is prohibited; and

     iii.    The content of a digital display must transition by changing instantly; and

     iv.    When refacing existing signage, there is no change to the existing overall height or existing square footage; and

     v.     The addition of any digital display to an illegal sign is prohibited; and

     vi.    When feasible, the sign shall be powered from an existing circuit; and

     vii.   Brightness shall not exceed 0.3-foot candles greater than ambient lighting conditions and be governed by a photosensor controller. The measurement shall be taken perpendicular to the sign, at a distance consistent with the following formula: Measurement distance = square root of (the approved monument sign area (sq.ft.) x 100); and

     viii.  The LED color emitted is white. Any other color shall require discretionary review.

     4.     Permanent Noncommercial Signs.

     a.     House address and/or identification signs; provided, that they do not exceed two sign faces each two square feet or less in area, for each driveway entrance. Subdued lighting may be used. Placement in the public right-of-way may be allowed with an encroachment permit from the director of public works.

     b.     Bulletin boards for noncommercial uses; provided, that total square footage of said board(s) does not exceed twelve (12) square feet per use. Subdued lighting may be used.

     c.     Security signs; provided, that each sign not exceed one square foot in area or a total area of four square feet per parcel.

     D.    Prohibited Signs. The following signs and/or sign structures are prohibited:

     1.     By Nuisance or Hazardous Characteristics.

     a.     Signs Which Conflict with Traffic Control Signs. Signs or sign structures which by color, wording or location, resemble or conflict with traffic control signs or devices.

     b.     Signs Which Create Safety Hazards. Signs which obstruct vehicular views of pedestrians or other vehicles or pedestrian views of vehicles, so as to affect the safety of the public.

     c.     Rotating, moving, scintillating, blinking or flashing illumination signs, except for randomly blinking Tivoli lights.

     d.     Electronic reader boards, of more than four square feet of area.

     2.     By Form.

     a.     Flags, pennants, banners, bunting, streamers or balloons, except:

     i.      Temporary signage as provided for in subsection (C)(1) of this section;

     ii.     Those bearing solely noncommercial messages;

     iii.    Balloons less than one foot in any dimension; and

     iv.    Flags of government entities; provided, that the flag area does not exceed twenty (20) square feet per flag or eighty (80) square feet total per parcel.

     b.     Commercial Advertising Statuary or Holograms.

     3.     By Location.

     a.     Billboards and other off-premises signs, except for noncommercial off-premises signs.

     b.     Paper products signs used in exterior locations, including temporary signs.

     c.     Bench signs.

     d.     Portable signs, except for:

 

     i.      Noncommercial signs;

     ii.     Signs expressly specified as allowed and exempt from review under subsection C of this section; and

     iii.    Signs expressly permitted in the public right-of-way (subsection (D)(4) below).

     4.     Public Right-of-Way. Signs located anywhere within the public right-of-way, except for the following:

     a.     Incidental lettering on objects, within the public right-of-way, for which an encroachment permit has been obtained from the director of public works, such as umbrellas, vending carts, and menu boards; provided, that the lettering or extent of lettering has been indicated on the approved drawings for the encroachment permit;

     b.     Publicly posted business signage as sponsored by a city program;

     c.     Addresses in noncommercial zones subject to public works approval;

     d.     Election signs placed within the unimproved public right-of-way (parkway area) between the property line and curb line or improved public right-of-way with the approval of the abutting property owner or occupant. This provision shall only apply to unimproved public right-of-way abutting developed single-family residential lots and shall be subject to the following restrictions:

     i.      An individual sign shall not be greater in size than six square feet and the total aggregate of all signs shall be no greater than thirty-six (36) square feet; and

     ii.     Signs shall not be placed in a manner that creates a potential or actual safety hazard; and

     iii.    Signs may be removed by the city in such case as the city manager, or designee, reasonably determines that the location of the sign(s) creates a potential or actual safety hazard to pedestrian, vehicular, and/or equestrian traffic due to line of sight or access-related impacts from the sign(s). Upon removal, the city shall return the sign(s) to the abutting property owner or occupant along with a notice that the sign may be relocated so as not to create a potential or actual safety hazard.

     5.     Signs Erected on Hillsides. Signs of any kind, including those created by the arrangement of vegetation, rocks or other objects on a hillside visible from a public right-of-way.

     6.     Other Categories.

     a.     Geometric signs of plastic materials.

     b.     Obscene Signs. Signs that display a message or graphic representation that is obscene.

     c.     Any other sign not expressly allowed within the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 387 § 1, 2010; Ord. 246 § 1(b), 1995; Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.050 Exceptions.
     Aside from categorically prohibited signs (Section 11.37.040(D)) and standards pertaining to maximum size/area, maximum number per business, and placement (Section 11.37.040(A)(1)(a)), exceptions from the standards of this chapter may be allowed through public design review pursuant to Section 11.37.060; provided, that approval findings be made that such exceptions effectuate the general policies for this chapter as set forth in Section 11.37.030. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.060 Review requirements.
     A.    All signs except those prohibited and those specifically exempted from review by this chapter, require approval by the director of community development prior to installation or issuance of any permits required by the building department.

     B.     Applications for sign approval shall be submitted to the planning department and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council, and by six drawing sets showing:

     1.     Site Plan. A site plan of the property with the location of buildings, walls, neighboring structures, and other features indicated and dimensioned.

     2.     Position and Relationship of Sign. The position of each sign and its relationship to adjacent buildings and structures.

     3.     Design of Sign. The height, dimensions, area calculations, shape, copy and design of each sign and supporting structure, including callouts of colors and materials, and samples thereof unless exempted by the director of community development.

     C.     Additional information may be required by the director of community development to determine compliance with this chapter.

     D.    Applications shall also include the following information:

     1.     The name and address of the business proprietor and property owner;

     2.     Authorization by either the property owner or any authorized representative of the owner, for review and action on the application.

     E.     Permit Approval.

     1.     After a complete application is filed, the director of community development shall determine whether the proposed sign is in conformance with standards and general policies established by this chapter, and with the following criteria:

     a.     The sign’s size, shape, color, placement and compatibility with existing signs shall be considered in order to determine if the sign is compatible with and bears a harmonious relationship to its building, site and surroundings.

     b.     The sign’s location and design, lettering, colors, decorative motifs, spacing and proportions shall be considered in order to determine whether the sign would be legible and that it would not obscure from view or unduly detract from existing adjacent signs or features.

     c.     The sign’s design shall be considered in order to determine whether it would be in keeping with the overall character of the development.

     2.     Changes or modifications of existing signage for existing buildings, including signage in a new location on such buildings, shall require only director of community development review and approval; however, the director may require that the design review board review and act upon the proposal. The resulting decision, whether by the director or by the design review board, shall be final, subject to the right of appeal to the planning commission. The planning commission decision shall be subject to appeal to the city council.

     3.     All other signage for which review is required shall be subject to design review board approval, conditional approval, or denial, with the design review board to determine whether the proposed sign is in conformance with standards and general policies established by this chapter as well as the other criteria set forth in this section. Decisions of the design review board are subject to appeal to the planning commission. The planning commission decision shall be subject to appeal to the city council.

     4.     Any appeal pursuant to this section must be filed within fifteen (15) days after the date of the action being appealed. The appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk, with the appropriate fees in the amount established by resolution of the city council. In the event of an appeal to the city council, its decision regarding the matter shall be final and conclusive.

     5.     Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not substitute for compliance with the building code of the city, as it applies to the construction or maintenance of a sign.

     6.     The director of community development shall authorize the issuance of a permit for any sign after compliance with all applicable requirements of this chapter has been achieved. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.070 Removal without compensation.
     A.    Non-Approved Signs. The city may require removal, without compensation, of the following signs:

     1.     Any sign which was installed without first complying with all ordinances and regulations in effect at the time of its construction and erection or use;

     2.     Any sign found posted, or otherwise affixed upon any public property contrary to the provisions of this subsection may be immediately removed by the city.

     B.     Legal Nonconforming Signs. Legal nonconforming on-premises signs shall be removed without compensation, if the sign meets any of the following criteria:

     1.     Any sign, including its supporting structure, whose use has ceased, or has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of not less than ninety (90) days. Costs incurred in removing an abandoned sign shall be charged to the legal owner;

     2.     Any sign which has been more than fifty (50) percent destroyed, and the destruction is other than facial copy replacement, and the sign is not repaired within thirty (30) days of the date of its destruction;

     3.     Any sign whose owner, outside of a change of copy subject to design approval, requests permission to: (i) remodel and remodels that sign; or (ii) expands or enlarges the building or land use upon which the sign is located and the sign is affected by the construction, enlargement or remodeling, or the cost of construction, enlargement or remodeling of the sign exceeds fifty (50) percent of the cost of reconstruction of the building. (Changes of copy are subject to approval unless categorized in Section 11.37.040(C) as review-exempt;)

     4.     Any sign whose owner seeks relocation thereof and relocates the sign;

     5.     Any temporary sign which is beyond the time limits set within this chapter for its category of temporary sign;

     6.     Any sign which, in the determination of the city building inspector, is or may become a danger to the public or which is unsafe;

     7.     Any sign which constitutes a traffic hazard not created by relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the city or Los Angeles County.

     C.     Deactivation of Signs. Any sign which rotates, moves, scintillates, blinks or flashes, shall be deactivated within sixty (60) days from the effective date of this chapter, without compensation.

     D.    Limitations on Properties with Nonconforming Signs.

     1.     No sign shall be added to an occupancy with a nonconforming sign unless the total allowable sign area square footage and at least one nonconforming sign associated with such occupancy is made conforming.

     2.     No modification shall be made to an existing building unless the total allowable sign area square footage and at least one nonconforming sign is made conforming. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.080 Abatement.
     A.    Signs which may be removed without compensation shall be abated pursuant to the following process:

     1.     Director’s Notice. The director shall provide notice by any means which he or she deems desirable to the owner(s) of the business and the property at which the sign is located of the need to remove such sign, and/or to bring the sign into compliance with this chapter. Such notice shall specify a date by which compliance shall be obtained, which shall be not less than ten days from the date of such notice.

     2.     Adoption of Resolution. The city council shall, by resolution, declare as public nuisances any sign to be abated. The resolution shall describe the property upon which or in front of which the sign exists by its lot and block number on the city or Los Angeles County Assessment Map and its street address if known. Prior to adoption of the resolution, the city clerk shall provide at least ten days’ written notice to all persons owning property described in the proposed resolution according to the last equalized assessment roll. The notice shall state the date, time and place of the hearing and generally describe its purpose and the nature of the illegality of the signs to be abated.

     3.     Posted and Written Notice. Following adoption of the resolution, the director shall conspicuously post notices on or in front of the property on or in front of which the sign is located, at least ten days prior to the date for hearing objections set by the city council. The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

 

     NOTICE TO REMOVE ILLEGAL SIGNS

 

     Notice is hereby given that on the day of , the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge adopted Resolution No. declaring that an illegal sign is located upon or in front of this property which constitutes a public nuisance and must be abated by removal of the illegal sign. Otherwise, the sign will be removed, and the nuisance abated by the City. The cost of removal will be assessed upon the property from or in front of which the sign is removed and will constitute a lien upon the property until paid. Reference is hereby made to the resolution for further particulars. A copy of this Resolution is on file in the office of the City Clerk.

 

     All property owners having any objection to the proposed removal of the sign are hereby notified to attend a meeting of the City Council of the City of La Cañada Flintridge to be held on , at , when their objections will be heard and given due consideration.

     Dated this day of , .

     City Clerk

     City Clerk

 

     4.     Written Notice. In addition to posting notice as set forth above, the city clerk shall mail written notice of the proposed abatement to all persons owning property described in the resolution. The city clerk shall also mail written notice to each person on whom the described property is assessed in the last available equalized assessment roll at least ten days prior to the date for hearing objections set by the city council.

     5.     Hearing and Order to Abate. At the time stated in the notices, the city council shall hear and consider all objections to the proposed removal of the sign(s). The city council shall by motion or resolution at the conclusion of the hearing allow or overrule any objections. Following disposition of any objections made, the city council shall, by motion or resolution, order the director or designee to abate the nuisance by having the sign(s) removed.

     6.     Abatement of Nuisance by City or Owner.

     a.     The director may enter private property to abate the nuisance. Prior to said officer’s arrival, any property owner may remove the illegal sign at the owner’s own expense.

     b.     The director shall keep an account of the cost of abatement of each sign, and shall submit an itemized written report showing that cost to the city council for confirmation. A copy of said report shall be posted at City Hall for at least three days prior to its submission to the city council, with notice of the time of submission.

     c.     At the designated time of submission, the city council shall hear the report of abatement costs and any objections of the property owner(s) liable to be assessed for the abatement, and may modify the report if necessary. The city council shall then confirm the report by motion or resolution.

     7.     Cost of Abatement.

     a.     The cost of abatement in front of or upon each parcel of property, and the cost incurred by the city in enforcing abatement upon the parcel(s), including investigation, boundary determination, measurement, clerical and other related costs, are a special assessment against that parcel. After the assessment is made and confirmed, a lien attaches on the parcel upon recordation of the order confirming the assessment by the office of the Los Angeles County recorder. Such lien does not attach to the real property where the property has been transferred to a bona fide purchaser for value, or if a lien of a bona fide encumbrancer for value has been created and attaches thereon, prior to the date on which the first installment of the assessment would become delinquent, and in such cases the cost of abatement and enforcement relating to the property shall be transferred to the unsecured roll for collection.

     b.     After confirmation of the report, a copy shall be given to the Los Angeles County tax assessor and the tax collector, who shall add the amount of the assessment to the next regular tax bill levied against the parcel for municipal purposes. The county auditor shall enter each assessment on the county tax roll opposite the parcel of land.

     c.     The amount of the assessment shall be collected at the time and in the manner of ordinary municipal taxes.

     B.     The procedures set forth in subsection A of this section shall not be deemed exclusive, and the city reserves the right to abate signs in accordance with any other provision of law. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

 

11.37.090 Maintenance.
     Every sign shall be maintained in good structural and aesthetic condition at all times. All signs shall be neatly painted, cleaned and defective parts replaced as required by the building official. (Ord. 222 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 11.38 PARKING AND VEHICLE STORAGE
11.38.010 Parking—General conditions.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply at the time that a building or structure is erected, altered or enlarged to increase floor space, numbers of dwelling units or guest rooms, or the use or occupancy of a building or structure is changed.

     B.     In the case of mixed uses, the total automobile parking spaces required shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. Required automobile parking spaces for one use shall not be considered as providing required parking spaces for any other use.

     C.     Automobile parking spaces established by this chapter shall be improved as required by this chapter prior to the occupancy of new buildings or structures or occupancy of a new use in the case of an existing building or structure which has been altered or enlarged in accordance with subsection A of this section. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 740, 1974)

 

11.38.020 Parking—Schools and churches.
     Every building used in whole or in part for an elementary school, public or private, having no grade above the sixth, shall have within five hundred (500) feet thereof, one automobile parking space for each classroom.

     Every other building used in whole or in part for the gathering together of persons for deliberation or worship, or used as a school auditorium of a school in which any pupil is in a grade higher that the sixth, shall have within five hundred (500) feet thereof, one automobile parking space for each five fixed seats, and one automobile parking space for each thirty-five (35) square feet of the usable floor area of such auditorium where seats are not fixed, in the largest auditorium used for public assembly. Such automobile parking spaces shall be permanently maintained. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 741, 1974)

 

11.38.030 Residential vehicle storage.
     Every single-family residence shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one or more garages, or other enclosed structure, providing storage space for two vehicles, conveniently accessible and located at a place where the erection of structures is permitted. Each vehicle storage space shall be at least nine feet wide and twenty (20) feet deep. (Ord. 281 § 6, 1997: LACC Ord. 1494 § 742, 1974)

 

11.38.040 Parking—Reduction of required.
     Automobile parking facilities required by this chapter shall be permanently maintained as such unless and until substituted for in full compliance with the provisions of this code. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 743.9, 1974)

 

11.38.050 Hospitals and sanitaria.
     Every hospital and sanitarium shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one and one-half automobile parking spaces plus adequate access thereto, for each patient bed. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 746, 1974)

 

11.38.060 Hotels and clubs.
     Every hotel, club, fraternity house, sorority house and similar structure providing sleeping rooms shall have on the same lot or parcel of land one automobile parking space for each two sleeping rooms. In case of dormitories, each one hundred (100) square feet of floor area shall be considered a sleeping room. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 746.5, 1974)

 

11.38.070 Mortuary, skating rink, gymnasium and dance hall.
     Every mortuary, skating rink, gymnasium and dance hall shall have on the same lot or parcel of land automobile parking spaces plus adequate access thereto, calculated as follows:

     A.    As required by Section 11.14.030(D)(1)(d) of this title, considering only the seating area; plus

     B.     One automobile parking space for every four hundred (400) square feet of other area. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 747, 1974)

 

11.38.080 Parking—Motels.
     Every motel shall have on the same lot or parcel of land:

     A.    One parking space for each guest room; and

     B.     Parking for each dwelling unit in the number required and subject to the same conditions as specified in LACC Ord. 1494, Section 743. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 748, 1974)

 

11.38.090 Rest homes.
     Every rest home shall have on the same lot or parcel of land automobile parking spaces not less than the number of residents permitted by any license or permit which permits the maintenance of such rest home. If employee residence facilities are on the premises there shall be in addition to the automobile parking spaces required for the principal use, the number of automobile parking spaces required by this chapter for such residence facilities. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 748.2, 1974)

 

11.38.100 Parking for uses not specified.
     Where parking requirements for any use are not specified, parking shall be provided in an amount which the commission finds adequate to prevent traffic congestion and excessive on-street parking. Whenever practical, such determination shall be based upon the requirements for the most comparable use specified in this chapter. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 749.1, 1974)

 

11.38.110 Ownership.
     Space required by this chapter for automotive parking shall either be owned by the owner of the premises because of the use of which the automobile parking space is required, or the owner of such premises shall have the right to use such space for automobile parking by virtue of a recorded lease for a term of not less than twenty (20) years, which lease requires that if canceled, the party canceling such lease, prior to the effective date of such cancellation shall notify the director of community development of such cancellation. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 749.3, 1974)

 

11.38.120 Fractional parking spaces.
     When the application of this chapter requires a fractional part of an automobile parking space or garage or parking space sufficient to accommodate a fractional number of automobiles, any such fraction shall be construed as a whole. This section does not apply to the specification of an area by square feet, or of an area equal to another area. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 749.5, 1974)

Chapter 11.40 PRESERVATION AND PROTECTION OF DESIGNATED TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY
11.40.010 Purpose.
     The purposes of this chapter are to preserve and protect certain species of trees, as set forth in this chapter, that are of aesthetic importance and to protect the scenic beauty of the area in a manner that does not unreasonably infringe upon the rights of property owners. It is pertinent to the public interest, health and welfare that the protection of these certain species of trees be guarded against damage, destruction and removal. These purposes can be achieved through education and regulation regarding the care and removal of protected trees. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.020 Applicability.
     This chapter applies to all property in the city, except city-owned or controlled property, which is addressed in Chapter 4.24 of the city of La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined as follows:

     “Certified arborist” means an individual who is certified as an arborist, possesses and maintains a city business license, and is on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List, as set forth in Section 11.40.050(A), at the time the work is performed.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

     “Commercial tree service” means a service hired for the purpose of trimming protected trees that, at the time the work is performed, has a D49 contractor’s license (tree service), a city business license and is on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List, as set forth in Section 11.40.050(A).

     “Damage” or “damaging” means any act which causes or tends to cause injury or disfigurement to a protected tree, including the root system, or impairs its structural integrity. This includes, but is not limited to, topping, poisoning, burning, or girdling a protected tree or attaching any object by means of nails, screws, lag bolts or other similar objects. Attachment of cables, braces or similar, undertaken by a licensed arborist for the purpose of protecting or preserving the health of a protected tree, shall not be defined as “damage” or “damaging” so long as undertaken, supervised or directed by a licensed arborist for the purpose of protecting or preserving the health of the protected tree.

     “Development activity” means any development work upon property subject to this chapter, including, but not limited to:

 

     A.    Construction, installation, reconstruction, demolition, or moving of a building or structure; or

     B.     Grading, excavation, or compaction of soil; or

     C.     Flatwork.

     “Director” means the director of community development or designee.

     “Director’s determination” means an approval issued by the director pursuant to Section 11.40.070(D) authorizing development activity within a protection zone of a protected tree.

     “Emergency” means an immediate threat or hazard to health, safety or property caused by the presence of the protected tree as a result of accident, disease, storm damage, acts of nature affecting the protected tree, or other acts not caused by the property owner.

     “Fire department” means the county of Los Angeles fire department.

     “Flatwork” means an improvement built or placed at ground level not requiring a footing, including, but not limited to, driveways, walkways, and/or equipment pads.

     “Historic Deodar District” means the area that encompasses the following streets: Alta Canyada Road (North of Alta Park Lane), Bonita Vista Drive, Bubbling Well Lane, Del Oro Drive, Earl Drive, Earlmont Avenue, El Vago Street (West of Indian Drive), Fairmount Avenue, Hacienda Drive, Hillard Avenue, Jarvis Avenue, Linda Vista Drive, Louise Drive, and Palm Drive (North of Fairmount Avenue).

     “Person” or “persons” means an individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust, partnership, limited liability company, association, joint venture, government, governmental subdivision, agency, or instrumentality, public corporation, or any other legal or commercial entity.

     “Planning commission” means the planning commission of the city.

     “Project area” means any development activity within thirty (30) feet of a protected tree.

     “Property owner” means a person who is the record owner, as shown on the Los Angeles County assessor’s latest secured real property assessment roll or then current grant deed of record as shown in the Los Angeles County recorder’s office.

     “Protected tree” means:

     A.    Any of the following trees on property located in the R-1 single-family residential zone having a diameter of twelve (12) inches or greater at fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade: Coast Live Oak, Interior Live Oak, Canyon Live Oak, Scrub Oak, Coastal Scrub Oak, Valley Oak, Mesa Oak, and California Sycamore Tree. Where a tree trunk is divided below fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade, the diameter of all trunks, as measured at fifty-four (54) inches from the natural grade, shall be added to determine a tree’s diameter.

     B.     Any Deodar Cedar Tree on property located in the R-1 single-family residential zone that has a diameter of twelve (12) inches or greater at fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade, that has a trunk which is partially or wholly within twenty (20) feet of any curb or edge of pavement, and that is located within the Historic Deodar District, as defined in this section. Where a tree trunk is divided below fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade, the diameter of all trunks, as measured at fifty-four (54) inches from the natural grade, shall be added to determine a tree’s diameter. This definition shall not apply to any Deodar Cedar Tree located within the public right-of-way, which is regulated by Chapter 4.24 of the city of La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     C.     Any species of tree greater than five feet in height on property in a non-R-1 single-family residential zone, except city-owned or controlled property, which is addressed in Chapter 4.24 of the city of La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     “Protection zone” means a defined area surrounding a protected tree which may be impacted by development activity as described in Section 11.40.070(D).

 

     “Removal,” “remove,” “removed,” or “removing” means transplanting a protected tree, complete extraction of a protected tree, or cutting of a protected tree so that only a stump remains.

     “Replacement tree” means a substituted tree designated by the director, the planning commission, the city council, and/or a court of law as a replacement for a protected tree. A replacement tree is deemed a protected tree.

     “Structure” means anything built, constructed, fabricated, formed or placed which requires a fixed location on the ground. For the purposes of this definition, structure does not include flatwork.

     “Topping” (also known as “heading back,” “stubbing” or “pollarding”) means a severe type of trimming which results in the cutting back of large branches to stub, or the removal of the upper twenty (20) percent or more of a protected tree’s trunk or primary scaffold.

     “Trim,” “trims,” “trimmed” or “trimming” (also known as “pruning”) means detaching or separating either in whole or in part, any limb, branch, and/or root, from any part of a protected tree. (Ord. 471 § 4, 2018; Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.040 Tree preservation and protection guidelines.
     The city is committed to natural resource stewardship and a healthy and sustainable tree population. Trees and vegetation provide a multitude of benefits, which include clean water, clean air, enhanced quality of life, and improved property values. In an effort to promote the maintenance of protected trees, the city shall maintain the “Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines,” as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website. The “Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines” are intended to inform residents and business owners of tree trimming techniques that reflect industry standards and acceptable best management practices for the preservation of protected trees in the city. The “Tree Preservation and Protection Guidelines” recommend best practices for the proper care and maintenance of protected trees. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.050 Trimming of protected trees.
     A.    Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List.

     1.     The director shall prepare and maintain the “Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List,” a copy of which shall be available in the office of the director and the city’s website. Certified arborists and commercial tree services must appear on this list at the time they are performing any trimming of protected trees, or as otherwise may be required in this chapter.

     2.     A certified arborist or commercial tree service may be added to the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List, subject to completing a business license application, a supplemental application for certified arborists and commercial tree services, and a signed acknowledgement that the certified arborist or commercial tree service had received, read and understood this chapter.

     3.     A certified arborist and/or commercial tree service may be removed from the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List for failure to comply with the provisions of this code as further discussed in Section 11.40.080(C).

     B.     Authorized Persons Who May Trim Protected Trees.

     1.     For property located in the R-1 single-family residential zone, only the following persons may trim protected trees:

     a.     A commercial tree service;

     b.     A certified arborist;

 

     c.     A property owner and/or household members who personally performs the work on his or her property.

     2.     For property located in a non-R-1 single-family residential zone, only the following persons may trim protected trees:

     a.     A commercial tree service;

     b.     A certified arborist. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

 

11.40.060 Removal of protected trees.
     A.    A tree removal permit shall be required for the removal of any protected tree in accordance with the provisions of this section.

     B.     A tree removal permit may be issued only if any one of the following criteria is met:

     1.     Where the protected tree itself, its excess foliage, or any one or more of its limbs is, in the opinion of the director, unreasonably interfering with a structure or other improvement and there is no reasonably practical alternative to mitigate the interference.

     2.     Where, upon taking into account the size, shape, topography and existing protected trees upon the lot, the denial of the permit would create an unreasonable hardship or a significant undue impairment of the use and enjoyment of the property by the property owner.

     3.     Where the protected tree is so diseased or damaged that it is no longer viable or is a threat to cause damage to property or to other protected trees.

     4.     Where the removal of one or more protected trees is required by the fire department for reasons of public health, safety and/or welfare, including to provide an effective firebreak. This criterion shall only apply to existing structures and must be supported by written documentation from the fire department.

     5.     Where a property owner requests removal of a protected tree for other reasonable cause and the removal will not impact the character of the neighborhood from public view or adjacent properties or where such removal can be reasonably mitigated.

     C.     Exceptions from Tree Removal Permit Requirements. A tree removal permit is not required in the following cases:

     1.     Removal of an unprotected tree.

     2.     Removal of a dead tree, as determined by the director.

     3.     Removal of a protected tree which is required by the city, the fire department, or a public utility.

     4.     Removal of a protected tree due to an emergency, subject to the following requirements:

     a.     If an emergency occurs during regular City Hall business hours, the person removing the protected tree, or causing it to be removed, shall notify the director prior to the removal of the protected tree if reasonably practicable. If it is not reasonably practicable to provide notice, the person removing the protected tree, or causing it to be removed, must notify the director within a reasonable period of time after the removal and provide supporting documentation of the emergency.

     b.     If an emergency removal occurs outside of regular City Hall business hours or when City Hall is otherwise closed, the person removing the protected tree, or causing it to be removed, must notify the director within a reasonable period of time after the removal and provide supporting documentation of the emergency.

     D.    Procedure for Issuance of Tree Removal Permits.

     1.     A property owner shall first submit an application along with any required fees to the planning department.

     2.     The director shall evaluate the application along with the findings established in subsection B, as applicable. If the director can make any one of the findings for removal in his or her determination based on a visual inspection of the protected tree(s), the tree removal permit shall be granted.

     3.     If the director, however, requires further evidence to make any one of the findings, the director may require an arborist report to be prepared by a certified arborist, as defined in Section 11.40.030. The applicant may provide an arborist report or, alternatively, provide a deposit to the director, based on a reasonable estimate of the director’s and/or consultant’s/arborist’s costs to be incurred to conduct the review, or as may be established by fee resolution of the city council, whichever is greater.

     4.     A determination of the director to grant the application may include reasonable conditions for the removal of the protected tree.

     5.     Upon the determination to either approve or deny the tree removal permit, the director shall provide notice to the applicant, the abutting property owners, and all others whose names appear on the application for removal.

     6.     The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Section 11.49.010.

     7.     A tree removal permit application made in connection with a development proposal shall be considered concurrently with the development proposal.

     E.     As a condition to granting a tree removal permit pursuant to subsections (B)(1) through (B)(4), inclusive, the property owner or applicant may be required to plant replacement trees on the subject property if removal of the protected tree(s) impacts the character of the neighborhood from public view or adjacent properties and where removal can be mitigated on-site. The replacement trees shall be planted as follows:

     1.     The number and size of replacement trees required shall be based on the city’s Tree Replacement Chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     2.     For property located in the R-1 single-family residential zone, a replacement tree(s) shall be any species of a protected tree(s), as defined in Section 11.40.030, as determined by the director. For property located in a non-R-1 single-family residential zone, a replacement tree(s) may be any species of tree, as determined by the director.

     3.     The location of replacement tree(s) shall be determined by the director or the planning commission.

     4.     The property owner must agree to accept the conditions of replacement by his or her signature on the acknowledgement of conditions before activation of the tree removal permit, including a condition that the property owner shall provide written notice to subsequent property owners about the existence of a replacement tree that is subject to the provisions of this chapter.

     5.     When the replacement is completed, the applicant shall contact the city’s planning department for an inspection of the work and to demonstrate evidence of the mitigation.

     6.     In any case where the director reasonably determines that the required replacement tree(s) cannot be planted on the subject property due to the size, shape, topography, or design of existing development of the subject property, the director may authorize the property owner or applicant to pay money into the city’s tree replacement fund in lieu of the required planting of replacement trees. The amount shall be based on the city’s Tree Replacement Chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     F.     As a condition to granting a tree removal permit pursuant to subsection (B)(5), the property owner or applicant shall be required to plant replacement trees on the subject property, as set forth in subsection (F)(1), or pay a designated amount into the city’s tree replacement fund, as set forth in subsection (F)(2).

     1.     Replacement Trees.

     a.     If replacement trees are to be planted, the number and size of replacement trees required shall be based on the city’s Tree Replacement Chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     b.     For R-1 single-family residential zone, a replacement tree(s) shall be any species of a protected tree(s), as defined in Section 11.40.030, as determined by the director. For property located in a non-R-1 single-family residential zone, a replacement tree(s) may be any species of tree, as determined by the director.

     c.     The location of replacement tree(s) shall be determined by the director or the planning commission. If the subject property cannot accommodate multiple protected trees, if required, alternative public property locations within the city (rights-of-way, parks, etc.) may be designated.

     d.     The property owner must agree to accept the conditions of replacement by his or her signature on the acknowledgement of conditions before activation of the tree removal permit, including a condition that the property owner shall provide written notice to subsequent property owners about the existence of a replacement tree that is subject to the provisions of this chapter.

     e.     When the replacement is completed, the applicant shall contact the city’s planning department for an inspection of the work and to demonstrate evidence of the mitigation.

     2.     City’s Tree Replacement Fund. Except where it is determined by the director, planning commission, or city council that planting of replacement trees is necessary for purposes of mitigation, the property owner or applicant may pay money into the city’s tree replacement fund as an alternative to planting replacement trees. The amount shall be based on the city’s Tree Replacement Chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     G.    Unless otherwise stated in the conditions of approval, a tree removal permit shall be valid for a period of one year. (Ord. 420 § 1, 2014; Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.070 Protection requirements during development activity.
     A.    In recognition that development activity presents a risk of harm to protected trees, this section is intended to ensure that reasonable safeguards are taken to ensure that protected trees are protected during development activity.

     B.     Site Plan Requirements.

     1.     When protected trees are located within a project area involving development activity requiring a building permit, grading permit, or other zoning entitlement, the property owner or applicant shall identify the following on a site plan or, in lieu of a site plan, an approved landscape plan:

     a.     The location and species of all protected trees in the project area including the approximate location of each protected tree’s canopy. Protected trees shall each be identified on the site plan by separate number.

     b.     Canopies of neighboring protected trees that overhang the project area.

     c.     Existing and proposed grades, existing and proposed improvements, and septic tanks and utility lines in the project area, if impacted.

     d.     The location and type of the proposed protective barrier for each protected tree.

     2.     All site plans will be reviewed by city staff, in consultation with a certified arborist, if necessary. If arborist review is required, such review is subject to a deposit, based on a reasonable estimate of the director’s and/or consultant’s/arborist’s costs to be incurred by the city to conduct the review, or as may be established by fee resolution of the city council, whichever is greater.

     3.     The requirements of subsection B shall not be applicable if the only development activity being conducted is flatwork that does not encroach within the area described in subsection (D)(1)(b).

     C.     Arborist Report Requirements.

     1.     Unless waived by the director, an arborist report shall be prepared by a certified arborist, as defined in Section 11.40.030, in the following cases:

     a.     Any development activity within the applicable protection zone of a protected tree.

     b.     In conjunction with an application for a tree removal permit, if required, to support the applicable finding(s) for issuance.

     c.     In all other instances as determined by the director, planning commission and/or city council, to preserve and protect the health of a protected tree.

     2.     The arborist report shall contain the following information:

     a.     The name, address and daytime telephone number of the preparer.

     b.     For each protected tree, the circumference and diameter of the trunk, measured fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade or, in the case of multiple trunks, the cumulative diameter of all trunks that are fifty-four (54) inches above natural grade.

     c.     The locations of protected trees and the outlines and dimensions of the respective canopies on a corresponding site plan.

     d.     Aesthetic assessment of the protected tree, considering factors such as, but not limited to, symmetry, broken branches, unbalanced crown, excessive horizontal branching.

     e.     Recommendations to remedy structural problems where required.

     f.      Evidence of disease.

     g.     Identification of insects or pests.

     h.     Evaluation of vigor, such as new tip growth, leaf color, abnormal bark, presence of deadwood and thinning of crown.

     i.      Health rating based on the archetype tree of the same species.

     j.      Recommendations to improve the health of the protected tree, such as insect or disease control, pruning and fertilization.

     k.     Evaluation of the applicant’s proposal as it impacts each protected tree shown on the site plan, including suggested mitigating and/or future maintenance measures where required. This information shall only be provided when there is development activity within the protection zone of a protected tree.

     3.     In lieu of the property owner or applicant obtaining an arborist report, the property owner may authorize the director to obtain the arborist report on behalf of the property owner or applicant, subject to a deposit.

     4.     All arborist reports will be reviewed by city staff, in consultation with a certified arborist, if necessary. If arborist review is required, such review is subject to a deposit, based on a reasonable estimate of the director’s and/or consultant’s/arborist’s costs to be incurred by the city to conduct the review, or as may be established by fee resolution of the city council, whichever is greater.

     D.    Director’s Determination.

     1.     Development activity that includes any of the following shall require a director’s determination prior to conducting said work:

     a.     Placing or constructing a structure within a distance from the protected tree equivalent to three and one-half times the trunk diameter, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. For purposes of the provisions of this subsection, the distance shall be measured from the outer trunk edge of the protected tree at ground level.

     b.     Installing new paving or flatwork within a distance from the protected tree equivalent to two times the trunk diameter, up to a maximum of ten feet. For purposes of the provisions of this subsection, the distance shall be measured from the outer trunk edge of the protected tree at ground level.

     c.     Excavating a footing, basement, or pool or substantial compaction within a distance from the protected tree equivalent to three and one-half times the trunk diameter, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. For purposes of the provisions of this subsection, the distance shall be measured from the outer trunk edge of the protected tree at ground level.

     d.     Placement of fill material within a distance from the protected tree equivalent to three and one-half times the trunk diameter of a protected tree, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet. For purposes of the provisions of this subsection, the distance shall be measured from the outer trunk edge of the protected tree at ground level.

     2.     Procedure for Director’s Determination.

     a.     A property owner shall submit a site plan of the proposed development activity to the planning department. The contents of the required site plan shall include the requirements set forth in subsection B.

     b.     The director shall approve the site plan if the director can find that the health of the protected tree will not be unreasonably impacted by the proposed development activity.

     c.     If the director requires further evidence to make the necessary finding, the director may consult with a certified arborist as part of the director’s determination. If arborist review is required, such review is subject to a deposit, based on a reasonable estimate of the director’s and/or consultant’s/arborist’s costs to be incurred to conduct the review, or as may be established by fee resolution of the city council, whichever is greater.

     3.     A determination of the director to approve the site plan may include reasonable conditions to mitigate the impacts of the development activity on the protected tree, including, but not limited to:

     a.     Roots that are two inches or greater in diameter shall not be cut within the protection zone and roots that are four inches or greater in diameter shall not be cut outside the protection zone.

     b.     Branches that could be damaged by vehicles or that interfere with the development activity must be trimmed by a certified arborist or commercial tree service.

     4.     The decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission in accordance with Section 11.49.010.

     E.     Protection Barriers.

     1.     Prior to the commencement of development activity, and during all phases of development activity, within a project area, a property owner or applicant shall establish and maintain a protection barrier for each protected tree scheduled to be retained within the project area. The protection barrier shall:

     a.     Be a chain link fence; and

     b.     Have a minimum height of five feet; and

     c.     Have warning signs indicating the protected tree’s protected status; and

     d.     Be located a distance from the trunk base equal to three and one-half times the trunk diameter, up to a maximum of fifteen (15) feet.

     2.     The director, in consultation with a certified arborist if necessary, may modify the standards identified in this section and/or impose additional measures determined necessary to preserve and protect the health of protected trees depending upon the nature of development activity and site features.

     F.     Remedies for Noncompliance. In the event of noncompliance with any requirement in this section, the director may issue a stop work order for all or part of the project on the site. (Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

 

11.40.080 Violations and enforcement.
     A.    The following actions are prohibited and are violations of this code:

     1.     Damaging any protected tree.

     2.     Causing a protected tree to die.

     3.     Removing a protected tree without a tree removal permit, where one is required.

     4.     Removing a protected tree in an emergency without complying with the proper procedures, including, but not limited to, the failure to provide the required notice and/or supporting documentation.

     5.     Hiring a commercial tree service or arborist who, at the time of performing the work on a protected tree, fails to appear on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List.

     6.     For arborists and commercial tree services, the failure to, at the time of performing the work on a protected tree, possess and maintain the proper certification, a city business license, appropriate state contractor’s license and/or inclusion on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List.

     B.     Any violation of subsection A shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, subject to the fines and related penalties of Section 1.04.010 of this code, and/or as an administrative citation, subject to the fines set forth in Chapter 1.07 of this code.

     C.     In addition to the penalties imposed in subsection B, a person who is in violation of subsection A, shall be required to pay restitution to the city to mitigate the loss of the protected tree(s) as follows:

     1.     Persons who commit the following violations are required to pay restitution:

     a.     Damaging any protected tree, such that the protected tree dies within one year from the act causing damage.

     b.     Causing a protected tree to die.

     c.     Removing a protected tree without a tree removal permit, where one is required.

     d.     Removing a protected tree in an emergency without complying with the proper procedures, including, but not limited to, the failure to provide the required notice and/or supporting documentation.

     2.     The amount of restitution shall be established in the city’s Tree Replacement Chart as adopted by resolution of the city council, as amended from time to time. A copy of said resolution shall be available in the office of the director and on the city’s website.

     3.     Restitution shall be paid into the city’s tree replacement fund.

     4.     Failure to pay restitution after the date ordered shall constitute a new, continuing, and separate offense each day that the restitution amount remains unpaid. All civil, criminal, and/or administrative remedies may be exercised for each such offense.

     5.     Any person who is required to pay restitution and who meets the low, very-low, or extremely-low income categories as established annually by the California Department of Housing and Community Development may apply for a financial hardship waiver as follows:

     a.     The request for waiver shall be on a form approved by the director and available in the office of the director;

     b.     The completed form shall be submitted to the director within ten days of the notification of required payment of restitution;

     c.     Upon receipt of such application, the director shall schedule a hearing before a hearing officer. Notice of the hearing shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing;

     d.     At the time fixed for the hearing, the hearing officer shall consider all relevant evidence demonstrating a financial hardship;

     e.     A financial hardship shall be determined to exist if the person requesting the waiver meets the then-current low, very-low, or extremely-low income categories as established annually by the California Department of Housing and Community Development; and

     f.      If the hearing officer finds that a financial hardship does not exist, the hearing officer shall deny the application. If the hearing officer finds that a financial hardship exists, the hearing officer may modify and/or waive the amount of restitution that is required to be paid. The decision of the hearing officer shall be in writing and shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested within thirty (30) days of the hearing. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final.

     D.    In any case where restitution is required pursuant to subsection C, the property owner of the subject property shall plant a replacement tree on the subject property in accordance with Section 11.40.060(F)(1). This subsection shall apply irrespective of whether the property owner is a responsible person for the under-

lying violation of subsection A. In such cases when the property owner is not the party who committed the illegal removal or damage (such that the protected tree dies within one year from the act causing damage), the city shall tender to the property owner the amount of restitution collected from the offending party in an amount not to exceed the actual cost of replacement and installation. Payment shall be provided by the city after confirmation of installation by the director of community development and receipts have been provided to the city by the property owner. Failure to plant a replacement tree after the date ordered shall constitute a new, continuing, and separate offense each day that the replacement tree remains unplanted. All civil, criminal, and/or administrative remedies may be exercised for each such offense.

     E.     For violations of subsection A, a certified arborist or commercial tree service shall be subject to the penalties imposed by subsections B and C, and/or removal from the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List for a period of six months for a first violation of this code. Subsequent offenses may result in extended suspension.

     F.     For violations of subsection A, a commercial tree service or arborist who, at the time of performing the work on a protected tree, fails to appear on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List, shall be subject to the penalties imposed by subsections B and C and shall not be eligible for inclusion on the Official City Approved Arborists and Tree Trimmers List for a minimum of six months. (Ord. 420 § 2, 2014; Ord. 412 § 2, 2013)

Chapter 11.41 APPLICATIONS AND PETITIONS
11.41.010 Withdrawal of.
     An applicant or petitioner for any permit, variance, nonconforming use or structure review, or zone change provided for in this code may withdraw his or her application at any time before hearing or before ex parte action by the commission by filing with the commission a request in writing signed by all persons who signed the original application or petition, or their successors in interest. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 620, 1974)

 

11.41.020 Fee waiver.
     In those instances where the city council by resolution determines it is in the public interest to accept applications or petitions without filing fee, the director shall accept such applications or petitions subject to the requirements specified in said resolution. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 621.5, 1974)

 

11.41.030 Deficiencies and refunds of fees and deposits.
     A.    If any application or petition is withdrawn as provided in Section 11.41.010 prior to publication of notice of hearing or prior to ex parte action by the commission, the city shall refund the filing fee and all deposits, if any.

     B.     In all other cases there shall be no refund after the notice of hearing has been published. (Ord. 212 § 2 Exh. A, 1992; Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 622, 1974)

 

11.41.040 Accounting for fees and deposits.
     The director shall keep a permanent and accurate account of all deposits received, giving the name of the applicant upon whose account the same was deposited, the date and amount thereof, together with the location of the premises to which they relate. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 623, 1974)

 

11.41.050 Review by city council.
     A.    All decisions of the planning commission upon applications for discretionary permits in commercial zones (CPD and FCD zones) shall be reported to the city council at the council’s next regular meeting held not less than five days after such decision is rendered.

     B.     In addition to any appeal procedures otherwise established by law, the city council may cause any decision of the planning commission to be heard de novo by the city council by a majority vote conducted at the meeting at which the decision is reported. In the event the council does not so vote, the decision of the planning commission shall be final.

     C.     All provisions for notice and hearing applicable to the planning commission for that type of decision shall apply to the city council in conducting its review; provided, however, that if an appeal from a decision has been properly filed, the matter shall be conducted as an appeal subject to all applicable requirements for such appeals, rather than a review subject to this section. (Ord. 237 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 11.42 ZONE CHANGES AND AMENDMENTS
11.42.010 Authority.
     Zone changes and amendments may be initiated to change zones, to alter the boundaries of districts, to impose regulations not previously imposed, and to remove or modify any regulation already imposed, whenever the city council finds that the public convenience, the general welfare, or good zoning practice justifies such action. All such zone changes and amendments shall be made pursuant to the provisions of this title and Title 7 of the Government Code. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 306, 1974)

 

11.42.020 Initiation of changes.
     Hearings on zone changes or amendments may be initiated:

     A.    If the city council instructs the commission to set the matter for a hearing, report and recommendation; or

     B.     Upon the initiative of the commission; or

     C.     Upon the filing of a petition as provided in Sections 11.42.030, 11.42.040, 11.42.050 and 11.42.060. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 307, 1974)

 

11.42.030 Zone change—Petition for.
     Any person owning or having such other interest in property as specified in Section 11.42.040(A) may file a petition for a change of zone with the director, except that a person may not file, and the director shall not accept a petition which is the same as, or substantially the same as, a petition upon which final action has been taken either by the commission or by the city council within one year prior thereto. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 308, 1974)

 

11.42.040 Zone change—Contents of petition.
     A petition for a change of zone shall contain the following information and such other information as is required by the director.

     A.    The director may reject any petition that does not supply the information requested herein:

     1.     Name and address of the applicant;

     2.     Evidence that the applicant:

     a.     Is an owner of all or a portion of the property involved, or

     b.     Has written permission of an owner of all or a portion of the property involved to make such application, or

     c.     Is or will be the plaintiff in an action in eminent domain to acquire the premises involved, or any portion thereof, or

     d.     In the case of a public agency, is negotiating to acquire a portion of the premises involved;

     3.     Location of subject property (address or vicinity);

     4.     Legal description of the property, including a statement of total area involved;

     5.     Zone or zones requested;

     6.     With each petition the applicant shall also file:

     a.     Maps in the number prescribed and drawn to a scale specified by the director, showing the location of all property included in the request for action, the location of all highways, streets, alleys and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a distance of seven hundred (700) feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the petition,

     b.     One copy of the map shall indicate the uses established on every lot or parcel of land shown within the said seven hundred (700) foot radius,

     c.     A list, certified to be correct by affidavit or by a statement under penalty of perjury pursuant to Section 2015.5 of the Code of Civil Procedure, of the names and addresses of all persons who are shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county of Los Angeles as owners of the subject property and as owning property within a distance of five hundred (500) feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the petition. One copy of the map shall indicate the ownership of said lots or parcels of land;

     7.     Indicate the conditions which warrant the change of zone;

     8.     If the change of zone as requested will permit any uses prohibited by the existing zoning, will such change of zone result in a need for a greater water supply for adequate fire protection and what are the existing proposed sources of such an adequate water supply;

     9.     Such other information as the director may require.

     B.     The accuracy of all information, maps and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 308.3, 1974)

 

11.42.045 Zone change—Fee.
     Each petition for a change of zone shall be accompanied by a filing fee. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 308.7, 1974)

 

11.42.050 Zone change—Burden of proof.
     In addition to the information required in the petition by Section 11.42.040, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the commission the following facts:

     A.    That modified conditions warrant a revision in the zoning plan as it pertains to the area or district under consideration; and

     B.     That a need for the proposed zone classification exists within such area or district; and

     C.     That the particular property under consideration is a proper location for said zone classification within such area or district; and

     D.    That placement of the proposed zone at such location will be in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare and in conformity with good zoning practice. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 308.5, 1974)

 

11.42.060 Zone change—Study of additional area.
     Where a petition is filed requesting a change of zone, the director or the commission may elect to include additional property within the boundaries of the area to be studied when, in his, her or its opinion, good zoning practice justifies such action. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 308.8, 1974)

 

11.42.070 Commission hearing.
     In all cases where a zone change or amendment is initiated, the commission shall hold a public hearing and shall give notice of such public hearing pursuant to the procedure provided by Chapter 11.42. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 309, 1974)

 

11.42.080 Zone change—Commission findings and decisions.
     In making its recommendation relative to a proposed change of zone, the commission shall consider the following principles and standards:

     A.    That modified conditions warrant a revision in the zoning code as it pertains to the area or district under consideration.

     The terms of design commission members are set forth in Section 11.47.150 of the La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code and are directly tied to the terms of the city council. Because the city of La Cañada Flintridge general municipal election dates have been changed from March of odd-numbered years to March of even-numbered years, the terms of the councilmembers have been changed and the terms of commission members must be adjusted accordingly. For this reason, the change in election dates warrants an amendment to Section 11.47.150 of the La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code.

     B.     That a need for the proposed zone classification exists within such area or districts; and

     The proposed amendment to Section 11.47.150 of the La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code will apply city-wide. This section is necessary to govern the appointment of design commission members, their qualifications, terms of office, and compensation.

     C.     That the particular property under consideration is a proper location for said zone classification within such area or district (not applicable); and

     The proposed amendment to Section 11.47.150 of the La Cañada Flintridge Zoning Code will apply city-wide. This section is necessary to govern the terms of office of design commission members.

     D.    That placement of the proposed zone at such location will be in the interest of public health, safety and general welfare and in conformity with good zoning practice.

     The proposed amendment to Section 11.47.150 of the zoning code will be in the best interest of the public health, safety and general welfare and in conformity with good zoning practice because it will establish the terms of office of design commission members as established in the zoning code. (Ord. 479 § 4, 2019; LACC Ord. 1494 § 309.1, 1974)

 

11.42.090 Water supply.
     In addition to the principles and standards enumerated in Section 11.42.080, the commission, in determining its recommendation for a change of zone, shall consider whether or not the change of zone under consideration if adopted will result in a need for greater water supply for adequate fire protection and, if so, what are the existing and proposed sources of such an adequate water supply. The commission may request that the forester and fire warden or city engineer, or both, supply it with all facts, opinions, suggestions and advice which may be material to reaching a decision on any or all matters mentioned in this section. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 309.3, 1974)

 

11.42.100 Amendments—Commission findings and decision.
     In making its recommendation relative to a proposed amendment other than a zone change, the commission may recommend approval where the information presented at public hearing shows that such amendment is necessary to implement the general plan and/or that the public convenience, the general welfare or good zoning practice justifies such action. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 309.5, 1974)

 

 

 

 

11.42.110 Commission recommendation.
     A recommendation by the commission relative to a zone change or amendment shall be by resolution carried by the affirmative vote of not less than three of its members. Such recommendation is final and conclusive and may not be reconsidered by the commission except upon a referral by the city council. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 309.7, 1974)

 

11.42.120 Notice of commission action.
     The commission shall serve a notice of its action in the manner prescribed by Section 11.48.070. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 309.9, 1974)

 

11.42.130 Council hearing.
     After receipt of the commission’s recommendation, the city council shall hold a public hearing and shall give notice of such public hearing pursuant to the procedure set forth in Chapter 11.48 provided, however, that if the planning commission has recommended against the approval of an amendment other than a zone change the city council shall not be required to take further action. In case of a change of zone where the commission has recommended denial, the action of the commission shall become final unless an interested party requests a hearing by the city council by filing a written request with the city clerk within five days after the commission files its recommendations with the city council. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 310, 1974)

 

11.42.140 Modification of recommendation.
     Before changing or modifying a commission recommendation involving a zone change or amendment, the city council shall refer the proposed modification to the commission for report and recommendation. Failure of the commission to report within forty (40) days after such referral or such longer period of time designated by the city council, shall be deemed to be approval by the commission of the proposed modification. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 310.3, 1974)

 

11.42.150 Notice of council’s decision.
     The city council shall serve a notice of its action in the manner prescribed by Section 11.48.070. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 310.5, 1974)

Chapter 11.43 CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
11.43.010 Conditional use defined.
     A “conditional use,” as defined by this code, means a use which:

     A.    Because of characteristics peculiar to it; or

     B.     Because of size, technological process or type of equipment; or

     C.     Because of the location with reference to surroundings, street or highway width, traffic generation or other demands upon public facilities;

     requires special consideration relative to placement at specific locations in the zone or zones where classified to insure proper integration with other existing or permitted uses in the same zone or zones. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.1, 1974)

 

11.43.020 Filing of application.
     Any person desiring a conditional use permit required by or provided for in this code may file an application with the director except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by either the commission or city council on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same permit. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.2, 1974)

 

11.43.030 Contents of application.
     An application for a conditional use permit shall contain the following information, unless waived by the director:

     A.    A project application form and supplemental application for the conditional use permit, including a description of the proposed project, the proposed zone category, a statement of how the request meets the required conditional use permit findings and an original signature of the property owner;

     B.     An initial study questionnaire for environmental review;

     C.     A map depicting all properties within three hundred (300) feet (for residential properties and for commercial properties with lot area thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or less) or five hundred (500) feet (for commercial properties with lot area greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet) of the project site. A list of the names and addresses of all current owners of these depicted properties, and two sets of envelope labels for these property owners. A notice list affidavit is also required;

     D.    A vicinity map depicting all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the project site, and indicating their land uses;

     E.     Site plan at a scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     Location of lot lines, streets (with street names), easements and all structures ()existing and proposed),

     2.     Slopes, contours, trees and other pertinent physical features,

     3.     All exterior building dimensions, setbacks,

     4.     Locations, use and approximate distance from property line of the nearest structures on all properties abutting the project site,

     5.     Vehicle circulation and parking area, including dimensions of drive aisles and parking space,

     6.     All exterior lighting, existing and proposed;

     F.     Building elevations at a scale of one inch equals eight feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     All exterior sides of all existing and proposed buildings,

     2.     All exterior building dimensions, including heights,

     3.     Description of all exterior building materials;

     G.    Floor plans at a scale of one inch equals eight feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     Description of the proposed use of all interior floor area,

     2.     All dimensions of interior room or other enclosed areas,

     3.     Location of all plumbing equipment, existing or proposed;

     H.    A reduced transparency (size eight and one-half inches by eleven (11) inches) for each plan sheet (site plan, floor plan and elevations);

     I.      Color and materials board;

     J.      Certificate of water availability;

     K.    Property owners affidavit;

     L.     Application fee, as established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.3, 1974)

 

11.43.040 Burden of proof.
     In addition to the information required in the application by Section 11.43.030, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or the commission the following facts:

     A.    That the requested use at the location proposed will not:

     1.     Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area, or

     2.     Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site, or

     3.     Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

     B.     That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this code, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and

     C.     That the proposed site is adequately served:

     1.     By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and

     2.     By other public or private service facilities as are required. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.4, 1974)

 

11.43.050 Fees required.
     When an application is filed, it shall be accompanied by the filing fee and deposit as required in LACC Ord. 1494, Section 621. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.5, 1974)

 

11.43.070 Hearing.
     In all cases where an application for a conditional use permit is filed and the commission does not grant a request for ex parte consideration, the zoning board shall hold a public hearing unless the commission determines to and itself holds a public hearing. In either case, the public hearing shall be held pursuant to the procedure provided in LACC Ord. 1494, Article 7 of Chapter 5. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.7, 1974)

 

11.43.080 Findings and decision.
     The zoning board may recommend approval and the commission may approve an application for a conditional use permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings:

     A.    That the proposed use will not be in substantial conflict with the adopted general plan for the area. Where no general plan has been adopted, this subsection shall not apply;

     B.     That the requested use at the location proposed will not:

     1.     Adversely affect the health, peace, comfort or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding area, or

     2.     Be materially detrimental to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity of the site, or

     3.     Jeopardize, endanger or otherwise constitute a menace to the public health, safety or general welfare; and

     C.     That the proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the yards, walls, fences, parking and loading facilities, landscaping and other development features prescribed in this code, or as is otherwise required in order to integrate said use with the uses in the surrounding area; and

     D.    That the proposed site is adequately served:

     1.     By highways or streets of sufficient width and improved as necessary to carry the kind and quantity of traffic such use would generate, and

     2.     By other public or private service facilities as are required;

     E.     That the proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and protects public views, and aesthetic values in the neighborhood.

     The commission shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing fails to substantiate such findings to the satisfaction of the commission. (Ord. 171 § 1, 1989; LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.9, 1974)

 

11.43.090 Adequate water supply.
     If it appears that the use requested will require a greater water supply for adequate fire protection than does either the existing use or any use permitted without a conditional use permit in the same zone and will not comply with the provisions of LACC Ordinance No. 7834, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that such requested use will adversely affect and be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, buildings and structures and will not comply with the provisions of Section 11.43.080. If the water appeals board grants a variance pursuant to any provision of Article 4 of Chapter 1 of LACC Ordinance No. 7834, permitting the proposed use with the existing or proposed water supply, this section shall not apply. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.11, 1974)

 

11.43.100 Conditions for issuance.
     The commission, in approving an application for a conditional use permit, may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to insure that such use will be in accord with the findings required by Section 11.43.080. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the requested use, including, but not limited to:

     A.    Special yards, open spaces and buffer areas;

     B.     Fences and walls;

     C.     Parking facilities, including vehicular ingress and egress and the surfacing of parking areas and driveways to specified standards;

     D.    Street and highway dedications and improvements including sidewalks, curbs and gutters;

     E.     Water supply and fire protection in accordance with the provisions of LACC Ordinance No. 7834;

     F.     Landscaping and maintenance of grounds;

     G.    Regulation of nuisance factors such as noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gases, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances and radiation;

     H.    Regulation of operating hours for activities affecting normal neighborhood schedules and functions;

     I.      Regulation of signs including outdoor advertising;

     J.      A specified validation period limiting the time in which development may begin;

     K.    Provisions for a bond or other surety that the proposed conditional use will be removed on or before a specified date;

     L.     A site plan indicating all details and data as prescribed in this code;

     M.    Such other conditions as will make possible the development of the proposed conditional use in an orderly and efficient manner and in general accord with all elements of the general plan and the intent and purpose of this code.

     The commission may also approve the requested permit contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other ordinances. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.12, 1974)

 

11.43.110 Expiration where not used.
     A permit issued on or after January 21, 1937, which is not used within the time specified in such permit, or, if no time is specified, within one year after the granting of the permit, becomes null and void and of no effect except:

     A.    That in all cases the commission may extend such time for a period of not to exceed one year, provided an application requesting such extension is filed prior to such expiration date;

     B.     That in the case of a permit for a publicly owned use no time limit shall apply to utilization of such permit, provided that the public agency:

     1.     Within one year of the date of such approval, either acquires the property involved or commences legal proceedings for its acquisition, and

     2.     Immediately after the acquisition of, or the commencement of legal proceedings for the acquisition of the property, posts such property with signs, having an area of not less than twenty (20) square feet nor more than forty (40) square feet in area per face indicating the agency and the purpose for which it is to be developed. One such sign shall be placed facing and located within fifty (50) feet of each street, highway or parkway bordering the property. Where the property in question is not bounded by a street, highway or parkway, the agency shall erect one sign facing the street, highway or parkway nearest the property.

     A conditional use permit shall be considered used within the intent of this section when construction or other development authorized by such permit has commenced that would be prohibited in the zone if no permit had been granted. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.17, 1974)

 

11.43.120 Date of grant where appealed.
     Where an appeal is filed relative to any conditional use permit, the date of decision by the city council of such appeal shall be deemed the date of grant in determining said expiration date. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.18, 1974)

 

11.43.130 Cessation of use.
     A conditional use permit granted by action of the commission, shall automatically cease to be of any force and effect if the use for which such conditional use permit was granted has ceased or has been suspended for a consecutive period of two or more years. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.19, 1974)

 

11.43.140 Nuisances prohibited.
     Neither the provisions of this chapter nor the granting of any permit provided for in this chapter authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of any public or private nuisance. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.20, 1974)

 

11.43.150 Applicability of regulations in the zone.
     Unless specifically modified by a conditional use permit, all regulations prescribed in the zone in which such conditional use permit is granted shall apply. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.22, 1974)

 

11.43.160 Continuing validity.
     A conditional use permit that is valid and in effect, and was granted pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall adhere to the land and continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on said land. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 501.23, 1974)

Chapter 11.44 VARIANCES
11.44.010 Purpose.
     The variance procedure is established to permit modification of development standards as they apply to particular uses when practical difficulties, unnecessary hardships, or results inconsistent with the general purposes of this code, develop through the strict literal interpretation and enforcement of such provisions. A variance may be granted to permit modification of:

     A.    Building line setbacks, yards, open space and buffer areas;

     B.     Height, lot coverage, density and bulk regulations;

     C.     Off-street parking spaces, maneuvering areas and driveway width, and paving standards;

     D.    Landscaping requirements;

     E.     Wall, fencing and screening requirements;

     F.     Street and highway dedication and improvement standards;

     G.    Lot area and width requirements;

     H.    Operating conditions such as hours or days of operation, number of employees and equipment limitations;

     I.      Sign regulations other than outdoor advertising. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.1, 1974)

 

11.44.020 Filing of application.
     Any person desiring any permit required by or provided for in this code, may file an application therefor with the director, except that no application shall be filed or accepted if final action has been taken within one year prior thereto by either the commission or city council on an application requesting the same, or substantially the same permit. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.2, 1974)

 

11.44.030 Contents of application.
     An application for a variance shall contain the following information, unless waived by the director:

 

     A.    A project application form and supplemental application for the variance, including a description of the proposed project, a statement of how the request meets the required variance findings and an original signature of the property owner;

     B.     An initial study questionnaire for environmental review;

     C.     A map depicting all properties within three hundred (300) feet (for residential properties and for commercial properties with lot area thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or less) or five hundred (500) feet (for commercial properties with lot area greater than thirty thousand (30,000) square feet) of the project site. A list of the names and addresses of all current owners of these depicted properties, and two sets of envelope labels for these property owners. A notice list affidavit is also required;

     D.    A vicinity map depicting all properties within five hundred (500) feet of the project site, and indicating their land uses;

     E.     Site plan at a scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     Location of lot lines, streets (with street names), easements and all structures (existing and proposed),

     2.     Slopes, contours, trees and other pertinent physical features,

     3.     All exterior building dimensions, setbacks,

     4.     Locations, use and approximate distance from property line of the nearest structures on all properties abutting the project site,

     5.     Vehicle circulation and parking areas, including dimensions of drive aisles and parking space,

     6.     All exterior lighting, existing and proposed;

     F.     Building elevations at a scale of one inch equals eight feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     All exterior sides of all existing and proposed buildings,

     2.     All exterior building dimensions, including heights,

     3.     Description of all exterior building materials;

     G.    Floor plans at a scale of one inch equals eight feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) and including the following:

     1.     Description of the proposed use of all interior floor area,

     2.     All dimensions of interior room or other enclosed areas,

     3.     Location of all plumbing equipment, existing or proposed;

     H.    A reduced transparency (size eight and one-half inches by eleven (11) inches) for each plan sheet (site plan, floor plan and elevations);

     I.      Certificate of water availability;

     J.      Property owners affidavit;

     K.    Application fee, as established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.3, 1974)

 

11.44.040 Burden of proof.
     In addition to the information required in the application by Section 11.44.030, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or the commission the following facts:

     A.    That there are special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property involved, such as size, shape, topography, location or surroundings, which are not generally applicable to other properties in the same vicinity and under identical zoning classification; and

     B.     That such variance is necessary for the preservation of a substantial property right of the applicant such as that possessed by owners of other property in the same vicinity and zone; and

     C.     That the granting of the variance will not be materially detrimental to the public welfare or be injurious to other property or improvements in the same vicinity and zone. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.4, 1974)

 

11.44.060 Denial of inadequate petition.
     The zoning board may recommend denial, and the commission may deny, without a public hearing, an application for a variance if such application does not contain the information required by Sections 11.44.030 and 11.44.040. The commission may permit the applicant to amend such application. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.6, 1974)

 

11.44.070 Hearing.
     In all cases where an application is filed for a variance the zoning board shall hold a public hearing unless the commission determines to and itself holds a public hearing. In either case the public hearing shall be held pursuant to the procedure provided by Chapter 11.48 of this code. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.7, 1974)

 

11.44.080 Findings and decision.
     The zoning board may recommend approval and the commission may approve an application for a variance where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings:

     A.    That because of special circumstances or exceptional characteristics applicable to the property, the strict application of this code deprives such property of privileges enjoyed by other property in the vicinity and under identical zoning classification; and

     B.     That the adjustment authorized will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated; and

     C.     That strict application of zoning regulations as they apply to such property will result in practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose of such regulations and standards;

     D.    That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity; and

     E.     That the proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and protects public views, and aesthetic values in the neighborhood;

     The commission shall deny the application where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing fails to substantiate such findings to the satisfaction of the commission. (Ord. 171 § 1, 1989; LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.8, 1974)

 

11.44.090 Adequate water supply.
     If it appears that the variance requested will require a greater water supply for adequate fire protection than does either the existing use or any use permitted in the same zone without a variance, and will not comply with the provisions of LACC Ordinance No. 7834, such facts shall be prima facie evidence that such requested variance will adversely affect and be materially detrimental to adjacent uses, buildings and structures and will not comply with the provisions of Section 11.44.080. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.9, 1974)

 

11.44.100 Conditions for issuance.
     The commission in approving an application for a variance may impose such conditions as it deems necessary to insure that the adjustment will be in accord with the findings required by Section 11.44.080. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the use for which such variance is requested, including, but not limited to those specified in Section 11.43.100. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.10, 1974)

 

11.44.110 Expiration where not used.
     A variance which is not used within the time specified in such variance, or, if no time is specified, within one year after the granting of the variance, becomes null and void and of no effect except that in all cases the commission may extend such time for a period of not to exceed one year, provided an application requesting such extension is filed prior to such expiration date. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.11, 1974)

 

11.44.120 Date of grant where appealed.
     Where an appeal is filed relative to any variance, the date of decision by the city council of such appeal shall be deemed the date of grant in determining said expiration date. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.12, 1974)

 

11.44.130 Nuisances prohibited.
     Neither the provisions of this chapter nor the granting of any permit provided for in this chapter authorizes or legalizes the maintenance of any public or private nuisance. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.13, 1974)

 

11.44.140 Applicability of regulations in the zone.
     Unless specifically modified by a variance, all regulations prescribed in the zone in which such variance is granted shall apply. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.15, 1974)

 

11.44.150 Continuing validity.
     A variance that is valid and in effect, and was granted pursuant to the provisions of this code, shall adhere to the land and continue to be valid upon change of ownership of the land or any lawfully existing building or structure on said land. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 502.16, 1974)

Chapter 11.45 DIRECTOR’S REVIEW, MODIFICATIONS AND SPECIAL REVIEWS
11.45.010 Setback modifications.
     A.    Authority. Modifications to setback development standards for single-family residential structures, accessory structures, and/or swimming pool/spa mechanical equipment may be allowed and are classified as follows:

     1.     Director’s Review Setback Modifications. A director’s review setback modification is a modification that is subject to approval by the director of community development or designee.

     2.     Setback Modifications. A setback modification is a modification that is subject to approval by the planning commission.

     B.     Review Criteria.

     1.     Director’s Review Setback Modifications. The director or designee may grant director’s review setback modifications to the front, side, and rear yard setback requirements, subject to the following conditions a, b, c, d, and e and findings f and g:

     a.     The modification is to allow an encroaching building addition to an existing and legally established residential or accessory structure, to allow encroaching accessory structure, or to allow encroaching swimming pool/spa mechanical equipment.

     b.     The building addition will not encroach into a required front, side, or rear yard beyond the limits already established by the existing structure to which the addition will be attached, or result in less than a five-foot setback.

     c.     If the building addition is a second floor, it will not create additional encroaching floor area that is more than fifty (50) percent of the amount of overall encroaching floor area on the same side and story as the request, existing prior to the request.

     d.     Within the required setback, the exterior walls and roofs of the structure establishing an existing setback encroachment shall be retained to qualify for a director’s review setback modification. Additionally, any project involving demolition of more than thirty (30) percent of the existing floor area shall comprise a new house for the purposes of this section, and shall not be eligible for a director’s review setback modification.

     e.     The swimming pool/spa mechanical equipment will not be located in front of the subject residence or within the front yard setback and will not result in a side and/or rear yard setback less than the applicable building code requirements.

     f.      Topographic features, lot configurations or other conditions make it impractical to require compliance with the yard setback requirements.

     g.     The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood, and protects public views, and aesthetic and other property values in such neighborhoods in a manner which is compatible with reasonable development of the subject lot and is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council.

     2.     Setback Modifications. The planning commission may grant setback modifications to the front, side, and rear yard setback requirements, including fence height standards, subject to the following findings:

     a.     The proposed project is compatible with existing development on the site, and is consistent with other development in the immediate vicinity.

     b.     The modification authorized will not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity and zone in which the property is situated.

     c.     Strict application of zoning regulations as they apply to such property will result in practical diffi-culties or unnecessary hardships inconsistent with the general purpose of such regulations and standards.

     d.     The modification will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

     e.     The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and protects public views, and aesthetics and other property values in such neighborhoods in a manner which is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council and compatible with development of the subject lot. (Ord. 404 § 1, 2011; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

 

11.45.015 Recreational vehicle parking or storage review.
     A.    Authority. A director’s review approval shall be required per threshold criteria contained in Section 11.11.050(D)(4).

     B.     Review Criteria. The director of community development may grant director’s review approval no less than ten calendar days after adjacent property owners are notified by the city that such application is under review and appeal procedures contained in Section 11.45.060 are disclosed. The director shall determine the lot type of the subject property as part of the action. The director may grant recreational vehicle parking or storage review approval subject to the following findings:

     1.     The proposed recreational vehicle parking or storage does not adversely impact the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and does not adversely impact views and aesthetics in a manner which is incompatible with the development on the subject lot and neighboring properties.

     2.     The proposed recreational vehicle parking or storage would not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety, access, or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment, or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

     C.     Revocation. A recreational vehicle parking or storage director’s review approval may be revoked by the planning commission through a public hearing process if one or more of the following conditions exist:

     1.     Circumstances have changed or negative impacts have arisen to such a degree that one or more of the findings of fact contained in subsection B can no longer be made;

     2.     The director’s review approval was obtained in a false, misleading, or fraudulent manner;

     3.     One or more conditions of the director’s review approval have not been fulfilled;

     4.     The director of community development determines that the recreational vehicle parking or storage is or has become a nuisance. (Ord. 410 § 1, 2013)

 

 

11.45.020 Large garage review.
     A.    Authority. Planning commission approval shall be required per threshold criteria contained in Section 11.11.050(D)(3).

     B.     Review Criteria. The planning commission may grant large garage review approvals, subject to the following finding: The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood, and protects public views, and aesthetics and other property values in such neighborhoods in a manner which is compatible with reasonable development of the subject lot and is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

 

11.45.030 Floor area review.
     A.    Authority. The planning commission may approve a floor area review per qualifying criteria established in Section 11.11.050(B)(1)(b).

     B.     Review Criteria. The planning commission may approve a floor area review subject to the following finding: Through its siting, screening, and/or massing effects, the project is compatible with its neighborhood setting and is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

 

11.45.040 Director’s review height modification.
     A.    Authority. Excess height as stipulated in Section 11.11.050(A)(1)(d) may be allowed, provided that a director’s review height modification is obtained, pursuant to requirements for the director’s review height modification. A director’s review height modification is subject to approval by the director of community development or designee.

     B.     Review Criteria. The director or designee may grant director’s review height modifications for excess height subject to the following criteria:

     1.     Neighbor Notification. The director of community development may grant director’s review height review approvals no less than ten calendar days after notification by the city to adjacent property owners that the development request is under review and stating appeal procedures contained in Section 11.45.060.

     2.     Required Findings. A director’s review height modification shall not be approved unless the approval authority makes the following findings:

     a.     The excess height accommodates an architectural objective, as dictated by style, scale, and/or architectural consistency with the subject structure or other structures in visual proximity.

     b.     The proposed project preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood and protects public views, aesthetics and other property values in such neighborhoods in a manner which is compatible with reasonable development of the subject lot and is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

 

11.45.050 Second floor review.
     A.    Authority. Director’s review or planning commission approval shall be required per threshold criteria contained in Section 11.11.050(A)(3).

     B.     Review Criteria.

     1.     Director’s Review. The director of community development may grant second floor review approvals no less than ten calendar days after notification by the city of adjacent property owners that such development request is under review and stating appeal procedures contained in Section 11.45.060. The director of community development may grant second floor review approvals, subject to the finding contained in subsection (B)(2) of this section.

     2.     Planning Commission. The planning commission may grant second floor review approvals, subject to the following finding:

     a.     The two-story design includes adequate setbacks, screening and modulation.

     b.     The two-story design preserves the existing scale and character of the surrounding neighborhood.

     c.     The two-story design protects public views, aesthetics, privacy and property values of the neighbors.

     d.     The two-story design is consistent with the residential design guidelines as adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

 

11.45.060 Procedures and requirements for director’s review, modifications and special reviews.
     A.    Applicability. All director’s review and modifications are subject to the following procedures and requirements.

     B.     Application. Any property owner or any individual with the property owner’s authorization may submit an application to the director of community development. Application materials shall include the following:

     1.     A completed application form as provided by the city, including a written statement signed by the applicant and property owner describing the proposed project, identifying the specific request, and describing how the request meets the required findings of this chapter;

     2.     A completed environmental assessment questionnaire form, as provided by the city;

     3.     One copy of a map depicting the properties within one hundred (100) feet of the boundaries of the project site;

     4.     Project drawings: thirteen (13) copies for planning commission projects, or three copies for administrative projects, consisting of the following:

     a.     A site plan: scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet or larger (or as otherwise approved by the director) including the following information:

     i.      Location of lot lines, easements, and all structures, existing and proposed,

     ii.     Identification of street names,

     iii.    All slopes, contours, and other topographical considerations pertinent to the project,

     iv.    All exterior building dimensions; average lot width determination (where project is to be constructed within twenty (20) feet of a side property line); dimensions of all setbacks, and the location of the nearest building wall on all abutting lots,

     v.     All trees with a trunk diameter of six inches or more, measured four feet above grade, unless waived by the director;

     b.     Building elevation drawings, at a scale of one-eighth inch equals one foot or greater, including the following information:

     i.      Overall building height,

     ii.     Height of significant component masses, and

     iii.    Material and color callouts;

     5.     An application fee in an amount established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. Checks shall be made payable to the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     C.     Review and Notification. Applications for discretionary approvals which have been deemed complete for filing shall be reviewed as follows:

     1.     Review.

     a.     Review Process. The director or designee shall review all application materials and may contact property owners abutting the project site, and conduct negotiations to resolve matters related to the project.

     b.     Conditions. The decision making authority may impose reasonable conditions which would alleviate the effect of an approval upon other public or private property.

     2.     Notification.

     a.     Director’s Review. The director or designee shall notify the applicant, the abutting property owners, and all others whose names appear on the application, petition or other correspondence of the decision upon the request.

     b.     Planning Commission. Planning commission review requires a public hearing notice.

     D.    Call-Up and Appeals.

     1.     Call-Up by the Planning Commission.

     a.     All decisions by the director of community development shall be reported to the planning commission at the commission’s next regular meeting.

     b.     In addition to any appeal procedures otherwise established by law, the planning commission may cause any such decision to be heard de novo by a majority vote conducted at a meeting at which the decision is reported. In the event that the planning commission does not so vote, the decision of the director of community development shall be final.

     c.     Notification of a hearing on the call-up shall be provided to the applicant and all others whose name appears on the application, petition, or other correspondence, and others expressing interest in such notification by means of written communication to the city.

     d.     The planning commission shall review all application materials, shall conduct a de novo hearing, and shall render a decision according to the required conditions and findings applicable to the case.

     e.     The director or designee shall notify the applicant and all others whose name appears on the application, petition or other correspondence, of the planning commission action on the project.

     2.     Appeal to the Planning Commission. A decision of the director may be appealed to the planning commission, as provided in subsection (D)(4) of this section.

     3.     Appeal to the City Council. A decision of the planning commission may be appealed to the city council, as provided in subsection (D)(4) of this section.

     4.     Appeal Procedure. The following procedure shall be used when a decision on a modification is appealed:

     a.     Appeals shall be submitted in writing within fifteen (15) days of the mailing date (as shown on the declaration of service by mail by the city), which mailing shall occur in a timely manner following the decision of the director’s review or modification and shall specify whether the appeal is being made on the decision to approve or deny a project, or on a condition imposed upon the project. Reasons for the appeal shall be clearly stated. Appeals to the planning commission shall be submitted to the planning department. Appeals to the city council shall be submitted to the city clerk.

     b.     If the appeal is filed by the applicant, it shall also be accompanied by thirteen (13) sets of the documents required in subsection (B)(4) of this section.

     c.     The appeal shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount established by the current fee schedule adopted by the city council. Checks shall be made payable to the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     d.     Notification of a hearing on the appeal shall be provided to the applicant and all others whose name appears on the application, petition, or other correspondence, and others expressing interest in such notification by means of written communication to the city.

     e.     The reviewing body shall review all application materials, shall conduct a de novo hearing, and shall render a decision according to the required conditions and findings applicable to the case.

     f.      The director or designee shall notify the applicant and all others whose name appears on the application, petition or other correspondence, of the decision on the appeal request.

 

     g.     In the event of an appeal before the city council, the decision of the city council shall be final. (Ord. 413 §§ 15, 16, 2013; Ord. 356 § 3, 2006)

Chapter 11.46 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
11.46.010 Purpose and intent.
     The provisions of this chapter shall govern special events and temporary uses on private property. The provisions of this chapter shall not govern special events and temporary uses on public property. Special events and temporary uses within the public right-of-way or on public property shall be as governed by Chapter 4.05 of this code. The intent of this chapter is to accommodate reasonable requests for interim, temporary or seasonal uses within any zoning district, when such activities are desirable for the community in the short term but would have detrimental effects if allowed to continue on a permanent basis. Temporary uses generally do not have permanent structures associated with their use. Temporary uses allowed under this section shall be sensitive to the health, safety and general welfare of persons residing and working in the vicinity of their use, and shall be conducted so as not to cause any long-term detrimental effects on surrounding uses, properties or the community. The issuance of a temporary use permit does not confer any land use entitlement or property right to the holder of the permit. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.020 Authority.
     A temporary use permit may be approved, conditionally approved or denied administratively by the director of community development. The director may, at his or her discretion, refer such initial applications to the planning commission for determination. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.030 Processing of major and master temporary uses.
     Prior to commencement of a major or master temporary use listed in this chapter, a major or master temporary use permit must be approved by the community development director. A public hearing shall not be required for the approval and issuance of a temporary use permit; however, public notice of an approved event shall be provided prior to commencement of the use, as follows:

     A.    An application for a temporary use permit shall be filed with the community development department at least thirty-five (35) days prior to the proposed use. Applicants are encouraged to apply earlier for larger projects.

 

     B.     The community development director shall render a decision at least twenty-four (24) days prior to the proposed use.

     C.     The decision shall be followed by the mailing or delivery of public notices to all property addresses within a five-hundred (500) foot radius of the subject property.

     D.    The public notice shall state the nature of the request, location and zoning designation of the property, name of the project proponent, the time and place of the proposed temporary use, the conditions placed on the use, and notice of a seven-day appeal period. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.040 Processing of minor temporary uses.
     Prior to commencement of a minor temporary use listed in this chapter, a minor temporary use permit must be approved by the community development director. A public hearing shall not be required for the approval and issuance of a minor temporary use permit. An application for a minor temporary use permit shall be filed with the community development department at least ten days prior to the proposed use. Notice of the director’s determination shall be sent to the applicant prior to the commencement of the use. No other notice shall be required. The decision of the director shall be final. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.050 Permitted temporary uses.
     Temporary uses are divided into three general categories: major, minor and master. Major temporary uses include, but are not limited to, the following: may create health and safety concerns; may occur on undeveloped property; may create traffic problems and/or may disrupt community life if not properly conditioned or otherwise limited. Minor temporary uses include, but are not limited to, the following: occur on developed private property, generally commercial, for very short time periods; produce little noise; have no significant impacts to adjacent properties or to traffic and public safety. Master temporary uses are similar, in effect, to major temporary uses; however, they occur with more regularity and/or for much longer time periods.

     A.    Major Temporary Uses. Major temporary uses include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     Off-site contractors’ construction yards in conjunction with an approved, active development project;

     2.     Trailers, coaches or mobilehomes as a temporary residence of the property owner when a valid residential building permit is in force. The permit may be granted for up to two years, or upon expiration/finalization of the building permit, whichever occurs first;

     3.     Christmas tree and pumpkin sales lots on vacant commercial property, or on parking lots of commercial, commercial segment of mixed use, or institutional lands (note: this chapter doesn’t apply to public property);

     4.     Outdoor temporary swap meets or auctions in commercial, mixed use, or institutional zones, limited to two events per calendar year, and not exceeding five consecutive days per event;

     5.     Indoor and outdoor entertainment and assembly events in the commercial segment of mixed use, commercial or institutional zones including, but not limited to, fundraisers, retreats, fairs, circuses, festivals and concerts, when not held within premises designed to accommodate such events, such as: auditoriums, stadiums or other public assembly facilities, or private clubhouse facilities and excluding special events which are considered social events and approved through a separate city process;

     6.     In residential zones or the residential segment of the mixed use zones:

     a.     Temporary uses that are of a scale and use to have the ability to disrupt residential neighborhood character, may include some accessory commercial use, may increase traffic impacts, and generally last for more than a day, such as the “Showcase House” charitable event,

 

     b.     Excludes noncommercial weddings and other single-day life events such as birthday parties, etc., from the requirement to obtain any type of temporary use permit,

     c.     Except as allowed as a home occupation pursuant to Section 11.11.030(D) of this code, allowed pursuant to an issued filming permit, and allowed pursuant to subsection (A)(6)(a), commercial uses in the residential zone are prohibited.

     B.     Minor Temporary Uses. Minor temporary uses do not impact improved parking areas and include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     Outdoor display and sales of merchandise within commercial or mixed use land use districts, including “sidewalk” type sales not exceeding thirty (30) days per calendar year per business or organization, and subject to the following provisions:

     a.     Merchandise displayed or sold must be customarily sold on the premises by the permanently established business,

     b.     All outdoor displays shall occur in front of or along side the subject store,

     c.     The maximum number of consecutive days for any one event shall not exceed four calendar days,

     d.     Set-up and take-down of tents, lighting, fencing, merchandise and/or items for the event shall not be counted towards the allowable event days per calendar year, except that set-up shall not exceed one day and take-down shall not exceed one day unless otherwise authorized by the community development director,

     e.     Partial days shall count as full days;

     2.     Public health and safety activities, including emergency clinics and temporary inoculation centers;

     3.     Spotlights or searchlights identifying commercial events;

     4.     Veterinary clinics on developed sites that are not in conjunction with a veterinary facility (i.e., pet store, groomer).

     C.     Master Temporary Use Permits. These are generally reoccurring events at a reoccurring fixed location but without permanent structures. Master temporary uses include, but are not limited to, the following:

     1.     Real estate offices and model homes within approved development projects limited to two years or until all dwelling units are sold, whichever occurs first;

     2.     Outdoor swap meets, farmers markets or auctions, limited to one or two days per week and generally occurring weekly or with some frequency or regularity throughout the calendar year.

     D.    Temporary Uses Not Listed. For other temporary uses not listed, the director of community development may, at his or her discretion, determine whether an unlisted temporary use should be classified as major, minor or master. This determination shall be based upon the similarities and differences with the above listed uses and an assessment of the proposed temporary use’s compatibility with the zoning district and surrounding land uses. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.060 Application.
     Application for temporary use permits shall be filed on forms furnished by the community development department. Application for major or master temporary use permits shall be filed at least thirty-five (35) days prior to the anticipated initiation of the use (for larger projects, anticipate more time). Applications for minor temporary use permits shall be filed at least ten days prior to initiation of the use. Applications for temporary uses shall contain the following information:

     A.    The proposed location of the temporary use;

     B.     The name, address and phone number of the party responsible for the temporary use;

     C.     The number of persons who will be engaged in conducting the temporary use, if applicable;

     D.    A plot plan showing the entire property to be used to conduct the temporary use, including detailed siting of any temporary facilities associated with the use, and the parking plan for the temporary use;

     E.     A written description detailing the type and nature of the temporary use requested and the dates and hours of operation of the temporary use. In addition, provide information on how noise, garbage, sanitation, dust, and other impacts shall be mitigated as applicable;

     F.     Agency approval sheet, signed by all agencies (as applicable);

     G.    Filing fee;

     H.    A completed property owner affidavit; and

     I.      Such other information as may be required by the community development director. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.070 Temporary use limitations.
     All temporary uses shall have limitations on their use and the accessories associated with their activities. The following list is not all-inclusive and additional limitations may be applied at the discretion of the community development director.

     A.    Canopies/Tents. Canopies/tents shall not be located within any public right-of-way.

     B.     Banners.

     1.     The maximum number shall be one banner per street frontage.

     2.     The maximum area for each banner shall not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet.

     3.     The vertical dimension of a banner shall not exceed six feet and shall not be located more than eight feet above the ground, unless the banner is mounted to the face of the building.

     C.     Food Services. Food services are allowed subject to all rules and regulations of the Los Angeles County Health Department.

     D.    View Obstructions. Activities shall not substantially block, restrict or impair any of the following:

     1.     The public’s view of another business or activity;

     2.     The public’s view of the signage for another business or activity;

     3.     The view or visibility of the operator of any motor vehicle;

     4.     The movement of any pedestrian or motor vehicle;

     5.     The points of ingress or egress to a site. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.080 Findings.
     The community development director may approve a temporary use permit application provided that all of the following findings of fact are made:

     A.    The proposed site is adequate in size and shape to accommodate the temporary use;

     B.     Adequate parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by such use will be available either on-site or at alternate locations acceptable to the community development director;

     C.     The proposed use will not unreasonably jeopardize the public peace, safety or general welfare, or be injurious or detrimental to properties adjacent to, or in the vicinity of, the proposed location of the activity. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.090 Conditions of approval.
     In approving an application for a temporary use permit, the community development director may impose such conditions as are deemed necessary to insure that the permit will be in accord with the findings required by Section 11.46.080. These conditions may involve any pertinent factors affecting the operation of the temporary use, and may include, but are not limited to, the following:

     A.    Provision of adequate temporary off-street parking facilities, including vehicular access and egress as defined by the community development director;

     B.     Regulation of nuisance factors such as, but not limited to, the prevention of glare or direct illumination onto adjacent properties, noise, vibrations, smoke, dust, dirt, odors, gasses and heat;

     C.     Regulation of temporary buildings, structures and facilities, including placement, height and size, location of equipment and open spaces, including buffer areas and other yards;

     D.    Provision of sanitary and medical facilities;

     E.     Provision of solid waste collection and disposal;

     F.     Provision of security and safety measures;

     G.    Regulation of signs;

     H.    Regulation of operating hours and days, including limitation of the duration of the temporary use to a shorter time period than that requested, and limiting the hours for event set-up, break-down, and clean-up;

     I.      Submission of a performance bond or other surety devices to ensure that any temporary facilities or structures used for such proposed temporary use will be removed from the site within a reasonable time following the event and that the property will be restored to its former condition;

     J.      Requirement that the approval of the temporary use permit is contingent upon compliance with applicable provisions of other ordinances or other agencies (e.g., Fire Department);

     K.    Such other conditions which will ensure the operation of the proposed temporary use in an orderly and efficient manner and in accord with the intent and purpose of this chapter;

     L.     Applicants for special event permits shall:

     1.     Provide containers for recycling cans, glass, plastic and paper generated,

     2.     Comply with the city’s solid waste recycling ordinance;

     M.    Submission of additional services bond for the purpose of protecting, assisting and regulating the proposed event. The cost of providing such additional services shall be paid in advance to the city by the applicant;

     N.    The applicant shall defend, indemnify, and hold harmless the city and its officers, agents, and employees from any claim, action or proceeding against the city or its officers, agents, or employees to attack, set aside, void, or annul approval of this permit;

     O.    The applicant shall have a copy of the approved temporary use permit available on-site during the entire duration of the use;

     P.     The temporary use shall conform to the city’s community development department, building and safety division, public works department, Los Angeles County fire department, Los Angeles County sheriff’s department, and the Los Angeles County environmental health department programs, regulations and requirements. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.100 Appeals.
     Appeals of temporary use permits shall be made directly to the city manager. Only parties receiving notice of the temporary use permit determination, including the applicant, may appeal the determination; and appeals must be made in writing within seven calendar days of the determination. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk together with any required fees and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal. Appeals of the city manager’s determination may be made to the city council in the same manner and time as to the city manager. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.110 Revocation.
     A temporary use permit may be immediately revoked if the community development director finds that one or more of the following conditions exists:

     A.    Circumstances have been changed by the applicant to such a degree that one or more of the findings of fact contained in Section 11.46.080 can no longer be made in a positive manner;

     B.     The temporary use permit was obtained in a false, misleading or fraudulent manner;

     C.     One or more conditions of the temporary use permit have not been fulfilled;

     D.    The permittee, as determined by the community development director, or designee, is in violation of any law, or the activity endangers the public health, safety, or general welfare;

     E.     The community development director determines that the use is, or has become, a nuisance. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

 

11.46.120 Expiration.
     Temporary use permits shall expire at the end of their approval period. No temporary use permit shall exceed a one-year approval period. Recurring temporary uses must be reapplied for each year. (Ord. 408 § 4, 2012)

Chapter 11.47 DESIGN REVIEW
11.47.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish a design review authority, to be known as the design commission, and procedures for design review, in order to:

     A.    Develop plans to improve and enhance the appearance of existing and planned public and private buildings within the CPD zone; develop streetscape plans and criteria for improving the appearance of existing and planned public and private open spaces on Foothill Boulevard and other locations as directed by the city council;

     B.     Encourage the orderly and harmonious, yet varied appearance of commercial and multifamily residential structures and property within the city, including signs, landscaping, parking areas, and open space areas;

     C.     Protect and enhance the public health, safety, general welfare, and property and improvement values throughout the city;

     D.    Ensure that new development does not have an adverse impact in terms of aesthetics, health, or safety, upon existing adjoining properties, or the city in general; and

     E.     Preserve and enhance the particular character and unique assets of the city and its commercial districts, as described in the general plan. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.020 Applicability.
     A.    Required Review. The following projects are subject to design review:

     1.     Nonresidential Projects.

     a.     Any project involving construction of, or exterior change to, any building, where such change requires a building permit;

     b.     Any building repainted or partially repainted. Design review can be waived by the director of community development if it can be determined that the colors are appropriate and/or similar to the existing building colors or colors previously approved by the design commission. Partial repainting for de minimis repair, touch-up maintenance or graffiti removal with substantially similar paint color shall be exempt from design review. There shall be no presumption, if a color has not been previously approved by the design commission, that the color is prohibited;

     c.     Any permanent signage, as governed by Chapter 11.37 of this title;

     d.     Awnings visible from a public right-of-way;

     e.     Outdoor furniture visible from a public right-of-way, if said furniture is not approved by the director of community development;

     f.      Landscaping, in the case of:

     i.      A project subject to review for building construction or change under subsection (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(c) of this section, or

     ii.     A project involving changes to an approved landscape plan.

     2.     Residential Planned Development. Any project requiring a residential planned development permit.

     3.     City Projects. Any project involving city property.

     4.     Referred Projects. Any project, other than single-family residential, subject to planning commission review, and individually or categorically made subject to design review by the planning commission or city council. (Ord. 407 § 1, 2012; Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.030 Findings.
     In order for design review approval to be granted, the following findings shall be made:

     A.    The design and layout of the proposed development is consistent with the general plan and any design criteria adopted for specialized areas, such as designated historic or other special districts, planned developments, master plans, or specific plans, or adopted for the project through conditions of approval or development agreements;

     B.     The design and layout of the proposed development will accommodate the functions and activities that are proposed for the property, will not unreasonably interfere with the use and enjoyment of neighboring property, and will not create traffic or pedestrian hazards;

     C.     The architectural design of the proposed development is compatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood and that all reasonable design efforts have been made to maintain the harmonious, orderly, and attractive development contemplated by this title and the general plan;

     D.    The design of the proposed development will provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors and that it is aesthetically of good composition, materials, texture, and color that will remain aesthetically appealing with the level of maintenance that might reasonably be expected. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.040 Application materials.
     The following materials are required for submittal of a complete application for design review. Items listed as requirements may be waived for projects of smaller scope by the director of community development or designee. For projects consisting solely of signage, the application materials need not exceed the review requirements set forth in the sign regulations ordinance.

     All application materials shall be retained by the city to assure field compliance with design commission approval. Separately listed requirements may be combined if not detrimental to clear understanding of the proposal.

     A.    Design Concept Review.

     1.     A site or plot plan reflecting the proposed project, including existing and proposed topography, property lines and structures, and all recorded and proposed easements and public rights-of-way;

     2.     Elevation drawings at a scale of at least one-eighth inch equals one foot, with materials, colors, finishes, and critical vertical dimensions indicated;

     3.     A landscaping plan which shall accurately show:

     a.     Existing trees on the project site with a trunk diameter of six inches or greater at a height of four feet above grade, and/or having a vertical height from the ground level to treetop level of fifteen (15) feet or greater,

     b.     Species of all trees and their appropriate trunk diameter, height and condition,

 

 

     c.     Final disposition of all existing trees, and

     d.     The species, locations, and sizes of proposed vegetation;

     4.     Color photographs of the site and its surroundings;

     5.     The design commission may require additional materials for complete understanding of the proposal, including a three-dimensional scale model of the project site, onsite erection of a full-size mockup (either balloons denoting building corners or a story pole frame), perspective views, or such other graphic information;

     6.     Applicable fees.

     B.     Final Design Review.

     1.     Materials submitted at the design concept review, with such modifications as result from that review;

     2.     A materials and colors board, keyed to the elevation drawings;

     3.     Exterior lighting plan and specifications;

     4.     Landscaping irrigation plans;

     5.     Indication of all hardscape and exterior structures and amenities, including colors and materials. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.050 Fees.
     Fees shall be imposed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.060 Review process.
     Applicants are encouraged to consult with planning staff as early as possible in the design process. Quality of graphic presentation need only be of the level needed to convey basic concepts.

     A.    Design Commission Review. The design commission shall review all applications for design review action as follows:

     1.     Design Concept Review. Design concept review is the opportunity for initial design commission response to the project. Topics of review include building massing and siting, circulation, facade composition and articulation, and open space design.

     2.     Final Design Review. Final design review includes review for compliance with conditions set forth in design concept approval, as well as more detailed concerns including materials, colors, lighting, detailing, and landscape/hardscape specifications.

     3.     Consolidated Design Review. An applicant may consolidate the design concept review and final review application materials and review meetings. In so doing, the applicant acknowledges the risk in preparing final review detail prior to design concept review. Consolidated design review is appropriate chiefly for projects of minor scope and/or minor visibility.

     B.     Coordination with Planning Commission Review. In cases for which planning commission action is required, planning commission review and action shall precede design commission review and action. Design commission review concurrent with planning commission review shall be used for those cases in which the director of community development determines that design considerations are essential to project analysis for the purpose of the planning commission action. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.070 Action.
     All actions relating to design review shall be by a majority vote of the design commission members present and voting. The design commission may take the following actions relating to any application pursuant to this chapter:

     A.    Grant Approval. The design commission may grant approvals subject to such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure that the findings required by Section 11.47.030 and all city development standards are met. Reasonable guarantees and evidence may be required that such conditions are being, or will be, complied with.

     B.     Recommend Approval. The design commission may recommend approvals or denials of projects in which the design commission’s authority is advisory. It may also recommend such conditions as are deemed necessary to ensure that the findings required by Section 11.47.030 and all city development standards are met.

     C.     Refer Application. Any application subject to consideration of the design commission may be referred by such body to any subcommittee thereof, or to the director of community development for final disposition.

     D.    Continue Consideration. The design commission may continue consideration of an application.

     E.     Deny Approval. The design commission may deny an application. Any tie vote or other action that fails to receive a majority vote shall constitute a denial. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.080 Appeals.
     A decision of the design commission may be appealed to the city council. Appeals shall be made in writing, and shall be filed, accompanied by a fee as established in Section 11.47.050 within fifteen (15) days of the decision being appealed. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.090 Effect.
     No final inspection or occupancy permit shall be granted unless the completed work complies with the plans approved and the conditions required by the approval authority, including colors, material, building design signage and landscaping. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.100 Expiration.
     An approval granted pursuant to this chapter shall automatically expire if the use authorized by such approval is not commenced, or construction necessary and incident thereto is not begun on or before the time limit specified in such approval and thereafter diligently advanced, or, if no time is specified, on or before one year after the date such approval was granted. The approval authority may extend such time limit for good cause before its expiration. The director of community development may grant no more than one administrative extension of up to twelve (12) months if the approved plans have not changed and if there has been no material change to the adjacent area. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.110 Enforcement.
     Failure to comply with a design review approval is a violation of the zoning code. An approval may be revoked upon failure to comply with any of the conditions or terms of such approval, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith. Notice and hearing shall be provided prior to revocation, in accordance with provisions of the zoning code. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.120 Initiation.
     An application for design review may be initiated by application, or by the city council. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.130 Hearing and notice.
     All applications for design review shall be considered at public meetings. The design commission shall designate the time and place of the meetings. Public notice shall be provided as follows:

     A.    For projects involving more than signage and/or awnings, the applicant shall provide posted notice upon the project site not less than ten days prior to the meeting date, stating the project address, description, the place, date, and time of the public meeting, and the city’s phone number. The posted notice shall be of a size and placement as required by the director of community development or designee.

     B.     For any project involving new construction of more than one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area, posted notice as described in subsection A of this section shall be provided at least ten days prior to the meeting date. Additional public notice shall be provided in the form of two sets of address labels to be used by the city to mail notices to the owners of the properties within a three hundred (300) foot radius of all boundaries of the subject parcel, as contained in the most recent county assessor’s records. A map indicating said properties, keyed to the list and indicating the three hundred (300) foot radius, shall also be provided. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.140 Authority.
     A.    Advisory Authority. The design commission is advisory to the planning commission or city council as directed by the city council, consistent with the referred projects applicability as listed in Section 11.47.020(A)(u) of this chapter.

     B.     Binding Authority. The design commission is the final authority on any project requiring design review, except as follows:

     1.     Any project for which the design commission requires revisions to grading or site plan configuration as previously approved by the planning commission shall be subject to amended planning commission review as the final authority.

     2.     Any member of the city council may call the project to the city council for review and action on or before the day prior to the city council hearing date following the design review board action. A project called up for city council review and action will be considered at the next city council meeting occurring not less than five days after the city councilmember has called the project for review. Planning staff shall distribute to the members of the city council the materials describing the project and its approval in order for the city council to determine its disposition to review the project or to waive such review.

     C.     Limits of Authority. The design commission may not:

     1.     Authorize work which is prohibited by the zoning code; or

     2.     Determine the location or appropriateness of land uses if such uses comply with applicable zoning provisions.

     D.    Delegation of Authority. The design commission may, by resolution, delegate its authority to:

     1.     A subcommittee consisting of no more than three members of the board for specified review of an aspect of a project, an entire specific project, or a category of projects or aspects thereof; or

     2.     The director of community development for types of minor development. (Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

 

11.47.150 Commission membership.
     A.    The design commission shall consist of five members to be appointed by majority vote of the city council. One member should be an owner or manager of a business within the city; said business member need not reside in the city. Aside from the business member, if any, all members shall be city residents. At least one member should be licensed in the state of California as an architect, or retired from that status. At least one member should be professionally qualified in horticulture or landscape construction, with preference toward a member licensed in the state of California as a landscape architect, or retired from that status. At least one member should be qualified in a related field, including but not limited to urban planning, urban design, graphic design, historic preservation, industrial design, interior design, building construction, or real estate development.

     B.     Members shall receive a stipend as adopted by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time.

     C.     The terms of office of members shall be established and set forth by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. Members shall serve until subsequent appointments are made. (Ord. 479 §§ 2, 3, 2019; Ord. 292 § 3, 1998)

Chapter 11.48 PUBLIC HEARINGS
11.48.060 Continuance of hearings.
     If for any reason, the testimony on any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the appointed day, the chairman of such hearing may before adjournment or recess, publicly announce the time and place at which said hearing will be continued and no further notice thereof shall be required. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 632, 1974)

 

11.48.070 Notice of action.
     The commission or city council shall serve notice of its action upon:

     A.    The applicant for a permit, variance, nonconforming use or structure review, or zone change, or the person owning and/or operating a use for which the revocation of a permit, variance or nonconforming use or structure is under consideration as required by law for the service of summons or by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested; and

     B.     The following persons by first class mail, postage prepaid:

     1.     The first three protestants testifying or speaking at the public hearing, except at a hearing for the revocation or modification of any permit, variance, or nonconforming use or structure,

     2.     The first three persons testifying or speaking at a public hearing in favor of the revocation or modification of any permit, variance or nonconforming use or structure,

     3.     Any other persons testifying or speaking at a public hearing that request such notification from the chairman at the hearing. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 633, 1974)

Chapter 11.49 APPEAL AND CITY COUNCIL CALL-UP PROCEDURES
11.49.010 Appeal to planning commission.
     Any determination by the director of community development authorized pursuant to the city zoning ordinance, shall be final and effective unless appealed to the planning commission by any interested party within fifteen (15) calendar days following issuance of such determination. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the director of community development together with any required fees, and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal.

     The planning commission shall conduct a public hearing, with notification given in the same manner as for the original determination. Following such hearing the planning commission shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse or modify the determination of the director of community development; provided, that, any reversal or modification shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason for the planning commission action. (Ord. 308 § 1, 2000)

 

11.49.020 Appeal to city council.
     Any determination by the planning commission shall be final and effective unless the determination is appealed by any interested party to the city council within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of decision. Notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk together with any required fees and shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reasons for the appeal.

     The city clerk shall set the matter for public hearing, giving notice in the same manner as for the original determination. Following such hearing the city council shall consider the matter and may affirm, reverse, or modify the determination of the planning commission; provided, that, any reversal or modification shall be accompanied by a written statement setting forth the reason for the city council action. The determination of the city council shall be final and effective immediately. (Ord. 308 § 1, 2000)

 

11.49.030 Appeal stays effective date.
     When an appeal is properly filed, the determination appealed from is stayed. Any action taken pursuant to such determination prior to the expiration of the appeal period is at the risk of party taking such action. (Ord. 308 § 1, 2000)

 

11.49.040 Failure to act.
     In the event that an appeal is filed and not acted upon within forty (40) calendar days after the matter is submitted for decision then in that event, the previous decision shall be deemed affirmed. (Ord. 308 § 1 2000)

 

 

11.49.050 City council call-up.
     A.    Notwithstanding any appeal procedures or any other call-up procedures provided by law, the city council may call for the review of the following decisions of the planning commission at the meeting at which the planning commission’s decision is reported to the city council:

     1.     Any conditional use permit for commercial projects;

     2.     Any conditional use permit in the RPD residential planned development zone, public and semi-public zone, institutional zone or mixed use zone;

     3.     Any tentative map approval; and

     4.     Any telecommunications permit.

     B.     If called-up for review by a majority vote of the city council, the item will be heard de novo at a future city council meeting following notice pursuant to subsection C. If the city council does not so vote, the decision of the planning commission shall be final for city council call-up.

     C.     All provisions for notice and hearing applicable to the planning commission for that type of decision, shall apply to the city council in conducting its review; provided, however, that if an appeal from a decision has been properly filed, the matter shall be conducted as an appeal subject to all applicable requirements for such appeals, rather than a review subject to this section. (Ord. 413 § 18, 2013)

Chapter 11.50 REVOCATIONS OR MODIFICATIONS
11.50.010 Grounds for revocation or modification.
     After a public hearing as provided for in this chapter, the commission may revoke or modify any nonconforming use or revoke or modify any permit, variance or other approval which has been granted by either the city council or the commission, pursuant to either the provisions of this code or of any ordinance superseded by this code on any one or more of the following grounds:

     A.    That such approval was obtained by fraud;

     B.     That the use for which such approval was granted is not being exercised;

     C.     That the use for which such approval was granted has ceased or has been suspended for one year or more;

     D.    That any person making use of or relying upon the permit, variance or other approval, is violating or has violated any conditions of such permit, variance or other approval, or that the use for which the permit, variance or other approval was granted is being, or recently has been exercised contrary to the terms or conditions of such approval, or in violation of any statute, ordinance, law or regulation;

     E.     That the use for which the approval was granted is so exercised as to be detrimental to the public health or safety, or so as to be a nuisance. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.1, 1974)

 

11.50.020 Additional grounds for nonconforming uses and structures.
     In addition to the grounds for revocation or modification contained in Section 11.50.010, a nonconforming use or structure may be revoked or modified after a public hearing if the commission finds:

     A.    That the condition of the improvements, if any, on the property are such that to require the property to be used only for those uses permitted in the zone where it is located would not impair the constitutional rights of any person;

     B.     That the nature of the improvements are such that they can be altered so as to be used in conformity with the uses permitted in the zone in which such property is located without impairing the constitutional rights of any person. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.2, 1974)

 

11.50.030 Initiation of hearings.
     Hearings on revocations or modifications of permits, variances or nonconforming uses or structures may be initiated:

     A.    If the city council instructs the commission to set the matter for a public hearing; or

     B.     Upon the initiative of the commission. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.3, 1974)

 

 

11.50.040 Notice of public hearing.
     Notice of a public hearing on a revocation or adjustment shall be provided as follows:

     A.    To the same persons and in the same manner as required for a public hearing before the commission pursuant to Chapter 11.48; and

     B.     By such other additional means that the commission deems necessary. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.4, 1974)

 

11.50.050 Continuance of hearing.
     If for any reason, the testimony of any case set for public hearing cannot be completed on the appointed day, the chairman of such hearing may before adjournment or recess, publicly announce the time and place at which said hearing will be continued and no further notice thereof shall be required. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.5, 1974)

 

11.50.060 Notice of action.
     Notice of the action taken by the commission shall be provided in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.48.070. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.6, 1974)

 

11.50.070 Effective date.
     An order by the commission revoking or modifying a permit, variance or nonconforming use or structure shall become final and effective fifteen (15) days after receipt by the owner or operator of such use of a written notice of action taken on a case, provided no appeal of the action taken has been filed with the city council pursuant to Chapter 11.49 within said fifteen (15) days. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 510.7, 1974)

Chapter 11.51 NONCONFORMING USES AND STRUCTURES
11.51.010 Types defined.
     As used in this chapter the expressions “Type 1, Type 2, Type 3, Type 4 and Type 5 building” are used as defined in the Building Code. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.1, 1974)

 

11.51.020 Regulations.
     The following regulations shall apply to all nonconforming uses:

     A.    Continuation of Nonconforming Uses. A nonconforming use may be continuously maintained, provided there is no alteration or addition to any structure nor any enlargement of area, space or volume occupied by or devoted to such use, except as otherwise provided in this code.

     B.     Additions to a Nonconforming Use. This section does not authorize the extension, expansion or enlargement of the area of land or the area within a building or structure devoted to a nonconforming use or permit the addition of land, buildings or structures used in conjunction with such nonconforming use except:

     1.     To the extent required by a subsequently enacted or subsequently adopted law, ordinance or regulation and the director so finds. Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use;

     2.     Additions may be made to a nonconforming dwelling unit without requiring any additional garage, carport, parking space or driveway paving; provided, that such additions neither increase the number of families that can be housed in such structure, nor occupy the only portion of an area which can be used for required garages, carports, parking space or access thereto. Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use.

     3.     Existing convenience stores may expand within existing exterior walls only, subject to a conditional use permit.

     C.     Additions to a Nonconforming Building or Structure. Additions may be made to a nonconforming building or structure which is not in violation of any provisions of this code and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the following standards of development as provided herein:

     1.     Yards, provided such addition or expansion is developed pursuant to the yard requirements of this code;

     2.     Building height limits, but not including floor area ratio or maximum lot coverage provisions, provided such addition or expansion is developed pursuant to the height requirements of this code;

     3.     Access and paving width of access, improvement and landscaping of parking areas provided such addition or expansion shall be developed pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 11.38. Where the amount of parking provided prior to such addition is sufficient to comply with Chapter 11.38 after such expansion it shall be deemed to comply with this subsection;

     4.     Such additions as are permitted by this subsection shall not be construed to authorize the modification of any provision of this code nor extend the termination date of the subject nonconforming use.

     D.    Substitution of a Conforming Use in a Structure, Nonconforming Due to Standards Other Than Parking.

     A use which is not in violation of any provisions of this code and is nonconforming only because it does not meet the requirements of the standards of development, other than automobile parking space requirements, may be changed to a use permitted in the zone. Any such change of use shall not extend the termination date established for the original nonconforming use.

     E.     Substitution of a Conforming Use in a Structure Nonconforming Due to Parking. A use which is not in violation of any provisions of this code and is a nonconforming use only because it does not meet automobile parking space requirements may be changed to a use permitted in the zone having the same or a lesser parking requirement. Any such change of use shall not extend the termination date established for the original nonconforming use.

     F.     Buildings and Structures Under Construction. Any building or structure, for which a valid building permit has been issued prior to the operative date of this code or any amendment thereto, may be completed and used in accordance with the provisions of this code provided:

     1.     That such construction or the proposed use of such building or structure under construction is not in violation of any other ordinance or law at said operative date; and

     2.     That such building or structure is completed within:

     a.     One year from said operative date, if two stories or less in height and not more than seventy thousand (70,000) square feet in floor area, except that one additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said seventy thousand (70,000) square feet,

     b.     One and one-half years from said operative date, if three to six stories in height and not more than one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet in floor area, except that one additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet,

     c.     Two years from said operative date if seven stories or more in height and not more than one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet in floor area except that one additional month shall be permitted for each fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet in excess of said one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) square feet;

     3.     That such building structure is completed in accordance with the plans and specifications on which such building permit was issued.

     G.    Repair of Partially Damaged or Destroyed Nonconforming Buildings or Structures. Any nonconforming building or structure or any building or structure containing a nonconforming use which is partially damaged or destroyed may be restored to one hundred (100) percent of the dimensions, footprint and use it was immediately in prior to the occurrence of such damage or destruction, provided:

     1.     That if the cost of reconstruction exceeds fifty (50) percent of the replacement construction value of the building or structure at the time of damage or destruction, an administrative (staff) review shall be conducted that may limit reconstruction of parts of the project that would create a health or safety issue. Such cost shall not include the land or any factor other than the building or structure itself. The administrative review shall identify those items that, for reasons of health or safety, shall not be allowed to be reconstructed to the dimensions, footprint or use as they were prior to the damage, and shall provide for those items the required degree of compliance with current code. The administrative review shall also identify all other nonconforming items on the lot to provide the property owner with the option to remove non-health or safety-related nonconformities;

     2.     That all such reconstruction shall commence within one year from the date of damage and be pursued diligently to completion except where the director of community development finds that circumstances beyond the property owner’s control have prevented such commencement. In such a case the director of community development may grant up to an additional year to commence reconstruction;

     3.     That the results of the administrative review, or the determination regarding the allowance of time to commence reconstruction, may be appealed to the city council;

     4.     That if the building use is commercial and is subject to the review criteria in subsection (G)(1) of this section, the building shall also be subject to façade and sign review and approval by the design commission; and

     5.     That reconstruction shall not extend the termination date of such nonconforming building or structure specified in this code.

     H.    Limitation on Additional Development. No new use, building or structure shall be developed on any lot or parcel of land containing a nonconforming use, building or structure unless the following conditions prevail:

     1.     That each existing and proposed use, building or structure, including appurtenant structures, improvements and open space, will be located on a lot or parcel of land having the required area as provided in this code for the zone in which it is located; and

     2.     That such lot or parcel of land can be divided into smaller lots or parcels of land each of which when considered as a separate lot or parcel of land will contain not less than the required area; and

     3.     That each such lot or parcel of land so divided into smaller lots or parcels of land will comply with the requirements of this code as to the number and location of structures. (Ord. 389 §§ 1, 2, 2010; Ord. 262, 1996; LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.2, 1974)

 

11.51.030 Termination of nonconforming uses and structures.
     A.    Termination by Discontinuance. Discontinuance of a nonconforming use for a period of nine months or more shall immediately terminate the right to operate such nonconforming use unless it can be demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director of community development that the nonconforming use had been and continues to be actively marketed. If the use is determined to have been continuously and actively marketed, the director may grant an additional nine months extension beyond the original nine months before the use is terminated.

     B.     Termination by Operation of Law. The following nonconforming uses and structures shall be discontinued and removed from their sites within the time specified in this section, except when extended or revoked as otherwise provided in this code:

     1.     Where the property is unimproved, one year;

     2.     Where the property is unimproved except for structures of a type for which the Building Code does not require a building permit, three years;

     3.     Where the property is unimproved except for structures which contain less than one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area, or where such structures have a total market value of five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less as reflected by the current assessment roll, three years;

     4.     Outdoor advertising signs and structures, five years;

     5.     Where a nonconforming use is carried on in a conforming structure five years except where the provisions of subsection (B)(3) apply;

     6.     In other cases twenty (20) years from effective date of the ordinance or amendment thereto establishing said nonconforming status, and for such longer time so that the total life of the structure from the date of construction, based on the type of construction as defined by the building code, will be as follows:

     a.     Type IV and Type V buildings (light incombustible frame and wood frame) used as:

     i.      One-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, three-family dwellings, apartment houses and other buildings used for residential occupancy, thirty-five (35) years,

     ii.     Stores and factories, twenty-five (25) years,

     iii.    Any other building not herein enumerated, twenty-five (25) years,

     b.     Type III buildings (heavy timber construction and ordinary masonry) used as:

     i.      One-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, three-family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, forty (40) years,

     ii.     Structures with stores below and residences, offices or a hotel above, forty (40) years,

     iii.    Warehouses, stores and garages, forty (40) years,

     iv.    Factories and industrial buildings, forty (40) years,

     c.     Type I and Type II buildings (fire resistive) used as:

     i.      One-family dwellings, two-family dwellings, three-family dwellings, apartment houses, offices and hotels, fifty (50) years,

     ii.     Theaters, warehouses, stores and garages, fifty (50) years,

     iii.    Factories and industrial buildings, fifty (50) years. (Ord. 389 § 3, 2010; LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.3, 1974)

 

11.51.040 Public uses.
     Any nonconforming publicly owned use, including but not limited to, schools, colleges, parks, libraries, fire stations, sheriff stations and other public sites, may be added to, extended or altered if such additions, extensions or alterations do not extend beyond the boundaries of the original site established prior to the time approval was required. Nothing in this code pertaining to nonconforming structures shall be construed to require the termination, discontinuance or removal of such uses except as provided in Section 11.50.020. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.4, 1974)

 

11.51.050 Public utilities.
     Any nonconforming public utility building, structure, equipment or facility necessary for operating purposes, but excluding offices, service centers or yards, may be added to, extended or altered, provided there is no change in use or enlargement of the original site established prior to the time such approval was required. Nothing in this code pertaining to nonconforming structures shall be construed to require the termination, discontinuance or removal of such uses except as provided in Section 11.50.020. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.5, 1974)

 

11.51.060 Review of amortization schedule or substitution of use.
     A.    Request for Review. An application may be filed with the commission:

     1.     Requesting extension of the time within which a nonconforming use or structure must be discontinued and removed from its site as specified in Section 11.51.030(B), or

     2.     Requesting substitution of another use permitted in the zone in which the nonconforming use is first permitted where a nonconforming building is vacant despite efforts to insure continuation of a nonconforming use and is so constructed that it may not reasonably be converted to or used for a use permitted in the zone in which it is located.

     The commission may accept such filing either before or after the date of expiration of such nonconforming use.

     B.     Application and Procedure. Except as specifically provided in this section, the application and all procedure relative to notification, public hearing and appeals shall be the same as for a conditional use permit.

     C.     Burden of Proof. In addition to the information required in the application, the applicant shall substantiate to the satisfaction of the zoning board and/or commission, the following facts:

     1.     That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and

     2.     That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

     D.    Findings and Decision. After a public hearing, the commission shall consider, or the zoning board shall consider and recommend to the commission, applications for a nonconforming use and structure review. In making such determination, the commission shall consider the following principles and standards and may approve such permit where the information submitted by the applicant and/or presented at public hearing substantiates the following findings:

     1.     That the nature of the improvement is such that to require cessation of use would impair the property rights of any person to such an extent as to be an unconstitutional taking of property; and

     2.     That such adjustment will not be materially detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare, or to the use, enjoyment or valuation of property of other persons located in the vicinity.

     E.     Conditions. The commission in approving an application for a nonconforming use and structure review may impose conditions it deems necessary to insure that the approval will be in accord with the findings required. Conditions imposed by the commission may involve any pertinent factors affecting the establishment, operation and maintenance of the use requested, including, but not limited to those specified in Section 11.43.100. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 509.6, 1974)

Chapter 11.52 PARKWAYS, MAJOR AND SECONDARY HIGHWAYS
11.52.010 Adequate highways adjacent to structures.
     Except as otherwise provided in Section 11.52.060, a building or structure shall not be used on any lot or parcel of land any portion of which abuts upon a parkway, major or secondary highway, or street unless the one-half of the highway or street which is located on the same side of the center line as such lot or parcel of land has been dedicated and improved as provided in this chapter. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 492, 1974)

 

11.52.020 Dedication standards.
     Parkways, major highways, and secondary highways and streets shall be dedicated to the width from the center line specified in LACC Ord. 1494, Section 467(a)—(d), except that dedication in any case shall not be required to such an extent as to reduce the area or width of any lot or parcel of land to less than that specified in Sections 11.36.070 or 11.36.120. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 493, 1974)

 

11.52.030 Improvements.
     Before a structure subject to the provisions of this chapter may be used, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and drainage structures where required shall be constructed at the grade and at the location specified by the road commissioner unless there already exists within the present right-of-way, or on property the owner has agreed to dedicate, curbs, gutters, sidewalks or drainage structures which are adequate and the road commissioner so finds. Sidewalks shall be not less than four feet in width unless the available portion of the highway or street is less, in which case they shall be the width specified by the road commissioner. Curbs, gutters, drainage structures and sidewalks shall comply with the standards of the road commissioner. All construction within the existing or proposed road rights-of-way shall be done under provisions of LACC Ordinance 3597 entitled “Highway Permit Ordinance of the County of Los Angeles,” adopted May 28, 1940. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 494, 1974)

 

11.52.040 Agreement to dedicate.
     In lieu of dedication, the road commissioner may accept an agreement to dedicate signed by all persons having any right, title, interest or lien in the property, or any portion thereof, to be dedicated. The signatures on such agreement shall be acknowledged and the road commissioner shall record such agreement in the office of the county recorder of this county. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 495, 1974)

 

11.52.050 Agreement to improve.
     In lieu of the required improvements, the road commissioner may accept from any responsible person a contract to make such improvements. Said improvements shall be completed within the time specified in the agreement to improve, except that the road commissioner may grant such additional time as he or she deems necessary if, in the opinion of said road commissioner, a good and sufficient reason exists for the delay.

     Such contract shall be accompanied by a deposit with the city council of a sum of money or negotiable bonds or savings and loan certificates or shares in an amount which, in the opinion of the road commissioner, equals the cost thereof. If savings and loan certificates or shares are deposited, the owners thereof shall assign such certificates or shares to the city of La Cañada Flintridge and such deposit and assignment shall be subject to all the provisions and conditions of Article III E of LACC Ordinance No. 4099.

     If the estimated cost of the improvements equals or exceeds one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in lieu of such deposit the applicant may file with the city council a corporate surety bond guaranteeing the adequate completion of all of the improvements, in a penal sum equal to such estimated cost.

     Upon the failure of said responsible person to complete any improvement within the time specified in an agreement, the city council may, upon notice in writing of not less than ten days served upon the person, firm or corporation signing such contract, or upon notice in writing of not less than twenty (20) days served by registered mail addressed to the last known address of the person, firm or corporation signing such contract, determine that said improvement work or any part thereof is incomplete and may cause to be forfeited to the city such portion of deposits or bonds given for the faithful performance of said work, or may cash any instrument of credit so deposited in such amount as may be necessary to complete the improvement work. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 496, 1974)

 

11.52.060 Existing structures.
     This chapter does not apply to the use, alteration or enlargement of an existing building or structure or the erection of one or more buildings or structures accessory thereto, or both, on the same lot or parcel of land, if the total value of such alteration, enlargement or construction does not exceed one-half of the current market value of all existing buildings or structures on such lot or parcel of land. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 497, 1974)

 

11.52.070 Modifications.
     A.    The director of planning may grant a modification to the provisions of this chapter and relieve the applicant either from compliance with all or a portion of the provisions thereof if he or she finds:

     1.     Property adjoining on both sides of the subject property is developed with lawfully existing buildings or structures which were they not already existing would be subject to the provisions of this chapter, and the requirement to dedicate, pave or improve would require a greater width than is the highway or street in front of the said existing buildings or structures on the said adjoining properties; or

     2.     The lot or parcel of land adjoins a parkway, major or secondary highway or street for a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more and only a portion of said lot or parcel of land is to be used for such building or structure or occupied by such use.

     B.     The director of public works may grant a modification to the provisions of this chapter and relieve the applicant either from compliance with all or a portion of the provisions thereof if he or she finds:

     1.     There is in existence or under negotiation a contract between the city and a contractor to install the required improvements; or

     2.     The road commissioner is unable to furnish grades within a reasonable time; or

     3.     The required construction would create a drainage or traffic problem; or

     4.     The construction will be isolated from a continuous roadway which may not be improved for many years; or

     5.     There are in existence partial improvements satisfactory to the road commissioner and he or she deems construction of additional improvements to be unnecessary or constitute an unreasonable hardship. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 498, 1974)

 

11.52.080 Dedication and improvement standards—Variance.
     Any person deeming him or herself aggrieved may apply for a variance from any provision of this chapter pursuant to Chapters 11.43, 11.44, 11.50 and 11.51 whether he or she has applied for a modification or not. The provisions of Section 11.52.070 shall constitute additional grounds for a variance from any provisions of this chapter. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 499, 1974)

Chapter 11.53 TRIP REDUCTION AND TRAVEL DEMAND MANAGEMENT
11.53.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to comply with the congestion management program’s (CMP) requirements for a trip reduction and travel demand management ordinance. The requirements of the South Coast Air Quality Management District (“district”) Regulation XV are separate from this chapter, and administered by the air district. Nothing herein is intended, nor shall it be construed, to limit or otherwise preclude employers from offering or providing additional inducements to use alternatives to single-occupant vehicles to their employees necessary to meet Regulation XV requirements.

     In order to use the existing and planned transportation infrastructure more efficiently, maintain or improve levels of service and lower motor vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the city to minimize the number of peak period vehicle trips generated by additional development, promote the use of alternative transportation, improve air quality and participate in regional and countywide efforts to improve transportation demand management. (Ord. 217 § 1, 1993)

 

11.53.020 Review of transit impacts.
     A.    Prior to approval of any development project for which an environmental impact report (EIR) will be prepared pursuant to the requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) or based on a local determination, regional and municipal fixed-route transit operators providing service to the project shall be identified and consulted with. Projects for which a notice of preparation (NOP) for a draft EIR has been circulated pursuant to the provisions of CEQA prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be exempted from its provisions. The “Transit Impact Review Worksheet” contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program Manual, or similar worksheets, shall be used in assessing impacts. Pursuant to the provisions of CEQA, transit operators shall be sent a NOP for all contemplated EIRs and shall, as part of the NOP process, be given opportunity to comment on the impacts of the project, to identify recommended transit service or capital improvements which may be required as a result of the project, and to recommend mitigation measures which minimize automobile trips on the CMP network. Impacts and recommended mitigation measures identified by the transit operator shall be evaluated in the draft environmental impact report prepared for the project. Related mitigation measures adopted shall be monitored through the mitigation monitoring requirements of CEQA.

     B.     Phased development projects, development projects subject to a development agreement, or development projects requiring subsequent approvals, need not repeat this process as long as no significant changes are made to the project. It shall remain the discretion of the lead agency to determine when a project is substantially the same and therefor covered by a previously certified EIR. (Ord. 217 § 1, 1993)

 

11.53.030 Transportation demand and trip reduction measures.
     A.    Applicability. Prior to approval of any development project, the applicant shall make provision for, as a minimum, all of the following applicable transportation demand management and trip reduction measures.

     This chapter shall not apply to projects for which a development application has been deemed complete by the city pursuant to Government Code Section 65943, or for which a notice of preparation for a DEIR has been circulated or for which an application for a building permit has been received prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     All facilities and improvements constructed or otherwise required shall be maintained in a state of good repair.

     B.     Development Standards.

     1.     Nonresidential development of twenty-five thousand (25,000) square feet or more shall provide the following:

     a.     A bulletin board, display case or kiosk displaying transportation information located where the greatest number of employees are likely to see it. Information in the area shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

     i.      Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit routes serving the site;

     ii. Telephone numbers for referrals on transportation information including numbers for the regional ridesharing agency and local transit operators;

     iii. Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations;

     iv. Bicycle route and facility information including regional/local bicycle maps and bicycle safety information;

     v.     A listing of facilities available for carpoolers, vanpoolers, bicyclists, transit riders and pedestrians at the site.

     2.     Nonresidential development of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsection (B)(1) of this section and shall provide all of the following measures:

     a.     Not less than ten percent of the employee parking area shall be located as close as is practical to the employee entrance(s), and shall be reserved for use by potential carpool/vanpool vehicles without displacing handicapped and customer parking needs. This preferential carpool/vanpool parking area shall be identified on the site plan upon application for a building permit. A statement that preferential carpool/vanpool spaces for employees are available and a description of the method for obtaining such spaces must be included on the required transportation information board. Spaces will be signed/striped as demand warrants; provided, that at all times at least one space for projects of fifty thousand (50,000) square feet to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and two spaces for projects over one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet will be signed/striped for carpool/vanpool vehicles.

     b.     Preferential parking spaces reserved for vanpools must be accessible to vanpool vehicles. When located within a parking structure, a minimum vertical interior clearance of seven feet two inches shall be provided for those spaces and accessways to be used by such vehicles. Adequate turning radii and parking space dimensions shall also be included in vanpool parking areas.

     c.     Bicycle racks or other secure bicycle parking shall be provided to accommodate four bicycles per the first fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development and one bicycle per each additional fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of nonresidential development. Calculations which result in a fraction of 0.5 or higher shall be rounded up to the nearest whole number. A bicycle parking facility may also be a fully enclosed space or locker accessible only to the owner or operator of the bicycle which protects the bicycle from inclement weather. Specific facilities and location (e.g., provision of racks, lockers or locked room) shall be provided.

     3.     Nonresidential development of one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet or more shall comply with subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section and shall provide all of the following:

     a.     A safe and convenient zone in which vanpool and carpool vehicles may deliver or board their passengers;

     b.     Sidewalks or other designated pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development;

     c.     If determined necessary to mitigate the project impact, bus stop improvements must be provided. The city will consult with the local bus service providers in determining appropriate improvements. When locating bus stops and/or planning building entrances, entrances must be designed to provide safe and efficient access to nearby transit stations/stops;

     d.     Safe and convenient access from the external circulation system to bicycle parking facilities onsite. (Ord. 217 § 1, 1993)

 

11.53.040 Land use analysis program.
     All development projects for which an environmental impact report (EIR) is required to be prepared shall be subject to the Land Use Analysis Program contained in the Los Angeles County Congestion Management Program (CMP), and shall incorporate into the EIR an analysis of the project’s impacts on the regional transportation system. Said analysis shall be conducted consistent with the Transportation Impact Analysis (TIA) Guidelines contained in the most recent congestion management program adopted by the Los Angeles County transportation authority. (Ord. 217 § 1, 1993)

 

11.53.050 Monitoring.
     Prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or of any business license for the management of the development, or for any tenant therein, the applicant of said certificate or business license shall certify that all required development standards of this chapter are provided. (Ord. 217 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 11.54 BONDS AND INSURANCE
11.54.010 Assurance of faithful performance of imposed conditions.
     When one or more conditions are attached to any grant, modification or appeal of a zone change, permit, variance or nonconforming use or structure review, the planning commission or city council may require the owners of the property to which such zone change, permit, variance or nonconforming use or structure review applies, to file a surety bond or corporate surety bond, or to deposit money, savings and loan certificates or shares with the city council in a prescribed amount for the purpose of guaranteeing the faithful performance of said conditions. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 651, 1974)

 

11.54.020 Assignment of savings and loan certificates and shares.
     Where savings and loan certificates or shares are deposited, they shall be assigned to the city subject to all of the provisions of Article III E of LACC Ordinance No. 4099 (Administrative Code of the County of Los Angeles.) (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 652, 1974)

 

11.54.030 Insurance.
     The commission or city council may also require the owners of the property to which such zone change, permit variance, or nonconforming use or structure review applies to file a policy of insurance equal in amount to the amount of the required bond or deposit, insuring all persons against any injury or annoyance arising from the breach of such conditions unless:

     A.    If the bond is filed, it includes as obligees all such persons; or

     B.     If money, savings and loan certificates, or shares are deposited, such owners also file an agreement in writing with the city council that the city may satisfy in whole or in part from such deposit any final judgment, the payment of which would have been guaranteed by such bond or policy of insurance. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 653, 1974)

Chapter 11.55 FLOOD CONTROL
11.55.010 Regulations of permittees.
     The city council may prescribe, by uniform rule or regulation, the minimum course of its excavations or other operations tending to displace the soil; and shall also have the power to prescribe any and all other rules and regulations, uniform in their operation, necessary for the carrying out of the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 760, 1974)

 

11.55.020 Obstructions.
     A person shall not place or cause to be placed in the channel or bed of any river, stream, wash or arroyo, or upon any property over which the Los Angeles County flood control district has an easement for flood control purposes duly recorded in the office of the county recorder of Los Angeles County, any wires, fence, building or other structure, or any rock, gravel, refuse, rubbish, tin cans or other matter which may impede, retard or change the direction of the flow of water in such river, stream, wash or arroyo, or that will catch or collect debris carried by such water, or that is placed where the natural flow of the stream and flood waters would carry the same downstream to the damage or detriment of either private or public property adjacent to the said river, stream, wash, arroyo or channel.

     This section does not supersede or modify the provisions of any other ordinance. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 762, 1974)

 

11.55.030 Flood hazard—Permit required when.
     Whenever the city council finds that the excavation or quarrying of any rock, sand, gravel or other material in a particular area would create flood hazard or would be otherwise dangerous to the public safety, then before any person excavates or quarries in any part of such area, such person shall first obtain from the chief engineer of the Los Angeles County flood control district a permit to do so. Amended during 1995 codification; Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 763, 1974)

 

11.55.040 Flood control permit.
     The chief engineer of the Los Angeles County flood control district may issue such permit upon the condition that the applicant before commencing any such excavation and at such other times during such excavation as may be necessary shall erect such dikes, barriers or other structures as will afford, in the opinion of the chief engineer of the Los Angeles County flood control district, either the same protection as if no excavation should be made, or protection adequate to prevent the flow of the flood waters out of their natural channels. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 764, 1974)

 

11.55.050 Application for permit.
     The chief engineer of the Los Angeles County flood control district may require the submission of plans and specifications showing the nature of the proposed excavation and dikes, barriers or other structures. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 765, 1974)

 

11.55.060 Compliance with permit.
     No person may make any excavation within such area except after receiving and in conformity with such a permit. (LACC Ord. 1494 § 766, 1974)

 

11.55.070 Permit no guarantee.
     The issuance of such a permit shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of any kind or nature by the county of Los Angeles or by the Los Angeles County flood control district, or by any officer or employee of either thereof, of the practicability or safety of any structure or other plan proposed and shall create no liability upon, or a cause of action against such public body, officer or employee for any damage that may result from any excavation made pursuant thereto. (Ord. 11 § 2, 1977; LACC Ord. 1494 § 767, 1974)

Chapter 11.61 SUBDIVISIONS
11.61.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted as the subdivision ordinance of the city, Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 4478. (Amended during 1997 codification; prior code § 11.12.010)

 

11.61.020 Purpose.
     It is intended that these policies and procedures be utilized in conjunction with County Ordinance No. 4478, or otherwise referred to as the subdivision ordinance, adopted by the city of La Cañada Flintridge (Ordinance No. 11), April 4, 1977. The provisions of this chapter provide only basic policies and procedures and are not intended to replace the specific requirements of provisions of said subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.030 Applicability.
     This chapter shall supplement and its provisions shall apply in conjunction with the provisions of the State Subdivision Map Act and Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 4478. Where conflicts arise, the provisions of the State Map Act shall prevail over those of local ordinances and the provisions of this chapter shall prevail over the provisions of County Ordinance No. 4478. (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.040 Definitions.
     The following amendments are made to the definitions included in County Ordinance No. 4478:

     A.    Whenever “regional planning commission” is used in the ordinance, it means the La Cañada Flintridge city planning commission.

     B.     Whenever “director of planning” is used in the ordinance, it means the La Cañada Flintridge city planner.

     C.     The term “minor land division” shall be used synonymously with the term “minor subdivision.” (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.050 Lot line adjustment.
     A lot line adjustment between two or more adjacent parcels where the land taken from one parcel is added to an adjacent parcel and where a greater number of parcels than originally existed is not thereby created shall not be considered a subdivision, resubdivision, minor subdivision or reversion to acreage. Minor lot line adjustments may be granted where the following conditions prevail:

     A.    The lot line adjustment(s) will not create an undersized lot subject to and as prescribed by provisions of the zoning ordinance;

     B.     Written notice of affected property owners authorizes the lot line adjustment(s); and

     C.     The planning commission approves the lot line adjustment(s) by resolution. (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.060 Subdivisions.
     The procedures for filing a subdivision shall be as follows:

     A.    Environmental Documents. Prior to the submittal of a tentative map application, a project applicant shall submit data necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act.

     1.     The city planner may request submission of a conceptual subdivision plan, project description, environmental assessment and such other information as deemed necessary in order to make a determination on a project’s environmental status.

     2.     Should the city planner or planning commission determine that a negative declaration or environmental impact report is required, an application for a tentative map shall not be accepted for processing until the required environmental document has been prepared. The required environmental document shall be reviewed by the decision-making body prior to any action taken on the subdivision.

     B.     Submittal of Tentative Maps. Upon completion of required environmental documents, a subdivider may submit to the city planner as many copies of a tentative map as required by the city planner along with any required filing fees. The tentative map shall be distributed to the subdivision committee for review and report subject to Sections 96 and 97 of LACC Ordinance 4478.

     C.     Public Hearing. The city planner shall schedule a public hearing before the planning commission no sooner than thirty (30) and no later than fifty (50) days after the date the tentative map was accepted for processing. Any extension of time beyond the limits established above shall be by mutual consent of the applicant and the planning commission.

     1.     Notification of the public hearing shall be provided at least ten days before the hearing. Such notice including the time and place of such hearing shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city and by mailing first class postage prepaid to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the county as owning property within a distance of three hundred (300) feet from the exterior boundaries of the area actually occupied by the proposed project.

     D.    Planning Commission Action on Tentative Map. Upon review of all preliminary information and after action has been taken on environmental documents, the commission shall consider the tentative map, and shall either approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the map, or any other conditions precedent thereto and such improvements as may be required, and shall report such action in writing to the subdivider, the city engineer and such agencies as may request to be notified. Any application for modification, as provided for in Section 6 of County Ordinance No. 4478, shall accompany the tentative map and the action on any modification requested.

     1.     The planning commission shall not approve a tentative map if it makes any of the following findings:

     a.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     b.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     c.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

     d.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

     e.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     f.      That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     g.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.

     2.     The approval of a tentative map shall be effective for a period of one year. However, the planning commission may grant one or more extensions to the term of approval of a tentative map, the sum of which shall not exceed two years. Extensions for the filing of a final map shall not be granted in intervals of more than one year. The subdivider shall submit a written request to the planning commission for each extension.

     E.     City Council Action on Final Map. After the approval or conditional approval of a tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map and after all required certificates on such map have been signed and where necessary acknowledged, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map, or any contiguous part thereof, to be surveyed, and a final map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative map. Such submittal shall be accompanied by a statement from the city engineer acknowledging its compliance to all rules, regulations and requirements.

     1.     The city council shall within a period of ten days or at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the submission of final maps, whichever is later, approve the map if it conforms to all requirements of this and related ordinances or if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. The city council shall also disapprove of final map if it makes any of the following findings:

     a.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general specific plans;

     b.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     c.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

     d.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

     e.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     f.      That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     g.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.

     F.     Filing Maps with County Recorder. After approval of a final map, the city clerk shall transmit the map to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.070 Minor subdivisions.
     The procedures for filing a minor subdivision shall be as follows:

     A.    Environmental Documents. Prior to the submittal of a tentative minor subdivision map application, the project applicant shall submit data necessary to comply with the California Environmental Quality Act.

     1.     The city planner may request submission of a conceptual minor subdivision plan, project description, environmental assessment and other information as deemed necessary in order to make a determination on a project’s environmental status.

     2.     Should the city planner or planning commission determine that a negative declaration or environmental impact report is required, an application for tentative minor subdivision map shall not be accepted for processing until the required environmental document has been prepared. The required environmental document shall be reviewed by the decision-making body prior to any action taken on the minor subdivision.

     B.     Submission of Tentative Minor Subdivision Maps. Upon completion of required environmental documents, a subdivider may submit to the city planner as many copies of a tentative minor subdivision map as required by the city planner along with any filing fees as may be required. The tentative minor subdivision map shall be distributed to the subdivision committee for review and reports subject to Sections 96 and 97 of LACC Ordinance 4478.

     C.     Public Meeting. The city planner shall schedule a public meeting before the planning commission no sooner than thirty (30) and no later than fifty (50) days after the date the tentative minor subdivision map was accepted for processing. Any extension of time beyond the limits established above shall be by mutual consent of the applicant and the planning commission.

     1.     Notification of the public meeting shall be provided at least ten days before the hearing. Such notice shall be given by publication once in a newspaper of general circulation published and circulated in the city and by mailing first class postage prepaid a notice of the time and place of such hearing to all persons whose names and addresses appear on the latest adopted tax roll of the county within which the property concerned is located as owning property abutting the exterior boundaries of the area actually occupied by the proposed project.

     D.    Planning Commission Action on Tentative Map. Upon review of all preliminary information and after action has been taken on environmental documents, the planning commission shall, by resolution, approve, conditionally approve or disapprove the tentative minor subdivision map and shall report such action in writing to the subdivider within thirty (30) days thereof and such agencies as may request to be notified.

     1.     The planning commission shall not approve a tentative minor subdivision map if it makes any of the following findings:

     a.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     b.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     c.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

     d.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

     e.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     f.      That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     g.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements, for access or for use, will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public.

     2.     The approval of a tentative map shall be effective for a period of one year from the date of written notice. However, the planning commission may grant one or more extensions to the term of approval of a tentative map, the sum of which shall not exceed two years. Extensions for the filing of a parcel map shall not be granted in increments of more than one year. The subdivider shall submit a written request to the planning commission for each extension.

     E.     Approval of Parcel Maps of Minor Subdivisions. After the approval or conditional approval of the tentative map and prior to the expiration of such map, the subdivider may cause the real property included within the map to be surveyed, and a parcel map thereof prepared in accordance with the approved or conditionally approved tentative minor subdivision map. Such submittal shall be accompanied by a statement from the city engineer acknowledging its compliance to all rules, regulations and requirements.

     1.     The planning commission shall, within a period of ten days, or at the next regularly scheduled meeting following the submission of final maps, whichever is later, approve the parcel map if it conforms to all requirements of this and related ordinances or if it does not so conform, disapprove the map. The planning commission shall disapprove a parcel map if it makes any of the following findings:

     a.     That the proposed map is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     b.     That the design or improvement of the proposed subdivision is not consistent with applicable general and specific plans;

     c.     That the site is not physically suitable for the type of development;

     d.     That the site is not physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

     e.     That the design of the subdivision or the proposed improvements are likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantially and avoidably injure fish or wildlife or their habitat;

     f.      That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements is likely to cause serious public health problems;

     g.     That the design of the subdivision or the type of improvements will conflict with easements, acquired by the public at large for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision. In this connection, the governing body may approve a map if it finds that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones acquired by the public.

     F.     Parcel Map Waiver. The filing of parcel maps may be waived subject to the provisions of Section 320 of County Ordinance No. 4478.

     G.    Filing Map with County Recorder. After approval of a final map, the city clerk shall transmit the map to the clerk of the county board of supervisors for ultimate transmittal to the county recorder. (Ord. 40 § 1, 1978)

 

11.61.080 Amendments to maps.
     A.    In addition to the amendments authorized by Government Code Section 66469, after a final map has been filed in the office of the county recorder, it may be modified by a certificate of correction or an amending map if the city finds and determines as follows:

     1.     There are changes in circumstances which make any or all of the conditions of such final map no longer appropriate or necessary;

     2.     The modifications do not impose any additional burden on the present fee owner of the property;

     3.     The modifications do not alter any right, title or interest in the real property reflected on the recorded map; and

     4.     The map as modified conforms to the provisions of Government Code Section 66474.

     B.     The procedure for processing any such proposed modification final map shall be as follows:

     1.     A public hearing on the proposed modification shall be held before the planning commission. The public hearing shall be set as provided for in Government Code Section 66451.3. At the public hearing on the proposed modifications, the planning commission shall consider only the proposed modification.

     2.     The planning commission may deny, approve or approve subject to conditions the proposed amendment. The planning commission shall act only on the proposed modification.

     3.     A certificate of correction or amending map conforming to the approved or conditionally approved or conditionally approved modification shall be filed with the city council for approval. The city council shall approve the certificate of correction or amending map if it conforms to all requirements of the Subdivision Map Act, including, but not limited to, Section 64470 of the Government Code and this section, if no appeal has been filed, and if all conditions of approval have been fulfilled.

     C.     Any interested person may appeal any decision of the planning commission made pursuant to this section to the city council pursuant to the provisions of Section 66452.5 of the Government Code. (Ord. 109 § 1, 1984)

 

11.61.090 Review by the city council.
     A.    All decisions of the planning commission upon applications for tentative maps, excluding vesting tentative maps, shall be reported to the city council at the council’s next regular meeting held not less than five days after such decision is rendered. The planning commission’s decisions regarding vesting tentative maps shall be limited to recommendations to the city council. The city council, as part of a public hearing in a manner prescribed by state law, shall make the final decision regarding a vesting tentative map.

     B.     In addition to any appeal procedures otherwise established by law, city council may cause any decision of the planning commission to be heard de novo by the city council by a majority vote conducted at the meeting at which the decision is reported. In the event the council does not so vote, the decision of the planning commission shall be final.

     C.     All provisions for notice and hearing applicable to the planning commission for that type of decision, shall apply to the city council in conducting its review; provided, however, that if an appeal from a decision has been properly filed, excluding vesting tentative maps, the matter shall be conducted as an appeal subject to all applicable requirements for such appeals, rather than a review subject to this section. (Ord. 287 § 2, 1997)

Chapter 11.62 VESTING TENTATIVE MAP
11.62.010 Authority.
     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 4.5 (commencing with Section 66498.1) of Division 2 of Title 7 of the Government Code, State of California (“Vesting Tentative Map Statute”). (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.020 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to establish procedures necessary for the implementation of the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, and to supplement the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.) and the city’s subdivision ordinance (Los Angeles County Ordinance No. 4478).

     The regulations set forth in this chapter are determined to be necessary for the preservation of the public health, safety and general welfare, and for the promotion of orderly growth and development. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.030 Scope.
     A.    This chapter shall apply only to residential developments. Whenever a provisions of the subdivision ordinance requires the filing of a tentative map or tentative minor land division map for a residential development, a vesting tentative map may instead be filed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     If a subdivider does not seek the rights conferred by the Vesting Tentative Map Statute, the filing of a vesting tentative map shall not be a prerequisite to any approval for any proposed subdivision, permit for construction or work prepatory to construction. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.040 Filing and processing.
     A vesting tentative map shall be filed in the same form and have the same contents, accompanying data and reports and shall be processed in the same manner as set forth in the subdivision ordinance for a tentative map except as provided below. At the time a vesting tentative map is filed, a subdivider shall also supply the following information:

     A.    Architectural plans setting forth the exterior design, materials to be used, elevation and size of the buildings;

     B.     Location of buildings;

     C.     Landscape and irrigation plans indicating all plant materials, automatic irrigation systems, lighting, walls and fences;

     D.    Soils engineering report regarding the nature, distribution and strength of existing soils, conclusions and recommendations for grading procedures, and design criteria for corrective measures when necessary, and opinion and recommendations covering adequacy of the sites to be developed by the proposed grading. The report shall also discuss expansion of the soils and the recommended measures for foundations and slabs on grade to resist volumatic changes in soil. If a public sewer system will not be used, a detailed engineering data and test report including a percolation test setting forth soil porosity and ground water level, and recommending procedures and design criteria for private sewage disposal shall also be provided;

     E.     Engineering geology report setting forth an adequate description of the geology of the site. The report shall include conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions of the proposed development, and opinions and recommendations covering the adequacy of the site to be developed by the proposed grading;

     F.     Hydrology study and drainage plan to provide drainage facilities to carry runoff of stormwaters in the proposed development and contributory drainage from adjoining properties;

     G.    Water plan;

     H.    Sewer plan setting forth the sewage disposal system;

     I.      A final grading plan setting forth the nature and extent of the work proposed. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.050 Concurrent review.
     Concurrent with the filing of a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall file all diagrams, data and reports necessary for architectural or design review, a conditional use permit, or a specific plan if required for the proposed development by any other law. Architectural or design review, conditional use permit approval or specific plan approval shall be processed concurrently with a vesting tentative map. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.060 Fees.
     Upon filing a vesting tentative map, the subdivider shall deposit an amount sufficient to cover all costs incurred by the city for the filing and processing of a vesting tentative map. Deposit and payment shall be made as set forth in La Cañada Flintridge Ordinance No. 87. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.070 Expiration.
     The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall expire twenty-four (24) months from the date of the commission action. Upon application of the subdivider filed prior to the expiration of the approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map, the time at which the map expires may be extended by the planning commission for a period or periods not exceeding a total of three years. The maximum extension granted by the planning commission for each application shall be twelve (12) months. If the planning commission denies a subdivider’s application for extension, the subdivider may appeal to the city council within fifteen (15) days after the planning commission’s decision. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.080 Vesting on approval of vesting tentative map.
     A.    The approval or conditional approval of a vesting tentative map shall confer a vested right in the subdivider, or his or her assignees, to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards described in Government Code Section 66474.2. However, if Government Code Section 66474.2 is repealed, the approval shall confer a vested right to proceed with development in substantial compliance with the ordinances, policies and standards in effect at the time the vesting tentative map is approved or conditionally approved.

     B.     Notwithstanding subsection A of this section, a permit, approval, extension or entitlement may be made conditional or denied if any of the following are determined:

     1.     A failure to do so would place the residents of the subdivision or the immediate community, or both, in a condition dangerous to their health or safety or both.

     2.     The condition or denial is required in order to comply with state or federal law.

     C.     The vested rights referred to in subsection A of this section shall expire if a final map is not approved prior to the expiration of the vesting tentative map as provided in Section 11.62.070. If the final map is approved, the vested rights conferred by this chapter shall be subject to the following periods of time:

     1.     An initial time period of one year. Where several final maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, this initial time period shall begin for each phase when the final map for that phase is recorded.

     2.     The initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section shall be automatically extended by any time used for processing a complete application for a grading permit if such processing exceed thirty (30) days from the date a complete application is filed.

     3.     A subdivider may apply for a one-year extension at any time before the initial time period set forth in subsection (C)(1) of this section expires. If the extension is denied, the subdivider may appeal that denial to the city council within fifteen (15) days.

     4.     If the subdivider submits a complete application for a building permit during the periods of time specified in subdivisions (1) through (3) of this subsection, the vested rights conferred by this chapter shall continue until the expiration of that permit, or any extension of that permit. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.090 Applications inconsistent with ordinances, policies and standards.
     Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter, a subdivider or his or her assignee, may seek approvals or permits for developments which depart from the ordinances, policies and standards described in Section 11.13.090(A) and the city may grant these approvals or issue these permits to the extent that the departures are authorized under applicable law. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

 

11.62.100 Amendment to vesting tentative map.
     Any time prior to the expiration of a vesting tentative map pursuant to Section 11.62.080, the subdivider or his or her assignees, may apply for an amendment to the vesting tentative map. The procedures for applying for an amendment are set forth in Section 11.61.080. (Ord. 125 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 11.63 MERGER OF PARCELS
11.63.010 Merger of contiguous parcels.
     Unless otherwise exempt by California State law, whenever two or more contiguous lots, parcels or units of land are held by the same owner, such lots, parcels or units may be merged pursuant to the provisions of this chapter when any one of those lots, parcels or units does not conform to the city’s standards for minimum parcel size as provided in its zoning ordinance and where all of the following requirements are satisfied:

     A.    At least one of the affected lots, parcels or units is not developed with a structure for which a building permit was issued or which was built prior to the time such permits were required, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot, parcel or unit; and

     B.     With respect to any affected parcel, one or more of the following conditions exists:

     1.     Comprises less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger,

     2.     Was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

     3.     Does not meet the current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

     4.     Does not meet slope stability standards,

     5.     Has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability,

     6.     Its development would create health or safety hazards,

     7.     Is inconsistent with the general plan of the city or any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

     The conditions set forth in subdivisions (3) through (7) of this subsection shall be determined by the standards set forth in the ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations of the city in effect on the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded, including, but not limited to, the city’s subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance, building code and hillside development ordinance. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.020 Treatment of lots after merger.
     After merger has occurred with respect to any contiguous lots, parcels or units of land under this chapter, such lots, parcels or units of land shall be treated as a single lot under the provisions of this code. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.030 Contiguity and ownership.
     Property shall be considered as contiguous lots, parcels or units of land only if such lots, parcels or units of land are adjoining, but not if such lots, parcels or units of land are separated by roads, streets, alleys or other features deemed to be similar to these by the director of community development. For purposes of determining whether contiguous parcels are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded pursuant to Section 11.63.050 of this chapter. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.040 Unmerger of parcels.
     Any or all lots, parcels or units of land which may have been merged prior to January 1, 1984, by operation of law by reason of their being contiguous and under the same ownership may be unmerged and determined to be separate parcels, pursuant to the provisions of Article 1.7 of Chapter 3 of Division 2 of Title 7 of the California Government Code. All costs incurred by the city with respect to a parcel for which application for unmerger is made shall be reimbursed to the city by the property owner in accordance with the procedures set forth in Ordinance No. 87 of the city. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.050 Opportunity for hearing.
     A.    Whenever the director of community development believes that the conditions for merger pursuant to this chapter are present on any real property, the director of community development shall mail by certified mail to the current record owner of such real property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected parcels may be merged pursuant to this chapter and advising the owner that he or she has the opportunity to request a hearing before the planning commission on determination of status, and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria in this chapter for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the county recorder on the date that the notice is mailed to the property owner.

     B.     At any time within thirty (30) days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the city clerk a request for hearing on determination of status. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.060 Setting the hearing.
     If a request for a hearing on determination of status is received within the time provided by Section 11.63.050 of this chapter, the director of community development shall fix a time, a place and a date not more than sixty (60) days from the date of receipt of the request for such hearing to be conducted by the planning commission, and shall so notify the property owner by certified mail. The hearing may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the planning commission and the property owner, provided that the property owner also waive in writing any and all rights to have the final determination of status completed and recorded within ninety (90) days following the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 11.63.050(A) of this chapter. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.070 Review by planning commission.
     The planning commission shall hold a hearing on determination of status when required by and as provided by Section 11.63.060 of this chapter. The property owner shall state his or her objection and be given the opportunity to present the evidence upon which he or she relies that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter. At the conclusion of the hearing, the planning commission shall determine if the conditions constituting merger exist. If it determines such conditions exist, it shall determine to merge such lots, parcels or units; provided, however, that if it makes the findings required prior to the granting of a variance, as contained in Section 11.44.080, with regard to maintaining the lots, parcels or units of land as unmerged, it shall determine that no merger shall occur and instruct the director of community development not to file a notice of merger. Notice of the planning commission’s determination shall be mailed by certified mail to the property owner. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.080 Review by the city council.
     Within ten days following the decision of the planning commission, any owner of record of the affected property may file a written appeal of such decision with the city clerk. If an appeal is filed in accordance with this section, the matter shall be set for hearing before the city council. The hearing may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the city council and the property owner, provided that the property owner also waive in writing any and all rights to have the final determination of status completed and recorded within ninety (90) days following the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 11.63.050(A) of this chapter. Notice of the hearing on the appeal shall be provided by certified mail to the owner of the affected property and to any other person who has filed a request for notice of such matter with the city clerk. The city council shall make the findings set forth in Section 11.63.070 in approving or disapproving the proposed merger. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.090 Review of non-contested notice of intent to determine status.
     If the owner of the affected property does not file a request for hearing on determination of status pursuant to Section 11.63.050(B) of this chapter, the planning commission may, at any time after the expiration of the thirty (30) day period provided for therein, make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged. Notice of the determination of the planning commission shall be filed for record within the time frame and in the form provided in Section 11.63.110 of this chapter. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

 

11.63.110 Notice to county recorder.
     A.    If the final determination of the planning commission or, if an appeal was taken, the final determination of the city council is that the affected property shall be merged, the director of community development shall file for record the notice of merger within a time period that is within ninety (90) days following the mailing of the notice of intention to determine status pursuant to Section 11.63.050(A) of this chapter. The notice of merger shall specify the name(s) of the record owner(s) and shall particularly describe the real property merged. A merger of parcels becomes effective when the notice of merger is filed for record.

     B.     If the final determination is that the affected property shall not be merged, the director of community development shall, within the same time period specified for the filing for record of a notice of merger, file for record a release of the notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. (Ord. 258 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 11.64 CONVERSION TO CONDOMINIUMS
11.64.010 Purpose.
     The purposes of this chapter are as follows:

     A.    To establish criteria for the conversion of existing multiple family rental housing to condominiums, community apartments, and cooperative apartments;

     B.     To reduce the impact of such conversions on residents in rental housing who may be required to relocate due to the conversion of units or space to condominiums, community apartments and stock cooperatives by providing procedures for notification and adequate time and assistance for such relocation;

     C.     To ensure that the purchasers of converted housing have been properly informed as to the physical condition of the structure which is offered for purchase;

     D.    To ensure that converted housing achieves quality construction, appearance and safety, and is consistent with the goals of the city’s general plan and conforms or is legally nonconforming with the density requirements of the general plan’s land use element. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.020 References and definitions.
     A.    Conversions to community apartments and stock cooperatives shall be subject to the same restrictions, conditions and requirements as condominiums. All references to a “condominium” in this chapter shall be deemed to refer to a condominium, community apartment or cooperative apartment, except where specifically noted.

     B.     “Applicant” or “subdivider” means the owner of the real property proposed for condominium conversion or his or her representative.

     C.     “Community apartment project” means the same as defined by Section 11004 of the California Business and Professions Code.

     D.    “Condominium” means the same as defined by Section 783 of the California Civil Code.

     E.     “Condominium” means an existing multiple residential building proposed for conversion to a condominium, stock cooperative or community apartment project through approval of a tract or parcel map.

     F.     “Stock cooperative” means the same as defined by Section 11003.2 of the California Business and Professions Code. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.030 Permit required.
     No person, firm, corporation, partnership or other entity shall convert existing dwelling units to a condominium subdivision, community apartment or stock cooperative without first having been issued a condominium conversion permit by the planning director. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.040 Issuance of permits.
     The planning director shall issue a condominium conversion permit when he or she determines that:

     A.    The applicant has complied with all applicable city and state regulations in effect at the time the condominium conversion was approved; and

     B.     The applicant has complied with the conditions of approval.

     Once issued, the condominium conversion permit can be revoked only because of the failure of the applicant or his or her successors in interest to comply with the conditions of approval or any applicable city or state regulations in effect at the time the conversion was approved.

     A permit shall expire if and at the same time that the tentative subdivision map approval expires. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.050 Requirements and procedures.
     No existing building shall be approved for conversion to a condominium project unless it meets the following standards and requirements:

     A.    All residential buildings shall be in compliance with the minimum standards of the multiple family residential zone, of the building code as adopted by the city and the state of California, which are in effect on the date of approval of the tentative subdivision map.

     B.     All buildings for which an application for a conversion permit is filed shall be in compliance with the exit and occupancy requirements and the height and area requirements for the type of construction and occupancy involved as outlined in the building code as adopted by the city and in effect on the date the tentative subdivision map is approved.

     C.     All buildings for which an application for a conversion permit is filed shall be in all respects in compliance with the zoning ordinance and the goals and policies of the general plan, or legally nonconforming therewith, as of the date the tentative subdivision map is approved.

     D.    All condominium projects, apartments and stock cooperatives shall file a subdivision map subject to all applicable provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

     E.     No application for the approval of a tentative subdivision map for conversion of a building to condominiums may be filed with the city within a period of two years after issuance of the certificate of occupancy for said building. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.060 Development standards for condominium conversions.
     To achieve the purposes of this chapter, the planning commission shall require that all condominium conversions conform prior to the date of conversion to the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code in effect at the time of approval of the conversion permit, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. The planning commission shall require conformance with the standards of this section prior to the date of conversion in approving an application for conversion.

     A.    Unit Size. The floor area of the existing units shall not be reduced to less than the floor area of the units prior to approval of the conversion.

     B.     Fire Prevention.

     1.     Smoke Detectors. Each living unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion as specified in the Uniform Building Code in effect at the time of issuance of the conversion permit. Said detectors shall be mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

     2.     Smoke Detectors in Other than Dwelling Units. Every mechanical room, equipment room, enclosed garage, lobby, manager’s office, recreation room or similar enclosed space shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion as specified in the Uniform Building Code in effect at the time of issuance of the conversion permit. Said detectors shall be connected to an audible alarm which shall ring in an office or other inhabited area or shall ring outside the room.

     3.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. All onsite fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition at all times, maintained by the homeowner’s association. The covenants, conditions and restrictions shall provide for the maintenance of all such fire protection systems.

     C.     Sound Insulation. Wall and floor-ceiling assemblies of apartments shall conform to Title 25, California Administrative Code, Section 1092, or its successor. All permanent mechanical equipment, including domestic appliances, which are determined by the superintendent of building and safety to be a potential source of vibration or noise, shall be shock mounted, isolated in a manner approved by the superintendent of building and safety to lessen transmission of vibration and noise. Floor covering may only be replaced by another floor covering that provides the same or greater insulation. The requirements of this paragraph shall not apply to a unit in a building with no other unit(s). Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the planning commission if it is determined that complying with this section will add costs in excess of ten percent of the total cost of the improvements to the structure.

     D.    Utility Metering.

     1.     The consumption of gas and electricity within each unit shall be separately metered so that the unit owner can be separately billed for each utility. Water need not be separately metered, however, a water shut-off valve shall be provided for each unit or for each plumbing fixture. Each unit shall have access to its own meter(s). Exceptions may be granted by the planning commission for central water heating, central heating and central heating and air-conditioning systems which are energy efficient or otherwise deemed appropriate.

     2.     Each unit shall have access to its own electrical panel for all electrical circuits which serve the unit.

     E.     Private Storage Space. Each converted apartment unit shall have at least two hundred (200) cubic feet of enclosed weather-proofed and lockable private storage space, in addition to guest, linen pantry and clothes closets customarily provided. Such space shall be for the sole use of the unit owner. Such space may be provided in any location as approved by the planning commission at the time of approval, but shall not be divided into more than two locations. In such cases where the applicant can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     F.     Laundry Facilities. A laundry area shall be provided in each unit; or if common laundry areas are provided, such facilities shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each five units or fraction thereof. In such cases where the applicant can demonstrate that this standard cannot or should not reasonably be met, this standard may be modified by the planning commission.

     G.    Condition of Equipment and Appliances. The applicant shall provide written certification to the buyer of each unit on the initial sale after conversion that any dishwashers, garbage disposals, stoves, refrigerators, hot water tanks and air-conditioners which are provided are in working condition as of the close of escrow. At such time as the homeowners’ association takes over management of the development, the applicant shall provide written certification to the association that any pool and pool equipment and any appliances and mechanical equipment to be owned in common by the association are in proper working condition.

     H.    Public Easements. The applicant shall make provisions for the dedication of land or easements for street widening, public access or other public purpose in connection with the project where necessary and in accordance with established or planned improvements.

     I.      Underground Utilities. The applicant and his or her successors in interest shall waive the right, through deed restriction, to protest the formation of an underground utility district.

     J.      Refurbishing and Restoration. All main buildings, structures, fences, patio enclosures, carports, accessory buildings, sidewalks, driveways, landscaped areas, irrigation systems and additional elements as required by the planning director shall be refurbished and restored as necessary to achieve high quality appearance and safety. Such refurbishing and restoration shall be reviewed and approved by the planning director and architectural review committee.

     K.    Parking Standards. The off-street parking requirements for a condominium conversion project shall be two covered parking spaces per unit, to be assigned to and conveyed with the unit. Visitor parking shall be provided in the ratio to one space, which need not be covered, for every four dwelling units. Required off-street parking may be uncovered if the applicant can demonstrate to the planning commission that this requirement cannot or should not be reasonably met.

     L.     Physical Elements. Any physical element identified in the physical elements report (Section 11.64.070(B)) as having a useful life of less than two years shall be replaced.

     M.    Security Plan. A security plan, which may include but need not be limited to security lighting, driveway gates and fencing shall be submitted for review and approval by the planning director. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.070 Application requirements.
     No application for a condominium conversion project shall be accepted for filing unless the application includes the following:

     A.    A development plan of the project including:

     1.     The location, height, gross floor area and proposed uses for each existing structure to remain and for each proposed new structure,

     2.     The location, use and type of surfacing for all open storage areas,

     3.     The location and type of surfacing for driveways, pedestrian ways, vehicle parking areas and curb cuts,

     4.     The location, height and type of materials for walls or fences,

     5.     The location of all landscaped areas, the type of landscaping, and a statement specifying the method by which the landscaped areas shall be maintained,

     6.     The location and description of all recreational facilities and a statement specifying the method of the maintenance thereof,

     7.     The location and size of the parking facilities to be used in conjunction with each condominium unit,

     8.     The location, type and size of all drainage pipes and structures depicted or described to the nearest public drain or water course,

     9.     The location and type and fire flow of the nearest fire hydrants,

     10.   The location, type and size of all onsite and adjacent street overhead utility lines,

     11.   A lighting plan of the project,

     12.   Existing and proposed exterior elevations,

     13.   The location of and provisions for any unique natural or vegetative site features;

     B.     A physical elements report which shall include:

     1.     A report detailing the condition and estimating the remaining useful life of each element of the project proposed for conversion: roofs, foundations, exterior paint, paved surfaces, mechanical systems, electrical systems, plumbing systems, including sewage systems, swimming pools, sprinkler systems for landscaping, utility delivery systems, central or community heating and air-conditioning systems, fire protection systems including automatic sprinkler systems and structural elements. Such report shall be prepared by an appropriately licensed contractor or architect or by a registered civil or structural engineer other than the owner. For any element whose useful life is less than five years, a replacement cost estimate shall be provided.

     Included in this physical elements report shall be a discussion of the type and capacity of private sewage disposal system and a history of the maintenance of such system including the number of times and dates that the system has been pumped,

     2.     A structural pest control report. Such report shall be prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator pursuant to Section 8516 of the California Business and Professions Code,

     3.     A building history report including the following:

     a.     The date of construction of all elements of the project which required building, plumbing, electrical or other permits prior to construction,

     b.     The date and description of each major repair or renovation of any structure or structural element since the date of construction. For purposes of this subsection a “major repair” shall mean any repair for which an expenditure of more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) was made,

     c.     Statement regarding current ownership of all improvements and underlying land and encumbrances thereon,

     d.     Failure to provide information required by subsections (B)(3)(a) through (c), inclusive, shall be accompanied by an affidavit, given under penalty of perjury, setting forth reasonable efforts undertaken to discover such information and reasons why said information cannot be obtained;

     C.     Proposed covenants, conditions and restrictions, bylaws and other documents providing for the establishment, operation and maintenance of the condominium project. These documents shall provide that the city is a party and shall give the city the right to enforce any provision in those documents which is required pursuant to this chapter;

     D.    Specific information concerning the characteristics of the project, including but not limited to the following:

     1.     Square footage in the unit and number of rooms in each unit,

     2.     Proposed sale price of unit,

     3.     Proposed homeowners’ association fee; permanent mortgage financing available,

     4.     Names and addresses of all tenants.

     When the applicant can demonstrate that such information is not available, this requirement may be modified by the planning director;

     E.     Any other information which, in the opinion of the planning director, will assist in determining whether the proposed project will be consistent with the purposes of this chapter. The planning director may waive any requirement of this section which is not applicable to a particular condominium conversion project. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.080 Information reports.
     The applicant shall file a report of the impact of the condominium conversion upon the displaced residents of the property to be converted. This report shall include the following:

     A.    Rental rate history for each type of unit for previous three years;

     B.     Monthly vacancy rate for each month during preceding two years;

     C.     Makeup of existing tenant households, including family size, length of residence, age of tenants and whether receiving federal or state rent subsidies;

     D.    The availability in the La Cañada Flintridge area of adequate replacement space in apartment units.

     The information required by this section shall be utilized only to assist the planning commission in determining whether additional city regulation of condominium conversions should be recommended to the city council. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.090 Acceptance of reports.
     The final form of the physical elements report, information report and other documents shall be as approved by the planning director. The reports in their acceptable form shall remain on file with the planning department for review by any interested persons. The report shall be referenced in the subdivision report to the planning commission. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.100 Copy to buyers.
     The owner of the property proposed for conversion shall provide each purchaser with a copy of all reports (in their final acceptable form), along with the California Department of Real Estate white report, except the information required by Section 11.64.080, prior to said purchaser completing an escrow agreement or his or her contract to purchase a unit in the project. The owner shall give the purchaser ten days to review these reports prior to completion of the escrow agreement or contract to purchase the unit. In order to assure that a copy is received by the purchaser, the purchaser shall sign for the report. Copies of the reports shall be made available at all times at the sales office for the condominium conversion project and shall be posted at various locations, as approved by the city, at the project site. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.110 Tenant provisions.
     A.    Notice of Intent. A written notice of intent to convert shall be delivered by the owner of the property proposed for conversion to each tenant’s dwelling unit at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a tentative subdivision map. In addition, beginning at least sixty (60) days prior to the filing of a tentative subdivision map, the owner of the property proposed for conversion shall give to each prospective tenant immediately prior to the acceptance of the initial rent or deposit a written notice of intent to convert. Evidence of delivery of these notices shall be submitted with the application for conversion. The form of the notice shall be as approved by the planning director and shall contain not less than the following:

     1.     Name and address of current owner;

     2.     Name and address of proposed subdivider;

     3.     Approximate date on which the tentative subdivision map is proposed to be filed;

     4.     Approximate date on which the final subdivision map is proposed to be filed;

     5.     Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by nonpurchasing tenants;

     6.     Tenant’s right to purchase;

     7.     Tenant’s right of notification to vacate;

     8.     Tenant’s right of termination of lease;

     9.     Statement of limitations on rent increase;

     10.   Provision for special cases;

     11.   Provision of moving expenses; and

     12.   Such other related information as may be deemed necessary by the planning director.

     B.     Notice of Filing of Tentative Map. Applicant shall give to each tenant, and to each prospective tenant prior to acceptance of the initial rent or a deposit, notice of the filing of a tentative subdivision map in the form required by the planning director.

     C.     Tenant’s Right to Purchase. As provided in Government Code Section 66427.1(d), each tenant shall be given notice of a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied by the tenant upon the same terms and conditions that the unit will be initially offered to the general public, or upon terms more favorable to tenant. The right of first refusal shall extend for at least ninety (90) days from the date of issuance of the Public Report by the California Department of Real Estate, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his or her intention not to exercise the right to purchase.

     D.    Notice of Final Approval. Within ten days following approval by the city of the final subdivision map for the proposed condominium conversion, the city shall mail to each tenant notice that the final subdivision map has been approved.

     E.     Notice of Application for Public Report. Within ten days of the application by the subdivider to the California Department of Real Estate for a Public Report, the subdivider shall give notice of such application to all existing tenants and shall at the same time provide notice that the Report will be available for inspection upon request.

     F.     Report of Impact of Conversion upon Displaced Persons. At least fifteen (15) days prior to a public hearing on the proposed condominium conversion project by the planning commission, the subdivider shall give notice to each tenant that the report of the impact of the condominium conversion upon displaced residents, which the subdivider is required under Section 11.64.080, is available for inspection by each tenant upon request.

     G.    Vacation of Units. Each nonpurchasing tenant, not in default under the obligations of the rental agreement or lease under which he or she occupies his or her unit, shall have not less than one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of approval of the tentative subdivision map before the tenancy my be terminated.

     H.    Increase in Rents. From the date of approval of the tentative subdivision map until the date of issuance of the condominium conversion permit under Section 11.64.030, no tenant’s rent shall be increased: (1) more frequently than once every six months; and (2) at a rate greater than the rate of increase in the Consumer Price Index (all items, Los Angeles-Long Beach), on an annualized basis for the same period. This limitation shall not apply if rent increases are provided for in leases or contracts in existence prior to the filing date of the tentative subdivision map.

     I.      Moving Expenses. The subdivider shall provide moving expenses of one and one-half times the monthly rent to any tenant who relocates from the building to be converted after approval of the condominium conversion tentative map by the city, except when the tenant has given notice of his or her intent to move prior to receipt of notification from the subdivider of his or her intent to convert. Such payment shall be paid only after the tenant has moved from the building proposed to be converted. This requirement shall not apply to any new tenant who received the notices to prospective tenants set forth in subsections A and B of this section. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.120 Effect of proposed conversion on the city’s low and moderate income housing supply.
     Concurrent with review of requests for conversion of existing apartments to condominiums, the planning commission should consider the following:

     A.    Whether the amount and impact of the displacement of tenants, if the conversion is approved, would suggest the need for the planning commission to recommend to the city council adoption of additional condominium conversion regulations;

     B.     The role that the apartment structure plays in the existing housing market. Particular emphasis should be placed on the evaluation of rental structures to determine if the existing apartment complexes serving low and moderate income households are adequate, or whether additional municipal regulation should be recommended to the city council. Criteria to determine low and moderate income households used by the federal and state governments will be used in the evaluation. Along with other factors, the city will consider the following:

     1.     The number of families needing housing assistance as shown in the city’s current housing assistance plan,

     2.     The probable income range of tenants living in existing apartments based on the assumption that households pay between one-fourth and one-half of their income for housing. That income range will be compared with existing income limits for the Section 8 Housing Assistance Program to determine whether potential displaced tenants can be categorized as low and moderate income. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.130 Investigation and report.
     A.    The planning department shall investigate the facts bearing on the proposed conversion to provide information necessary to assure action consistent with the intent of this chapter and the general plan.

     B.     The staff report on the proposed conversion shall be mailed to each tenant and to applicant a minimum of three days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.140 Planning commission hearing.
     Within fifty (50) days after the application is accepted and a notice of complete filing has been sent to the applicant, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing upon the proposed condominium conversion project. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.150 Notice of hearing.
     Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the following manner and shall contain the date, time and place of hearing, a general description of the property, and a general description of the matter being considered.

     A.    Notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city not less than ten days before the date of the hearing.

     B.     Notices for the public hearing shall be mailed not less than fifteen (15) days before the hearing to: (1) owners of property within a radius of three hundred (300) feet of the exterior boundaries of the property as shown on the latest available assessment roll of the county; (2) all existing tenants of the property proposed for conversion; and (3) the applicant. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.160 Findings.
     To approve an application for condominium conversion, the planning commission and, in the event of an appeal, the city council shall make the following findings:

     A.    All provisions of this chapter are met and the project will not be detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare of the community;

     B.     The proposed conversion is consistent with the general plan of the city or is legally nonconforming therewith, and is consistent with the density requirement of the city land use element;

     C.     The proposed conversion will conform to the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code in effect at the time of approval, except as otherwise provided in this chapter;

     D.    The overall design and physical condition of this conversion will result in a project which is aesthetically attractive, safe and of quality construction;

     E.     That the applicant has not engaged in coercive retaliatory action regarding the tenants after the submittal of the first application for condominium conversion through the date of approval. In making this finding, consideration shall be given to:

     1.     Rent increases at a rate greater than the rate of increase in the Consumer Price Index (all items, Los Angeles-Long Beach) unless provided for in leases or contracts in existence prior to the submittal of the first application for city review, or

     2.     Any other action by applicant which is taken against tenants to coerce them to refrain from opposing the project. An agreement with tenants which provides for benefits to the tenants after condominium conversion approval shall not be considered a coercive or retaliatory action;

     F.     That conditions have been imposed which assure that all provisions of Section 11.64.110 have been complied with and that all notices set forth in Section 11.64.110 have been delivered prior to the issuance of the condominium conversion permit. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.170 Findings—Denial.
     If the planning commission determines that vacancies in the project have been increased for the purpose of preparing the project for conversion, the project shall be disapproved. In evaluation of the current vacancy level under this section, the increase in rental rates for each unit over the preceding three years and the average monthly vacancy rate for the project over the preceding two years shall be considered. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.180 Commission action.
     The planning commission shall approve or disapprove of the proposed conversion. If it approves the condominium conversion, the planning commission may impose conditions deemed necessary to carry out the purposes and intent of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

 

11.64.190 Appeals.
     A.    Any party may appeal from planning commission action to the city council pursuant to the provisions of the La Cañada Flintridge zoning ordinance, except to the extent that those provisions are modified herein.

     B.     Any appeal to the city council shall be filed with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days after the planning commission action from which the appeal is being taken.

     C.     A hearing on the appeal shall be held by the city council within thirty (30) days following the date of filing of the appeal with the city clerk. (Ord. 80 § 1, 1982)

Chapter 11.70 COMMERCIAL MARIJUANA ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED
Note
*       Prior ordinance history: Ords. 394, 445 and 456.

 

11.70.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    In order to preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the residents and businesses of the city, all marijuana-related businesses, activities and uses are prohibited, unless local control is otherwise preempted by state law, and except as provided for by Chapter 11.75 (Personal Indoor Marijuana Cultivation).

     B.     This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patient’s right to medical marijuana as provided for in Section 11362.5 of the Health and Safety Code.

     C.     The city affirms that Title 11 (“Zoning”) of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code is structured as a permissive zoning code, wherein any use not enumerated as allowed is prohibited, and the express prohibitions on commercial marijuana activities imposed by this Chapter 11.70 are enacted to fully comply with requirements of state law when a city desires to prohibit commercial marijuana activities. (Ord. 463 § 2, 2017)

 

11.70.020 Definitions.
     The following words and phrases shall, for the purposes of this chapter, have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section, as follows:

     A.    “Cannabis” has the same definition as “marijuana” provided in this chapter.

     B.     “Commercial marijuana activity” includes the cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, packaging, labeling, transportation, delivery, or sale of marijuana and marijuana products; except, as applicable, as set forth in Chapter 11.75 (Personal Indoor Marijuana Cultivation) of this code.

     C.     “Cultivation” means any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of marijuana.

     D.    “Delivery” means the commercial transfer of marijuana or marijuana products to a customer, and includes the use of any technology platform owned and controlled by the same person making such use.

     E.     “Distribution” means the procurement, sale, and transport of marijuana and marijuana products between entities licensed for and/or engaged in commercial marijuana activities.

     F.     “Distributor” means a person engaged in distribution.

     G.    “Manufacture” means to compound, blend, extract, infuse, or otherwise make or prepare a marijuana product.

     H.    “Manufacturer” means a person that conducts the production, preparation, propagation, or compounding of marijuana or marijuana products either directly or indirectly or by extraction methods, or independently by means of chemical synthesis, or by a combination of extraction and chemical synthesis at a fixed location that packages or repackages marijuana or marijuana products or labels or relabels its container.

     I.      “Marijuana” has the same definition as provided in Section 26001 of the Business and Professions Code for the term “cannabis,” and as may be amended, defined as “all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

     J.      “Marijuana products” means marijuana that has undergone a process whereby the plant material has been transformed into a concentrate, including, but not limited to, concentrated marijuana, or an edible or topical product containing marijuana or concentrated marijuana and other ingredients.

     K.    “Medical marijuana” or “medical marijuana product” means marijuana or a marijuana product used for medical purposes in accordance with state law, including the Compassionate Use Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.5) and the Medical Marijuana Program Act (Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7, et seq.).

     L.     “Microbusiness” shall have the same definition as provided for in Section 26070 of the Business and Professions Code, and as may be amended from time to time

     M.    “Nursery” means a person that produces only clones, immature plants, seeds, and other agricultural products used specifically for the planting, propagation, and cultivation of marijuana.

     N.    “Person” means any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     O.    “Retailer” shall mean a person engaged in the retail sale and delivery of marijuana or marijuana products to customers.

     P.     “Testing laboratory” means a laboratory, facility, or entity that offers or performs tests on marijuana or marijuana products. (Ord. 463 § 2, 2017)

 

11.70.030 Prohibition of commercial marijuana activities.
     A.    All commercial marijuana activities, whether medical or recreational (adult use) and including non-profit operations, are expressly prohibited in all zones (except for as preempted by state law). No person shall establish, operate, conduct, or allow commercial marijuana activities anywhere within the city except for as preempted by state law.

     B.     The city shall not issue any permit, license, or entitlement for any commercial marijuana activity (except for as preempted by state law), including, but not limited to, any activity covered by the state license classifications listed below as provided for in Section 26050 of the Business and Professions Code:

     1.     Type 1 = Cultivation; Specialty outdoor; Small.

     2.     Type 1A = Cultivation; Specialty indoor; Small.

     3.     Type 1B = Cultivation; Specialty mixed-light; Small.

     4.     Type 1C = Cultivation; Specialty cottage; Small.

     5.     Type 2 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Small.

     6.     Type 2A = Cultivation; Indoor; Small.

     7.     Type 2B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Small.

 

     8.     Type 3 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Medium.

     9.     Type 3A = Cultivation; Indoor; Medium.

     10.   Type 3B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Medium.

     11.   Type 4 = Cultivation; Nursery.

     12.   Type 5 = Cultivation; Outdoor; Large.

     13.   Type 5A= Cultivation; Indoor; Large.

     14.   Type 5B = Cultivation; Mixed-light; Large.

     15.   Type 6 = Manufacturer 1.

     16.   Type 7 = Manufacturer 2.

     17.   Type 8 = Testing laboratory.

     18.   Type 10 = Retailer.

     19.   Type 11 = Distributer.

     20.   Type 12 = Microbusiness.

     C.     This prohibition includes any activities authorized under new or revised state licenses, or any other state authorization, to allow any type, category or classification of medical or recreational (adult use) marijuana commercial activities, or similar operations, including non-profit, collective or cooperative operations.

     D.    The prohibition provided by this section includes medical marijuana collectives and cooperatives that operate pursuant to Section 11362.775 of the Health and Safety Code, the Compassionate Use Act, or otherwise. (Ord. 463 § 2, 2017)

 

11.70.040 Violations and penalties—Public nuisance.
     A.    At the discretion of the city prosecutor, any violation of this chapter is punishable as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.04.010(B) of this code, or punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.04.010(A) of this code, except for as preempted by state law.

     B.     Public Nuisance Abatement.

     1.     Any commercial marijuana activity that is conducted in violation of any provisions of this chapter is hereby declared to constitute a public nuisance and, as such, may be abated or enjoined from further operation, in accordance with the procedures set forth in Chapter 4.33 (Property Maintenance Requirements) of this code as reasonably applied to enforcement of this chapter.

     2.     All costs to abate such public nuisance, including attorneys’ fees and court costs, shall be paid by the person causing the nuisance, including the property owner where the nuisance is occurring.

     3.     Any appeal to a determination that commercial marijuana activity constitutes a public nuisance shall be pursuant to the appeal provisions in Chapter 4.33 (Property Maintenance Requirements) of this code.

     C.     The remedies described in this section are not mutually exclusive. Pursuit of any one remedy shall not preclude city from availing itself of any or all available administrative, civil, or criminal remedies, at law or equity. (Ord. 463 § 2, 2017)

Chapter 11.75 PERSONAL INDOOR MARIJUANA CULTIVATION
11.75.010 Intent.
     A.    Intent. The intent of this chapter is to prohibit throughout the entire city the outdoor cultivation of marijuana, and to establish, consistent with the meaning of Section 11362.2 of the Health and Safety Code, and as may be amended, reasonable regulations governing the indoor cultivation of up to six marijuana plants at a private residence.

     B.     Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the personal indoor cultivation of marijuana in a manner that protects the health, safety and welfare of the community consistent with state law. This chapter is not intended to interfere with a patient’s right to medical marijuana pursuant to state law. This chapter is not intended to give any person unfettered legal authority to grow marijuana. (Ord. 463 § 3, 2017; Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

 

11.75.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:

     “Accessory structure” means a detached subordinate building, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the main building or to the main use of the land, and which is located in the same or a less restrictive zone on the same lot or parcel of land with the main building or use.

     “Adult Use of Marijuana Act” means the Control, Regulate and Tax Adult Use of Marijuana Act, also known as Proposition 64, that will be submitted to the voters of the state of California at the November 8, 2016 statewide general election, and which adds to or amends parts of California law, including the California Health and Safety Code, Business and Professions Code, Revenue and Taxation Code, and Food and Agricultural Code.

     “Applicant” means a person applying for a personal marijuana cultivation permit pursuant to this chapter.

     “Director” means the city’s director of community development, or designee.

     “Fire department” means the Los Angeles County fire department.

     “Marijuana” has the same definition as provided for in Business and Professions Code Section 26001(f) for the term “cannabis,” and as may be amended, defined as “all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis. “Cannabis” also means marijuana as defined by Section 11018 of the Health and Safety Code as enacted by Chapter 1407 of the Statutes of 1972. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination.

     “Marijuana cultivation” means the growing, planting, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, trimming, processing or storing of one or more marijuana plants or any part thereof.

     “Marijuana cultivation site” means the private residence, or fully enclosed accessory structure to that residence, at which marijuana cultivation is occurring under the provisions of this chapter, or the property on which the private residence, or fully enclosed accessory structure to that residence, at which an applicant for a personal marijuana cultivation permit proposes to conduct marijuana cultivation.

     “Permit” means a personal marijuana cultivation permit described in this chapter.

     “Person” includes any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Primary caregiver” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(d), and as may be amended, defined in part as “the individual, designated by a qualified patient or by a person with an identification card, who has consistently assumed responsibility for the housing, health, or safety of that patient or person.

     “Private residence” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.2(b)(5), and as may amended, defined as “a house, an apartment unit, a mobile home, or other similar dwelling.”

     “Qualified patient” has the same definition as provided for in Health and Safety Code Section 11362.7(f), and as may be amended, defined as “a person who is entitled to the protections of Section 11362.5, but who does not have an identification card issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 463 § 4, 2017; Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

 

11.75.030 Marijuana cultivation prohibited—Exception.
     A.    Prohibition. Marijuana cultivation is prohibited in all zones of the city. No person shall engage in marijuana cultivation in the city for any purpose.

     B.     Provided that the provisions of this chapter are otherwise complied with in their entirety, the prohibition on marijuana cultivation by any person in all zones throughout the city does not apply to the indoor personal cultivation of six or fewer marijuana plants inside a private residence, or inside a fully enclosed accessory structure to such a private residence, occurring cumulatively in an area of no more than fifty (50) square feet, for personal use or for a qualified patient, as authorized under Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1(a)(3) and 11362.2, and as may be amended. (Ord. 463 § 5, 2017; Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

 

11.75.040 Personal indoor cultivation of marijuana—Permit required.
     A.    Permit Required. No person, who is otherwise qualified to engage in the cultivation of marijuana under Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1 and 11362.2, and as may be amended, shall engage in the cultivation of marijuana, unless that person has a current valid personal marijuana cultivation permit from the city, pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     Cultivation Application. An applicant shall submit a cultivation application to the director, on a form provided by the director, and proof of payment of the permit fee, in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council.

     1.     The cultivation application submitted by an applicant shall include, but not be limited to, the following information, affirmed under penalty of perjury by the applicant:

     a.     The property address of where the marijuana will be cultivated.

     b.     The name of each person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge of any legal parcel or premises where marijuana will be cultivated.

     c.     The name of each person who participates in the marijuana cultivation.

     d.     Property owner acknowledgement of cultivation of marijuana at the subject property, affirmed under penalty of perjury.

     2.     The cultivation application submitted by an applicant shall include a scaled property site plan and a scaled diagram of the floor plan within the residence or fully enclosed accessory structure to be used for cultivation at the marijuana cultivation site, and an itemized list of measures taken to comply with the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, odor control, security, electrical, and building and safety provisions, as well as any equipment that will be used for marijuana cultivation.

     3.     Within thirty (30) calendar days of receiving a cultivation application, the director either shall accept for processing the cultivation application upon finding that the cultivation application fully meets the requirements of this chapter, or shall return the cultivation application to the applicant with a written description of the reasons for rejecting the cultivation application, and so notify the applicant by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application.

     C.     Application Process. Within sixty (60) calendar days after the director deems a cultivation application fully meets the requirements of this chapter, the applicant shall provide to the director written proof (as deemed sufficient by the director), for purposes of verification, of successful completion and passing of both of the following inspections:

     1.     That the building and safety division of the community development department of the city has inspected the marijuana cultivation site and determined that the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure, including, but not limited to, the area dedicated to marijuana cultivation, is in compliance with the cultivation application, this chapter, the building code, the electrical code, the plumbing code, and any other applicable requirement of Title 7 (Buildings and Construction) of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code or any other relevant provision of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code concerning health and safety. This shall include inspection of the equipment, including any artificial lighting and/or ventilation systems, and other materials the applicant proposes to use for the marijuana cultivation.

     2.     That the fire department has inspected the marijuana cultivation site, and determined that the area dedicated to marijuana cultivation, and (as warranted) the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure, is in compliance with the fire code and any other applicable requirement of Chapter 4.01 (Fire Code) of Title 4 (Public Welfare) of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. This shall include inspection of the equipment, including fire suppression/extinguishing system, any artificial lighting and/or ventilation systems, and other materials the applicant proposes to use for the marijuana cultivation.

     D.    Application Approval. Upon verification of the information described in subsection C above, for a cultivation application which fully meets all the requirements of this chapter, the director shall issue a notice of decision of a personal marijuana cultivation permit within sixty (60) calendar days, upon making the following findings, or shall deny the application if the following findings cannot be made, and so notify the applicant in writing by United States mail, first class postage prepaid, addressed to the applicant at the address stated in the application:

     1.     The applicant meets all the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, those described in Section 11.75.050, as well as any other applicable requirements of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code and any regulations promulgated under Section 11.75.050(B) of this chapter.

     2.     The applicant for the permit and the marijuana cultivation site are both in compliance with state law, including, but not limited to, Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1, 11362.2 and 11362.3, and as they may be amended.

     E.     Permits Not Transferable. A personal marijuana cultivation permit issued pursuant to this chapter is nontransferable and is specific to the permit-holder and the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure for which it is issued.

     F.     Permit Renewal. A personal marijuana cultivation permit issued under this section shall automatically expire one year after the notice of decision. Permit renewal shall be requested through compliance with the procedures for issuance of a permit as provided in this section including inspection. An applicant for a permit renewal shall be required to pay a permit renewal fee in an amount to be set by resolution of the city council. However, an applicant for permit renewal shall not be required to submit a new cultivation plan annually, provided the marijuana cultivation site follows the original cultivation plan and the permit holder is not engaged in additional or expanded marijuana cultivation, as affirmed in the renewal form. Renewal applications must be received at least thirty (30) calendar days prior to the expiration of an existing permit, but not earlier than ninety (90) calendar days prior to such expiration. Renewal inspections must occur no earlier than sixty (60) calendar days prior to the submission of the renewal application.

     G.    Permit Revocation. Permits issued under this section may be revoked by the director upon making any of the following findings:

     1.     The permit was issued in error or the cultivation plan form included incorrect information.

     2.     The marijuana cultivated at the marijuana cultivation site has been sold or used for any commercial use, or any other use or activity has occurred that is prohibited by Health and Safety Code Sections 11362.1, 11362.2 and 11362.3, and as they may be amended.

     3.     Any violation of the AUMA, and as it may be amended, has occurred at the marijuana cultivation site.

     4.     Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter has occurred at the marijuana cultivation site.

     5.     The marijuana cultivation site has become a public nuisance or has been operated in a manner constituting a public nuisance.

     6.     The marijuana cultivation is not in compliance with conditions of the permit.

     7.     The permit holder has engaged in any activity for which the personal marijuana cultivation permit could have been denied originally.

     H.    Appeals. Any decision of the director under this chapter may be appealed to the city manager or designee. Any such appeal must be in writing, stating the grounds therefor, and be filed within fifteen (15) calendar days of the date of the decision being appealed. The written appeal shall specify the person making the appeal, the decision appealed from, shall state the reasons for the appeal, and shall include any evidence in support of the appeal which the appellant seeks to be considered by the city manager. The appeal must include the filing of an appeal fee as established by resolution of the city council. Notice of the time and place of an appeal hearing shall be provided to the appellant at least fifteen (15) calendar days before the date set for the hearing. The city manager shall, within sixty (60) calendar days of receipt of the appeal, review the facts of the matter, written documents submitted for review, the basis for making the decision which is under appeal, consider any oral testimony offered at the hearing, and then determine whether the appealed decision should be reversed or affirmed. The determination made shall be in writing, shall set forth the reasons for the determination, and shall be final. The provisions of Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedures for judicial review of any final determination. (Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

 

11.75.050 Personal indoor cultivation of marijuana—Conditions.
     A.    Conditions.

     1.     Visibility. All marijuana cultivation authorized by this chapter shall be conducted inside a private residence or inside a fully enclosed accessory structure and shall not occur in an area visible from any neighboring property, any public right-of-way, or public view. No exterior evidence of marijuana cultivation occurring at the property shall be visible from public view. A fully enclosed accessory structure shall be located within a securely fenced area in the rear yard of the private residence.

     2.     Odor. The odor resulting from all marijuana cultivation shall not be detectable by unaided human senses from any neighboring property or any public right-of-way. A marijuana cultivation site must have a ventilation and filtration system installed that shall prevent marijuana plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure and that shall comply with all applicable building code regulations, including obtaining all required permits and approvals. The ventilation and filtration system must be approved by the city and installed prior to commencing cultivation at the marijuana cultivation site.

     3.     Locks and Alarm. Any private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure utilized for marijuana cultivation pursuant to this chapter shall be secured with locks to prevent unauthorized entry and/or theft, remain secure at all times, and have a working security system which consists of a standard audible residential alarm in compliance with Chapter 5.04 (Burglar and Robbery Alarm Provisions) of this code.

     4.     Fire Extinguisher. A fully charged portable fire extinguisher, which complies with the regulations and standards adopted by the state fire marshal and applicable law, shall be kept in the fully enclosed and secure structure used for cultivation of marijuana. If cultivation occurs in a residential structure, the portable fire extinguisher shall be kept in the cultivation room.

     5.     Six Plants. Cultivation at a single private residence (which includes fully enclosed accessory structures on the grounds of that private residence) is limited to up to six living plants.

     6.     Residence. The person or primary caregiver cultivating the marijuana shall reside full-time on the premises where the marijuana cultivation occurs.

     7.     Personal Use. Marijuana plants shall be cultivated by a person or primary caregiver exclusively for personal use only and shall not be sold or used for any commercial use, or any other use or activity that is prohibited by Sections 11362.1, 11362.2 and 11362.3 of the Health and Safety Code, and as they may be amended, with the exception that a primary caregiver may cultivate for a qualified patient.

     8.     Electricity Use. The collective draw from all electrical appliances at the marijuana cultivation site shall not exceed the maximum rating of the approved electrical panel for the primary legal residence at the marijuana cultivation site. The maximum rating shall be as established in the manufacturer specifications for the approved electrical panel. Gas products (including, without limitation, CO2, butane, propane, and natural gas) or generators shall not be used for the cultivation of marijuana.

     9.     Lighting. Any lighting fixture used for marijuana cultivation shall not exceed the rated wattage and capacity of the circuit breaker and shall be shielded so as to completely confine light and glare to the interior of the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure.

     10.   Humidity and Mold. Marijuana cultivation shall not create a humidity or mold issue within the private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure in violation of the building code, as adopted by the city, or the city’s health and safety regulations, including, but not limited to, the property maintenance standards of the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     11.   Code Compliance. The private residence or fully enclosed accessory structure used for marijuana cultivation shall at all times be in full compliance with the city building code, electrical code, mechanical code, plumbing code, fire code, and any other requirement found in Title 7, Chapter 4.01 of Title 4, or any other applicable building, health, or safety standard in the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code.

     12.   Area. Marijuana cultivation occurring within a private residence or fully-enclosed accessory structure shall be in a cumulative area totaling no larger than fifty (50) square feet.

     13.   Residential Structure. The residential structure shall remain at all times a residence, with legal and functioning cooking, sleeping, and sanitation facilities with code-compliant ingress and egress. These rooms shall not be used for marijuana cultivation where such cultivation will prevent their primary use for cooking of meals, sleeping, and bathing.

     14.   Accessory Structure. A fully-enclosed accessory structure, as defined herein, used for the cultivation of marijuana shall be located in a fully fenced and secured rear yard of the residence, and shall maintain the minimum rear and side yard setbacks required for the residential lot. An accessory structure operating as a marijuana cultivation site shall at all times be fully enclosed so that none of the interior area is visible from any neighboring property, any public right-of-way, or public view.

     B.     The city council may, by resolution, adopt both additional conditions to further the purposes of this section, as well as additional regulations to further the purposes of this chapter. The city council may also delegate, by resolution, authority to adopt such conditions or regulations to the city manager or designee. (Ord. 463 § 6, 2017; Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

 

11.75.060 Violation and enforcement—Public nuisance declared.
     A.    A violation of this chapter or noncompliance with any of the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to any criminal or civil enforcement remedies available under the law and the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code. In addition, the city may prosecute a violation of this chapter by means of civil enforcement through a restraining order, a preliminary or permanent injunction, or by any other means authorized by law or equity. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no conduct which is protected from criminal liability pursuant to state law shall be made criminal by this chapter.

     B.     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter is declared to be a public nuisance and may be abated by the city either pursuant to the La Cañada Flintridge Municipal Code, including, but not limited to, procedures provided for in Chapter 4.33 (Property Maintenance Requirements) or any other available remedies at law or equity.

     C.     At the discretion of the city prosecutor, any violation of Section 11.75.030, 11.75.040 or 11.75.050 of this chapter is punishable as an infraction pursuant to Section 1.04.010(B) of this code, or punishable as a misdemeanor pursuant to Section 1.04.010(A) of this code. (Ord. 456 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 11.80 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
11.80.010 Authority.
     This chapter is adopted in accordance with Government Code Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4, Article 2.5, Section 65864 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.020 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish rules and regulations for the processing, review and approval of development agreements. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.030 Applicability.
     The procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter shall apply to all development agreements proposed by developers of projects in the city of La Cañada Flintridge and considered by the city council of La Cañada Flintridge. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.040 Definitions.
     “Applicant” means any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property who completes and submits an application for a development agreement, including any successor-in-interest thereto.

     “City” means the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     “City clerk” means the city clerk of the city.

     “City council” means the city council of the city.

 

     “Development agreement” means an agreement authorized by Government Code Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 4, Article 2.5, Section 65864 et seq., as amended, and this chapter.

     “Director” means the city’s director of community development, or designee.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, assignee for the benefit of creditors, trustee, trustee in bankruptcy, syndicate, the United States, the state of California, any county, city and county, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.050 Parties to development agreements.
     A.    An applicant shall possess a legal or equitable interest in the real property which is to be the subject of the development agreement. As set forth in Section 11.80.060(A), an application for a development agreement may be submitted by an authorized agent of the applicant.

     B.     In addition to the city and the applicant, any federal, state or local governmental agency may be included as a party to a development agreement. Any such additional party may be made a party to a development agreement pursuant to the provisions of the Joint Exercise of Powers Act, set forth in Section 6500 et seq., of the California Government Code, as amended, providing for joint powers agreements, or provisions of other applicable federal, state or local law, in order to create a legally binding agreement among such parties. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.060 Application for development agreement and processing.
     A.    Application. An applicant, or authorized agent, shall submit a completed application for development agreement to the director. The application shall be on a form approved by the director and shall include such information and supporting data as the director considers necessary to process the application, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Proof that the applicant has a legal or equitable interest in the real property that will be subject to the development agreement. Such proof may include a preliminary report issued by a title company licensed to do business in the state of California.

     2.     If an application for a development agreement is being submitted by an agent for an applicant, proof satisfactory to the city attorney that the agent is authorized to represent the applicant.

     3.     A draft of the development agreement proposed by the applicant, which may include, but not be limited to, the following:

     a.     The parties to the development agreement.

     b.     Written evidence of the nature of the applicant’s interest in the real property, demonstrating to the satisfaction of the director and the city attorney, the applicant’s legal or equitable interest in the property which is the subject of the development agreement.

     c.     A description of the development project sufficient to permit the development agreement to be reviewed under the applicable criteria of this chapter.

     d.     The proposed project as it relates to the permitted uses of the property, the density or intensity of use, the maximum height and size of proposed buildings, and provisions for reservation or dedication of land for public purposes.

     e.     The proposed project as it relates to anticipated traffic impacts from the project.

     f.      An identification of the approvals and permits for the development agreement to be issued or contemplated by the development agreement.

     g.     The proposed duration of the development agreement.

     h.     A program and standards for periodic review under this chapter.

     i.      Appropriate provisions, acceptable to the city attorney, providing security for the performance of the applicant under the development agreement.

     j.      Conditions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions, provided that such conditions and requirements for subsequent discretionary actions shall not prevent development of the land for the uses and to the density or intensity of development set forth in the development agreement.

     k.     If provided by the director, conditions to be imposed by the city with respect to the development project including those conditions required as a result of any environmental impact report prepared under the California Environmental Quality Act and the city’s environmental review process to eliminate or mitigate environmental impacts caused by or aggravated as a result of the development project.

     l.      An indemnity and insurance clause, in form and substance acceptable to the city attorney, requiring the applicant to defend and indemnify the city against any claims arising out of the development agreement process.

     m.    A provision that provides development agreements, or any part of a development agreement, may be subject to subsequent condemnation proceedings by the city.

     n.     Any other relevant provisions which may be deemed necessary by the city.

     B.     The applicant shall reimburse the city for all its reasonable and actual costs, fees, and expenses, including legal counsel and special counsel fees, for review, processing, negotiation, approval, of the development agreement. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.070 Review of application for development agreement.
     A.    After receipt of a completed application, including such information and supporting data as the director considers necessary to process the application, the director shall prepare a staff report and recommendation to the planning commission as to whether or not the agreement, as proposed or in an amended form (specifying the nature of the amendments), would be consistent with the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plan, and shall describe the public benefits provided by the proposed agreement.

     B.     Development agreements shall not take the place of any requirements in the city’s general plan, any applicable specific plan, or the city’s zoning code, including, but not limited to, any land use entitlements required for development on the subject property. To ensure consistency between a development agreement and any related land use approvals required for the development project, including conditions of approval imposed therein, and to the extent practicable, public hearings on a proposed development agreement may be held concurrently with the public hearings on all related land use approvals and all such approvals shall be made concurrently with the approval of the development agreement. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.080 Notice of public hearing.
     A.    All development agreements shall be considered at public hearings before both the planning commission and city council.

     B.     The form of notice to consider adoption of a development agreement before the planning commission or city council shall contain:

     1.     The time and place of the public hearing;

     2.     A general explanation of the matter to be considered including a general description of the area and/or property affected;

     3.     The location or locations where a copy of the proposed development agreement may be reviewed;

     4.     Other information required by specific provisions of this chapter or which the director considers necessary or desirable.

     C.     The time and manner of giving notice is by:

     1.     Publication at least once and at least ten days prior to the hearing in a newspaper of general circulation, circulated in the city.

     2.     Mailing of the notice at least ten days prior to the hearing to the applicant, to the owner of the property subject to the development agreement, to each local agency expected to provide fire, police, water, sewage, streets, roads, schools, or other essential facilities or services to the project whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected, to any person who has filed a written request for notice with either the city clerk, and to all persons shown on the last equalized assessment roll as owning real property within three hundred (300) feet of the property which is the subject of the proposed development agreement; provided, the director may direct that notice be given over a wider area to adequately inform interested persons. If the number of owners to whom notice is to be mailed is greater than one thousand (1,000), the director may as an alternative provide notice in the manner set forth in Section 65091 of the California Government Code, which includes posting a public hearing notice at the subject property and publishing a public hearing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of La Cañada Flintridge.

     D.    The planning commission or city council, as the case may be, may direct that notice of the public hearing to be held before it shall be given in a manner that exceeds the notice requirements prescribed by state law, but failure to comply with such procedure shall not invalidate a development agreement.

     E.     The notice requirements referred to in this chapter are declaratory of existing law (Government Code Sections 65867, 65090 and 65091). If and when state law prescribes any different notice requirement, notice shall be given in that manner.

     F.     The failure to receive notice by any person entitled to notice by law or this section does not affect the authority of the city to enter into a development agreement. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.090 Review by planning commission.
     Following a public hearing duly noticed in accordance with Section 11.80.080, the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed development agreement is consistent with the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plan. Said determination shall be forwarded to the city council for its consideration and action. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.100 Review by city council.
     A.    Following a public hearing duly noticed in accordance with Section 11.80.080, the city council shall consider the proposed development agreement. In order to approve a development agreement, the city council shall be required to find that the provisions of the development agreement are consistent with the city’s general plan and any applicable specific plan.

     B.     City council approval of a development agreement shall be by the adoption of an ordinance because a development agreement is a legislative act. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.110 Execution and recordation of development agreement.
     No later than ten days after the ordinance approving a development agreement takes effect, the city’s mayor or other authorized city official shall execute the development agreement, and the city clerk shall have the development agreement recorded in the official records of the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.120 Effect of development agreement.
     A.    When approved, a development agreement and any development control maps and all notations, references and regulations which are a part of the development agreement shall be considered part of this code. Development control maps include, but are not limited to, regulations intended to carry out any plan with respect to location or type of activities; height, bulk, siding or design of structures; location or design of open areas; and landscaping and other comparable regulations. In the case of any conflict with any other provisions of this code, such development agreement provisions shall take precedence.

     B.     Unless otherwise provided by the development agreement, the rules, regulations, and official policies governing permitted uses of the subject property, governing density, and governing design, improvement, and construction standards and specifications, applicable to development of the property subject to a development agreement, shall be those rules, regulations, and official policies in force at the time of execution of the development agreement.

     C.     A development agreement shall not prevent the city, in subsequent actions applicable to the property, from applying new rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with those rules, regulations, and policies applicable to the property as set forth herein, nor shall a development agreement prevent the city from denying or conditionally approving any subsequent development project application on the basis of such existing or new rules, regulations, and policies.

     D.    In the event that state or federal laws or regulations, enacted after a development agreement has been entered into, prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, such provisions of the development agreement shall be modified or suspended as may be necessary to comply with such state or federal laws or regulations. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.130 Irregularity in proceeding.
     Formal rules of evidence or procedure which must be followed in a court of law shall not apply to the consideration of a proposed development agreement. No action, inaction or recommendation regarding a development agreement shall be held void or invalid on the ground of the improper admission or rejection of evidence or by reason of any error or informality, as to any procedural matter whatsoever unless, after an examination of the entire case, including the evidence, a court of law finds that the error complained of was prejudicial and that by reason of the error the complaining party sustained and suffered substantial injury, and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. There is no presumption that error is prejudicial or that injury resulted if error is shown. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.140 Rules affecting development agreements.
     All development agreements shall be subject to the regulation and requirements of the laws of the state of California, the constitution of the United States and any codes, statutes and any court decisions, state or federal. In the event that any law, code, statute or decision made or enacted after a development agreement has been entered into prevents or precludes compliance with one or more provisions of the development agreement, then such provisions of the development agreement shall be modified or suspended in the manner and pursuant to the procedures specified in the development agreement, as may be necessary to comply with that law, code, statute or decision. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.150 Periodic review.
     A.    The city shall review development agreements which have been approved by the city council at least once every twelve (12) months from the date of their approval. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65865.1, the applicant shall have the duty to demonstrate its good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement at the time of such periodic review. The city’s cost for such periodic review shall be paid by the applicant to the city prior to the time of such review.

     B.     Not less than thirty (30), nor more than sixty (60), days prior to the anniversary date of a development agreement, and each anniversary date thereafter, the applicant shall submit to the director a letter setting forth the applicant’s good faith compliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement. Such letter shall be accompanied by documents and other information as may be necessary and available to enable the city to undertake its annual review of good faith compliance under the terms of the development agreement, and shall also state that such letter is submitted to the city pursuant to the requirements of Government Code Section 65865.1, as amended, and this chapter. Not less than thirty (30), nor more than sixty (60), days prior to the anniversary date of a development agreement, the director shall provide notice to the city council, at a regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, that a development agreement will be subject to annual review in accordance with this chapter.

     C.     The director shall review the applicant’s submission to ascertain whether applicant has complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement. Upon request of the director, the applicant shall furnish such additional documents or information as may be reasonably required and available to the applicant to enable director to make and complete its review hereunder. If the director finds good faith compliance by the applicant with the terms of the development agreement, it shall issue a certificate of compliance, certifying the applicant’s good faith compliance with the terms of the agreement through the period of the applicable annual review. Such certificate of compliance shall be in recordable form and shall contain such information as may be necessary in order to impart constructive record notice of the finding of good faith compliance hereunder. The applicant shall have the right to record the certificate of compliance, at the applicant’s sole cost, in the official records of the county of Los Angeles. At least ten days prior to making its determination, the director shall provide to the applicant copies of all staff reports and other information concerning the applicant’s compliance with the terms of the development agreement and the determination made by the director.

     D.    If the director finds that the applicant has not complied in good faith with the terms of the development agreement, it shall specify to the applicant in writing the respects in which the applicant has failed to comply. The director shall also specify a reasonable time for the applicant to comply with such terms for compliance, which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, and shall be reasonably related to the time necessary to adequately bring the applicant’s performance into good faith compliance with the development agreement. If the areas of noncompliance specified by the director are not perfected within such reasonable time limits prescribed by the director, then the development agreement shall be subject to modification or cancellation pursuant to this chapter and the provisions of Government Code Section 65865.1.

     E.     The director may refer any review to be conducted hereunder to the city council. Such referral shall be made by the director, together with a staff report on the director’s preliminary findings. Upon such referral, the city council shall conduct a noticed public hearing on the applicant’s compliance with the terms of the development agreement in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and Government Code Section 65865.1. If, after considering all the evidence at such public hearing, the city council finds and determines on the basis of substantial evidence that the applicant has not complied in good faith to the terms and conditions of the development agreement, then the city council shall specify to the applicant the respects in which the applicant has failed to comply and shall also specify a reasonable time for the applicant to comply with such terms which shall not be less than thirty (30) days, and shall be reasonably related to the time necessary to adequately bring the applicant’s performance into good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the areas of noncompliance specified by the city council are not perfected within such reasonable time limits, then the city council, by noticed hearing in accordance with Section 11.80.080, may terminate, modify or take such other action with regard to the development agreement.

     F.     The director’s determination of either compliance or noncompliance shall be made within thirty (30) days after the submission by the applicant of the required material hereunder, and, if the director refers the matter to the city council, then the determination by the city council shall be made within thirty (30) days after such referral. The issuance of the certificate of compliance by the director (or the city council on referral) shall conclude the review for the applicable period, and such determination shall be final and conclusive up to and including the date of the annual review hereunder.

     G.    All costs incurred by city for the annual review conducted under this chapter shall be borne by the applicant, including, but not limited to, the city’s retention of professionals. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.160 Amendment or cancellation by mutual consent.
     A.    Any development agreement may be cancelled or modified by mutual consent of the parties, but only in the manner provided for by California Government Code Section 65868, as amended. Any proposal to cancel or modify a development agreement shall be heard and determined in accordance with the same procedures specified by this chapter for approval of a development agreement.

     B.     If the parties to a development agreement, or their successors in interest, mutually agree to amend or cancel the development agreement as provided for in Government Code Section 65868 and this chapter, the city clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action recorded in the official records of the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.170 Cancellation by city.
     A.    If, at any time during the term of a development agreement the director determines that the applicant has not complied with the terms and conditions of the development agreement, the director shall provide the applicant thirty (30) days to cure any deficiency following notice to the applicant. Should the applicant fail to cure said deficiency, the director shall, pursuant to the notice provisions of Section 11.80.080, request that the planning commission conduct a public hearing at which the applicant must demonstrate good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. The burden of proof by substantial evidence of compliance by the applicant is upon the applicant. If such compliance cannot be shown, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council that it either commence proceedings to cancel the development agreement or recommend new terms and conditions intended to remedy the noncompliance.

     B.     The city council shall conduct a noticed hearing, as provided in Section 11.80.080, on the recommendations of the planning commission at which the applicant and any other interested person shall be entitled to submit such evidence and testimony as may be germane to the issue of the applicant’s good faith compliance with the terms of the development agreement. If the city council finds, based on substantial evidence, noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the development agreement and failure to cure the deficiency during the cure period provided in subsection A of this section, it may either cancel the development agreement upon giving sixty (60) days’ notice to the applicant, or in its discretion, may allow the development agreement to be continued by imposition of new terms and conditions intended to remedy such noncompliance. The city council may impose such conditions to the action it takes as it considers necessary to protect the interests of the city. The decision of the city council shall be final.

     C.     Any cancellation or imposition of new terms and conditions pursuant to this section shall be noticed in accordance with the procedures specified in Section 11.80.080.

     D.    If the city council cancels or modifies a development agreement as provided for in Government Code Section 65865.1 and this chapter for failure of the applicant to comply in good faith with the terms or conditions of the development agreement, the city clerk shall, after such action takes effect, have notice of such action recorded in the official records of the county of Los Angeles. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.180 Rights of the parties after cancellation.
     In the event a development agreement is cancelled, unless otherwise agreed, all rights of the applicant under the development agreement, shall terminate. Any and all benefits, including money or land, received by the city shall be retained by the city. Notwithstanding the above provision, the termination of a development agreement shall not prevent an applicant from completing a building or other improvements authorized pursuant to a valid building permit previously approved by the city or under construction at the time of termination, but the city may take any action permitted by law to prevent, stop, or correct any violation of law occurring during and after construction, and the applicant or any tenant shall not occupy any portion of the project or any building not authorized by a previously issued building permit. As used herein, “construction” shall mean work performed in good faith in reliance upon a valid building permit, and “completing” shall mean completion for beneficial occupancy for an applicant’s use, or if a portion of the project is intended for use by a lessee or tenant, then for such portion “completing” shall mean completion except for interior improvements such as partitions, duct and electrical run outs, floor covering, wall coverings, lighting, furniture, trade fixtures, finished ceilings and other improvements typically constructed by or for tenants of similar buildings. All such uses shall, to the extent applicable, be deemed nonconforming uses and shall be subject to the nonconforming use provisions of this code. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)

 

11.80.190 Fees.
     The applicant shall reimburse the city for all its reasonable and actual costs, fees, and expenses, including legal counsel and special counsel fees, for review, processing, negotiation, approval, and recordation of the development agreement. The city council may, by resolution, fix the schedule of fees and charges imposed for the filing and processing of each development agreement application and for the annual review. (Ord. 438 § 1, 2015)