Charter
Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Title 4 (Reserved)
Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Title 6 ANIMALS
Title 7 (Reserved)
Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Title 11 (Reserved)
Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Title 14 (Reserved)
Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Title 17 ZONING

Charter
History:
Ordaining Clause:
Article. I. Name and Seal.
Article II. Succession.
Article III. Boundaries.
Article IV. Powers of the City.
Article V. Elective Officers.
Article VI. The Council.
Article VII. City Manager.
Article VIII. Other Officers, Departments and Employees and Provisions Relating to Officers Generally.
Article IX. Election of Councilmembers and Council Districts.
Article X. Appointive Boards and Commissions.
Article XI. Retirement.
Article XII. Fiscal Administration.
Article XIII. Initiative, Referendum and Recall.
Article XIV. Definitions and Miscellaneous.

History:
 

APPENDIX B.

CHARTER

ADOPTED SEPTEMBER 1966

REVISED NOVEMBER 1968

REVISED NOVEMBER 1980

REVISED APRIL 1988

REVISED NOVEMBER 1998

Ordaining Clause:
 

We, the people of the City of Los Alamitos, State of California, do ordain and establish this Charter as the organic law of the City under the Constitution of the State.

Article. I. Name and Seal.
Sec. 100. Name of the City.
 

The municipal corporation now existing and known as the City of Los Alamitos shall remain and continue a body politic and corporate in name and in fact, by the name of the City of Los Alamitos.

 

Sec. 101. Seal.
 

The City shall have an official seal which may be changed from time to time by ordinance. The present official seal shall continue to be the official seal of the City until changed in the manner slated.

Article II. Succession.
Sec. 200. Rights and Liabilities.
 

The City of Los Alamitos shall remain vested with, and continue to have, hold and enjoy, all property, rights of property and rights of action of every nature and description now pertaining to this municipality, and is hereby declared to be the successor of the same. It shall be subject to all the obligations, debts, contracts and liabilities that now exist against this municipality.

 

Sec. 201. Ordinances.
 

All lawful ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations, or portions thereof, in force at the time this Charter takes effect and not in conflict with or inconsistent herewith, are hereby continued in force until the same have been duly repealed, amended, changed or superseded by proper authority.

 

Sec. 202. Continuance of Contracts and Public Improvements.
 

All contracts entered into by the City, or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter, shall continue in full force and effect. Public improvements for which proceedings have been instituted under laws existing at the time this Charter takes effect, at the discretion of the City Council, may be carried to completion as nearly as practicable in accordance with the provisions of such existing laws or may be continued or perfected under this Charter.

 

Sec. 203. Pending Actions and Proceedings.
 

No action or proceeding, civil or criminal, pending at the time when this Charter takes effect, brought by or against the City or any officer, office, department or agency thereof, shall be affected or abated by the adoption of this Charter or by anything here in contained, but all such actions or proceedings may be continued notwithstanding that functions, powers and duties of any officer, office, department or agency a party thereto, may be assigned or transferred by or under this Charter to another officer, office, department or agency, but in that event the same may be prosecuted or defended by the head of the office, department or agency to which such functions, powers and duties have been assigned or transferred by or under this Charter.

 

Sec. 204. Present Officers and Employees.
 

Each person who, at the time this Charter takes effect, holds an office of the City shall continue to hold the same office under this Charter for the term for which he/she was elected or appointed and until his/her successor is elected or appointed, and is qualified under this Charter. All employees of the City at the time this Charter takes effect shall continue to perform the duties of their respective employment subject to this Charter and ordinances, resolutions, orders, rules and regulations now existing or hereafter enacted. The rates of compensation of all officers and employees of the City in effect at the time this Charter takes effect shall remain in effect until lawfully changed.

 

Sec. 205. Emergency Powers.
 

Notwithstanding any general or special provision of this Charter, the Council, in order to insure continuity of governmental operations, in periods of emergency resulting from disasters of whatever nature, shall have the power and immediate duty:

 

(a) To provide for prompt and temporary succession to the powers and duties of all City officers of whatever nature and whether filled by election or appointment, the incumbents of which may become unavailable for carrying on the powers and duties of such offices, and

 

(b) To adopt such other measures as may be necessary and proper for insuring the continuity of City operations, including, but not limited to the financing thereof. In the exercise of the powers herein conferred, the City Council, in all respects, shall conform to the requirements of this Charter; except, that at such times they may make purchases and enter into contracts without calling for bids or giving notice therefore, to the extent the emergency requires such action.

 

Sec. 206. Effective Date of Charter.
 

This Charter shall take effect upon its approval by the Legislature.

Article III. Boundaries.
Sec. 300. Boundaries.
 

The boundaries of the City of Los Alamitos shall be the boundaries at the time this Charter takes effect and as may be changed from time to time in the manner allowed by law.

Article IV. Powers of the City.
Sec. 400. Powers.
 

The City shall have the right and power to make and enforce all laws and regulations in respect to municipal affairs, subject only to the restrictions and limitations provided in this Charter and in the Constitution of the State. Nothing in this Charter shall be construed to prevent or restrict the City from exercising or acting pursuant to, and the City is hereby authorized to exercise and act pursuant to, all rights, powers privileges and procedures heretofore or hereafter established, granted or prescribed by any law of the State or by other lawful authority, of which a municipal corporation might or could exercise, or act pursuant to, under said Constitution, unless the exercise thereof, or action pursuant to, is expressly prohibited by this Charter. The enumeration in this Charter of any particular power shall not be held to be exclusive of, or any limitation upon, the generality of the foregoing provisions of this section.

 

Sec. 401. Procedures.
 

The City shall have the power to and may act pursuant to any procedures established by this Charter, or, by State law where not in conflict with this Charter.

Article V. Elective Officers.
Sec. 500. Elective Officers.
 

The elective officers of the City of Los Alamitos shall consist of a City Council of five (5) or seven (7) members as hereinafter provided.

 

Sec. 501. Eligibility.
 

To be eligible to hold the office of Councilmember the person must meet the re quirements as set forth in the State law of the State of California, and, if the Council is divided into districts as hereinafter provided, he/she shall also be a resident and elector of the district within the City of Los Alamitos wherein he/she lives for a period thirty (30) days prior to the date his/her nomination papers are filed.

 

Sec. 501A. Election of Members; Term Limits.
 

A. No person shall serve more than three (3) consecutive terms of office as a member of the City Council. For the purpose of this Section, a “term” shall include service on the Council for any period of seven hundred thirty-one (731) consecutive days or longer.

 

B. Any person who has served three (3) consecutive terms as a Member of the City Council shall not be eligible to serve again until the expiration of at least three hundred sixty-five (365) consecutive days after the end of such person’s last term of office.

 

C. The term limits established by this Section shall apply prospectively only to those terms of office which commence on or after November 3, 1998.

(Passed by the voters as Measure E at the election of November 3, 1998)

 

Sec. 502. Vacancies.
 

A vacancy in the City Council from whatever cause arising shall be filled either by appointment of the City Council or by election. The City Council shall determine whether to fill a vacancy by election or by appointment; provided, however, if the City Council determines to fill a vacancy by appointment but fails to do so within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs, the Council shall forthwith cause an election to be held to fill the vacancy.

 

A person elected to fill a vacancy shall hold office for the entire unexpired term of the former incumbent.

 

A person appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the entire unexpired term of the former incumbent unless there remain two (2) years or more of said unexpired term on the date of appointment. In such case, the City Council shall decide by majority vote prior to such appointment whether the appointment shall be for the entire unexpired term or only until the next general municipal election. If the seat is filled by appointment only until the next general municipal election, then at said election the seat shall be filled by vote of the people.

 

If at said next general municipal election there are four (4) or more council seats to be filled, the three (3) persons each receiving the largest number of votes shall each serve a term of four (4) years while the person(s) elected to fill the remaining seat(s) shall serve for a term of two (2) years.

 

If a member of the City Council is absent from all regular meetings of the City Council for a period of sixty days consecutively from and after the last regular City Council meeting attended by such members, unless by permission of the City Council ex pressed in its official minutes or as provided in Section 1404, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or ceases to be a qualified elector of his/her district, his/her office shall become vacant and shall be so declared by the City Council.

 

Sec. 503. Compensation.
 

As compensation for their services, the Councilmembers shall each receive compensation at the respective rates in effect at the time this Charter becomes effective; provided that these rates of compensation may be changed by the majority vote of the electors of the City voting for such change in accordance with the State law of the State of California. Provided further, that the respective rates may also be changed according to any other applicable provision of the State law of the State of California.

 
Article VI. The Council.
Sec. 600. Powers.
 

All powers of the City shall be vested in the Council except as otherwise provided in this Charter.

 

Sec. 601. Composition.
 

The Council shall consist of five (5) Councilmembers as provided in this Charter, unless and until the Council is divided into districts or the Council is increased to seven (7) members, as herein provided, in which case the Council shall consist of seven (7) members. One (1) of the Councilmembers shall be Mayor. Each Councilmember, including the Mayor, shall have the right to vote on all questions coming before the Council. The Mayor shall be the presiding officer of the Council.

 

Sec. 602. Election of Mayor.
 

The Council shall elect one (1) of its members to act as Mayor. Said election shall be by roll call vote.

 

Sec. 603. Duties of the Mayor.
 

The Mayor, in addition to the powers and duties prescribed and allowed by the State law of the State of California and as prescribed elsewhere in this Charter, shall have the power and duty:

 

A. To report to the Council from time to time on the affairs of the City and to recommend for its consideration such matters as he/she may deem expedient.

 

B. To assume the primary but not the exclusive responsibility for interpreting to the people the policies, programs and needs of the City government and for informing the people of any major change in policy or program.

 

C. To exercise and perform such other powers and duties as may be delegated to or required of him/her by this Charter or by the Council if not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter or the State of California.

 

Sec. 604. Election of Mayor Pro Tempore.
 

The Council shall elect one of its members to act as Mayor Pro Tempore. Said election shall be by roll call vote.

 

Sec. 605. Duties of the Mayor Pro Tempore.
 

In the event of temporary absence or disability of the Mayor or during such period as a vacancy exists, the Mayor Pro Tempore shall preside at Council meetings, shall perform the other duties of the Mayor and perform such other duties as the Council may assign to him/her.

 

Sec. 606. Term of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore.
 

The Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore shall serve at the pleasure of the Council; however, the position of Mayor and Mayor Pro Tempore shall be reviewed after each general election.

 

Sec. 607. Meetings.
 

The Council shall hold regular meetings at such times as may be prescribed by ordinance or resolution and may adjourn or readjourn any regular meeting to a date and hour fixed in the order of adjournment and when so adjourned each adjourned meeting shall be a regular meeting for all purposes. Special meetings may be held as provided by law.

 

Sec. 608. Place of Meeting.
 

All meetings of the Council shall be open to the public, and shall be held in the Council Chambers in the City Hall or in such place to which any such meeting may be adjourned; provided, that if by reason of fire, flood or other emergency it shall be unsafe or impractical to meet at the regular meeting place, the Council may for the duration of the emergency meet at some other place designated in writing by the Mayor, or if he/she fails to act, by a majority of the Council.

 

Sec. 609. Proceedings and Quorum.
 

A majority of the then members of the Council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting, but a lesser number may adjourn from time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties as the Council may by ordinance prescribe. In the event all members of the Council are absent from any meeting, the City Clerk may declare the same adjourned to a stated day and hour in the manner provided by law. The Council shall judge all returns of City elections. It shall establish rules for the conduct of its proceedings and may evict any member or any other person for disorderly conduct at any meeting and may prosecute any member or other person for such conduct.

 

Each member of the Council and the City Clerk shall have the power to administer oaths and affirmations in any investigation or proceedings pending before the Council. The Council shall have the power to issue subpoenas, to compel by subpoena the attendance of witnesses and the production of documents and other evidence, to examine witnesses under oath and to take and hear evidence, in relation to any matter pending before it. Subpoenas shall be issued in the name of the City and be attested by the City Clerk. Disobedience of any subpoena or the refusal to testify upon other than legal grounds shall constitute a misdemeanor and shall be punishable in the same manner as violations of this Charter are punishable.

 

No action for the payment of money shall be taken at other than a regular or adjourned regular meeting.

 

The City Clerk shall call the roll and cause the ayes and noes to be entered in the minutes upon demand of any member or in the case of any action for the adoption of an ordinance, the payment of any money, the incurring of any debts, the appointment or removal of any officer, the granting of any franchise, the disposing of or leasing of City property, and the ordering or confirmation of any assessment for public improvements.

 

Sec. 610. Citizen Participation.
 

At each meeting the Council shall, if requested, grant any person, personally or through Counsel, reasonable opportunity to present grievances or offer suggestions for the betterment of City affairs, subject to such rules for orderly procedure as the Council or its Presiding Officer may prescribe.

 

Sec. 611. Ordinances and Resolutions.
 

The enacting clause of ordinances adopted by the Council shall be substantially as follows: “The City Council of the City of Los Alamitos does ordain as follows:”

 

All ordinances and resolutions shall be signed by the Mayor or in his/her absence the Mayor Pro Tempore, and attested by the City Clerk or in his/her absence, the Deputy City Clerk.

 

The adoption of ordinances and resolutions, the publication of ordinances and resolutions, the effective date of ordinances and resolutions, including urgency ordinances shall be governed by the State law of the State of California.

 

Sec. 612. Codification of Ordinances.
 

Any or all ordinances of the City which have been adopted and published in the manner required at the time of their adoption may at any time be compiled, consolidated, and rearranged as an Ordinance Code, and such Code may be adopted by reference, with the same effect as an ordinance, by the adoption of an ordinance for that purpose. Such Code need not be published in the manner prescribed for other ordinances, but not less than three (3) copies thereof shall be on file in the office of the City Clerk, for the use and examination of the public, for at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of such Code. Ordinances or portions of ordinances so codified shall be deemed repealed as of the effective date of such Code. Following the adoption of such Code, amendments to the Code shall be adopted and published as ordinances. The codification of some ordinances pursuant to this section shall not prevent the later codification of other ordinances in the same manner.

 

Detailed regulations pertaining to any subject such as the construction of buildings, plumbing, wiring or other subjects which require extensive regulations, when arranged as a comprehensive code, may likewise be adopted by reference in the manner provid ed in this section. Maps, charts, diagrams and similar material pertaining to or a part of any ordinance may also be adopted by reference in the same manner.

Article VII. City Manager.
Sec. 700. City Manager.
 

There shall be a City Manager who shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City. He/she shall be appointed by the affirmative vote of a least a majority of the members of the City Council and shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council; provided, however, that he/she shall not be removed from office except as provided in this Charter. He/she shall be chosen on the basis of his/her executive and administrative qualifications, with special reference to his/her actual experience in, and his/her knowl edge of accepted practice in respect to the duties of his/her office as herein set forth.

 

Sec. 701. Residence.
 

The City Manager shall establish such residence as the City Council may require pursuant to ordinance or resolution.

 

Sec. 702. Eligibility.
 

No person shall be eligible to receive appointment as City Manager while serving as a member of the City Council nor within one (1) year after he/she has ceased to be a member of the City Council.

 

Sec. 703. Compensation and Bond.
 

The City Manager shall be paid a salary commensurate with his/her responsibilities as Chief Administrative officer of the City, which salary shall be established by ordinance or resolution. The City Manager shall furnish a corporate surety bond conditioned upon the faithful performance of his/her duties in such form and in such amount as may be determined by the City Council.

 

Sec. 704. Powers and Duties.
 

The City Manager shall be the administrative head of the City government, and he/she shall be responsible to the City Council for the proper administration of all affairs of the City, and shall be given such powers and duties as the Council may from time to time provide by ordinance.

 

Sec. 705. Meetings.
 

The City Manager shall be accorded a seat at all meetings of the City Council and of all Boards and Commissions and shall be entitled to participate in their deliberations, but shall not have a vote. He/she shall receive notice of all special meetings of the City Council, and of all Boards and Commissions.

 

Sec. 706. Acting City Manager.
 

The City Manager may appoint an Acting City Manager to act in his/her behalf during his/her absence. Any such appointment by the City Manager shall be with the approval of the City Council; said approval to be given at the next meeting. If the position of City Manager becomes vacant or the City Manager is absent or is incapacitated to such an extent he/she cannot perform his/her duties, then the council may appoint an Acting City Manager until the position of City Manager is filled.

 

Sec. 707. Removal.
 

The City Manager shall not be removed from office during or within a period of ninety (90) days next succeeding any municipal election at which a member of the City Council is elected. At any other time the City Manager may be removed at a regular meeting of the City Council and upon the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the City Council. At least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of his/her removal, the City Manager shall be furnished with a written notice stating the Council’s intention to remove him/her and the reasons therefor. Within seven (7) days after receipt of such notice, the City Manager may by written notification to the City Clerk request a public hearing before the City Council, in which event the Council shall fix a time for a public hearing which shall be held at its regular meeting place before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period above referred to. The City Manager shall appear and be heard at such hearing. After furnishing the City Manager with written notice of his/her intended removal, the City Council may suspend him/her from duty, but his/her compensation shall continue for sixty (60) days. In removing the City Manager, the City Council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the City Council and the City Manager to present to each other and to the public all pertinent facts prior to the final action of removal.

 

Sec. 708. Noninterference with Administrative Service.
 

Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, no individual member of the Council shall interfere with the execution by the City Manager of his/her powers and duties, or order, directly or indirectly, the appointment by the City Manager, or by any of the department heads in the administrative service of the City, of any person to any office or employ ment, or his/her removal therefrom. Except for the purpose of inquiry, or report, the City Council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the City Manager, and neither the City Council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the City Manager, either publicly or privately. This section shall not apply to any officer appointed by the City Council or the members of his/her department.

Article VIII. Other Officers, Departments and Employees and Provisions Relating to Officers Generally.
Sec. 800. Officers.
 

The other officers of the City of Los Alamitos shall be a City Clerk, a City Treasurer, a City Attorney and a City Manager. The City Manager shall be appointed by the City Council and have the powers and duties as set forth in this Charter. The City Clerk and City Treasurer shall be appointed by the City Council and subject to the rights, powers and duties as set forth in this Charter. The City Attorney shall be appointed by the City Council and serve at their pleasure.

 

Sec. 801. Administrative Departments.
 

The City Council may provide by ordinance not inconsistent with this Charter, for the organization, conduct and operation of the several offices and departments of the City as established by this Charter, and for the creation of additional departments, divisions, offices, and agencies and for their consolidation, alteration or abolition. Each new department created by the City Council shall be headed by a department head.

 

The City Council, by ordinance or resolution, may assign additional functions or duties to officers, departments or agencies not inconsistent with this Charter. Where the positions are not incompatible, the City Council may combine in one person the powers and duties of two or more offices created or authorized by this Charter. The City Council shall provide for the number, titles, qualifications, powers, duties and compensation of all officers and employees.

 

Sec. 802. City Clerk, Powers and Duties.
 

The City Clerk shall have the power, and be required to perform the functions and responsibilities that the City Council may from time to time determine by ordinance or resolution.

 

Sec. 803. Treasurer.
 

The City Treasurer shall have the power, and be required to perform the functions and responsibilities that the City Council may from time to time determine by ordinance or resolution.

 

Sec. 804. City Attorney, Powers and Duties.
 

To become eligible for City Attorney, or Assistant City Attorney, the person appointed shall be an attorney at law, duly licensed as such under the laws of the State of California and shall have engaged in the practice of local government law for at least three (3) years prior to his/her appointment. The City Attorney shall have power and be required to perform the duties and responsibilities as the City Council may from time to time determine by ordinance or resolution.

Article IX. Election of Councilmembers and Council Districts.
Sec. 900. Election under Existing Law.
 

The City Councilmembers of the City of Los Alamitos shall, until the City of Los Alamitos is divided into districts as herein set forth, be elected at large under the then existing and applicable laws of the State of California.

 

Sec. 901. Division into Districts.
 

The City of Los Alamitos shall upon reaching an area of five (5) square miles or more, and eighteen thousand (18,000) population or more, divide itself into seven (7) Council manic Districts as provided in this Charter.

 

Sec. 902. Composition of Districts.
 

The City Council by ordinance, after the completion of the requirements as set forth in Section 901 of Article IX of this Charter, shall divide the City into seven (7) Council Districts to be effective before and after the next general municipal election. Said division shall not be changed for at least a period of two (2) years after the effective date of the ordinance so dividing the City into districts. The division of the district shall be based upon the following factors:

 

A. The major requirement is that the population of the districts shall be as nearly equalized as possible.

 

B. The districts shall be as nearly compact in shape as possible.

 

Sec. 903. Redefining of Districts.
 

The City shall, when necessary to comply with the requirements herein stated for Council Districts, redefine and establish said districts so as to comply with said requirements. At least every five (5) years the City Council shall review said districts to determine whether or not they comply with said requirements. No redistricting shall be required within three (3) years after the last districting.

 

Sec. 904. Election of Councilmembers.
 

If the requirements of Section 901 of Article IX have been fulfilled and there still remains more than one (1) year before the next general municipal election, the City Council shall, as soon as practicable, call a special election and elect two (2) Councilmembers (thereby increasing the Council to seven (7) members) at large from any area annexed after July 1, 1966 and the effective date of this Charter, whose terms shall be until the next general election.

 

At the next general municipal election, following the effective date of this Charter and each fourth (4th) year thereafter, there shall be elected to the City Council for a term of four (4) years, one (1) member each from districts 1, 3, 5 and 7 and at the general election held in 1970 and each fourth year thereafter there shall be elected to the City Council for a term of four (4) years, one (1) member each from districts 2, 4 and 6. In the original districting ordinance required by Section 902 of Article IX, the residency of the present Councilmembers whose terms expire in 1970, shall be included in districts 2, 4 and 6 respectively.

 

Sec. 905. Voting for Councilmembers.
 

Upon completion of the requirements of Section 901 of Article IX, each Councilmember shall be elected by the City at large and the candidate from each district receiving the highest number of votes from the City at large shall be elected to the City Council and represent his/her district upon qualifying in all other respects under the provisions of this Charter and the law of the State of California.

 

Sec. 906. General Municipal Elections.
 

(Adopted by Vote of the People 4/12/88)

 

The provisions of the law of the State of California applicable to General Law Cities, as such laws now exist and as they may hereafter be amended or superseded, shall in all respects govern elections in the City.

 

Sec. 907. Electors Signing Petitions.
 

The electors signing any petition for the nomination of any person to the office of Councilmember shall be residents of the district from which such person is to be nominated or has been elected. Only the names of electors who are residents of such district shall be counted in determining the sufficiency of any such petition.

Article X. Appointive Boards and Commissions.
Sec. 1000. In General.
 

The City Council may create by ordinance such Boards or Commissions as in its judgment are required and may grant to them such powers and duties as are consistent with the provisions of this Charter.

 

Sec. 1001. Present Existing Boards and Commissions.
 

All Boards and Commissions now existing and duly authorized in the City of Los Alamitos and the members thereof, shall continue until the normal expiration of their term or according to the ordinances or actions of the Council creating such Boards and Commissions or the appointment thereof.

 

Sec. 1002. Appropriations.
 

The City Council shall include in its annual budget such appropriation of funds as in its opinion shall be sufficient for the efficient and proper functioning of such Boards and Commissions.

 

Sec. 1003. Appointments. Terms.
 

The number of members to comprise such Boards and Commissions shall be specified by ordinance if not specified by this Charter. The members of each of such Boards or Commissions shall be appointed and shall be subject to removal, by motion of the City Council adopted by a majority vote. The members thereof shall be appointed from the qualified electors of the City, none of whom shall hold any paid office or employment in the City government and shall serve until their respective successors are appointed and qualified.

 

Sec. 1004. Composition of Boards and Commissions.
 

All Boards and Commissions shall be organized and conducted pursuant to the terms creating them. In the event that the ordinance establishing such Boards and Commissions does not specify the manner, the time of meetings and the composition thereof, said Boards and Commissions shall be organized and run according to acceptable and general standards then existing for similar Boards and Commissions and according to State law of the State of California.

 

Sec. 1005. Compensation. Vacancies.
 

The members of Boards and Commissions shall serve without compensation for their services as such but may receive reimbursement for necessary traveling and other expenses incurred on official duty when such expenditures have received authorization by the City Council.

 

Any vacancies in any Board or Commission, from whatever cause arising, shall be filled by appointment by the City Council. Upon a vacancy occurring leaving an unexpired portion of a term, any appointment to fill such vacancy shall be for the unexpired portion of such term. If a member of a Board or Commission is absent from three (3) consecutive meetings of such Board or Commission, unless by permission of such Board or Commission expressed in its official minutes, or is convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude, or ceases to be a qualified elector of the City, his/her office shall become vacant and shall be so declared by the City Council.

Article XI. Retirement.
Sec. 1100. Retirement.
 

The City Council by appropriate action may make provisions for a retirement program.

 

Sec. 1101. Vote by Employees.
 

Any program established by the City Council shall be voted upon and agreeable to a majority of the City employees who will be affected by the retirement program.

Article XII. Fiscal Administration.
Sec. 1200. Fiscal Year.
 

The fiscal year of the City government shall begin on the first day of July of each year and end on the thirtieth day of June of the following year.

 

Sec. 1201. Annual Budget. Preparation by the City Manager.
 

At such date as he/she shall determine, the City Manager shall obtain from each department head estimates of revenue and expenditures for his/her department, detailed in such manner as may be prescribed by the City Manager. In preparing the proposed budget, the City Manager shall review the estimates, hold conferences thereon with the respective department heads and may revise the estimates as he/she may deem advisable.

 

Sec. 1202. Budget. Submission to City Council.
 

At least thirty-five (35) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the City Manager shall submit to the City Council the proposed budget as prepared by him/her. After reviewing the same and making such revisions as it may deem advisable, the City Council shall determine the time for the holding of a public hearing thereon and shall cause to be published a notice thereof not less than ten (10) days prior to said hearing, by at least one insertion in a newspaper of general circulation within the City. Copies of the proposed budget shall be available for inspection by the public in the office of the City Clerk at least ten (10) days prior to said hearing.

 

Sec. 1203. Budget. Public Hearing.
 

At the time so advertised or any time to which such public hearing shall from time to time be adjourned, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the proposed budget, at which interested persons desiring to be heard shall be given such opportunity.

 

Sec. 1204. Budget. Adoption.
 

After the conclusion of the public hearing the City Council shall make any revisions of the proposed budget that it may deem advisable and shall adopt the budget. A copy thereof, certified by the City Clerk, shall be filed with the person retained by the City Council to perform auditing functions for the Council and a further copy shall be placed, and shall remain on file, in the office of the City Clerk where it shall be available for public inspection. The budget so certified shall be reproduced and copies made available for the use of the public and of departments, offices and agencies of the City.

 

Sec. 1205. Budget Appropriations.
 

From the effective date of the budget, the several amounts stated therein as proposed expenditures shall be and become appropriated to the several departments, offices and agencies. All appropriations shall lapse at the end of the fiscal year to the extent that they shall not have been expended or encumbered.

 

At any meeting after the adoption of the budget, the City Council may amend or supplement the budget by motion adopted by a majority vote so as to authorize the transfer of unused balances appropriated for one department to another department or to appropriate available funds not included in the budget or to cancel any appropriation not expended or encumbered.

 

The City Manager is authorized to make budgetary revisions among departmental appropriations. The City Manager is fully authorized to transfer monies and to expend monies and/or all funds, for departments and activities as he/she may determine neces sary to insure the proper operation and control of City business; except, that no such transfers shall be made in contravention to State law or City ordinances or exceed the total amount appropriated for each department or as amended by the City Council.

 

Sec. 1206. Contracts on Public Works.
 

Every project involving an expenditure of more than Ten Thousand (10,000) Dollars for the construction or improvement of public buildings, works, streets, drains, sewers, utilities, parks or playgrounds shall be let by the City Council by contract to the lowest responsible bidder after notice by publication in the official newspaper by one (1) or more insertions, the first of which shall be at least ten (10) days before the time for opening bids. Projects for the construction, resurfacing, maintenance or repair of streets, drains or sewers are excepted from the requirements of this paragraph, and the bidding requirements of the State of California, if such work is performed by a City or County of Orange Department.

 

All bids must be accompanied by either a certified or cashier’s check, or a bidder’s bond executed by a corporate surety authorized to engage in such business in California, made payable to the City. Such security shall be in an amount not less than that specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to therein, or if no amount be so specified, then in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the aggregate amount of the bid. If the successful bidder neglects or refuses to enter into the contract within the time specified in the notice inviting bids or in the specifications referred to herein, the amount of the bidder’s security shall be declared forfeited to the City and shall be collected and paid into its general fund and all bonds so forfeited shall be prosecuted and the amount thereof collected and paid into such fund.

 

The City Council may reject any and all bids presented and may advertise at its discretion.

 

The City Council, after rejecting bids, or if no bids are received, may declare and determine that in its opinion, based on estimates approved by the City Manager, the work in question may be purchased more economically on the open market, and after the adoption of a resolution to this effect by a majority vote of the Council, the Council may proceed to have said work done in the manner stated, without further observance of the provisions of this section. Such contracts likewise may be let without advertising for bids, if such work shall be deemed by the City Council to be of urgent necessity for the preservation of life, health or property, and shall be authorized by resolution passed by an absolute majority of the Council and containing a declaration of the facts constituting such urgency.

 

Sec. 1207. Taxation.
 

This City shall have the power and be subject to the same limitations with respect to taxation as a general law City of California.

 

Sec. 1208. Disbursement of Funds.
 

The City Manager shall have the power and the duty to supervise, and be responsible for, the disbursement of all monies and of all expenditures to insure that budget appropriations are not exceeded; audit all purchase orders before issuance; audit and approve before payment, all bills, invoices, payrolls, demands or charges against the City government; with the advice of the City Attorney when necessary, determines the regularity, legality and correctness of such claims, demands or charges; and draw warrants upon the City Treasurer for all claims and demands audited and approved as provided in this Charter, specifying the purpose for which drawn and the fund from which payment is to be made.

 

Sec. 1209. Claims and Demands. Applicability of State Procedure.
 

Procedures prescribed by the State Legislature governing the presentation, consideration and enforcement of claims against chartered cities or against officers, agents and employees thereof shall apply to the presentation, consideration and enforcement of claims against the City.

 

Sec. 1210. Demands Against the City.
 

All other demands against the City must be in writing and may be in the form of a bill, invoice, payroll, or formal demand. Each such demand shall be presented to the City Manager within one hundred (100) days after the last item of the account or claim accrued. The City Manager shall examine the same. If the amount thereof is legally due and there remains on his/her books an unexhausted balance of an appropriation against which the same may be charged, he/she shall approve such demand and draw his/her warrant on the City Treasurer therefor, payable out of the proper fund; otherwise he/she shall reject it. Objections of the City Manager may be overruled by the City Council and the warrant ordered drawn. Any person dissatisfied with the refusal of the City Manager to approve any demand, in whole or in part, may present the same to the City Council, which after examining the matter, may approve or reject a demand in whole or in part.

 

If a demand is one for an item not included within an approved budget appropriation, it shall require the approval of the City Council, following the adoption by it of an amendment to the budget authorizing such payment.

 

Sec. 1211. Requirement of Council Approval.
 

     Notwithstanding anything contained in this Charter to the contrary, the City Manager shall not approve any claim nor pay any demand without the prior approval of the majority of the City Council voting by roll call vote at a regular meeting of the City Council.

Article XIII. Initiative, Referendum and Recall.
Sec. 1300. In General.
 

The powers of the initiative and referendum and of the recall of elected City Officers are hereby reserved to the electors of the City. The provisions of the Elections Code of the State of California, as the same now exist or may hereafter be amended or superseded, governing the exercise of the power of recall of municipal officers, shall apply to the exercise of those powers in the City insofar as such provisions are not in conflict with the provisions of the Charter.

Article XIV. Definitions and Miscellaneous.
Sec. 1400. Definitions.
 

Unless the provision of the context requires otherwise, the following terms as used in this Charter shall have the following meaning:

A. “Shall” is mandatory and “may” is permissive.

 

B. “City” is the City of Los Alamitos and “office,” “department,” “board,” “Commission,” “Officer,” “department head,” or “employee” is an office, department, board, commission, officer, department head or employee, as the case may be, of the City of Los Alamitos.

 

C. “County” is the County of Orange.

 

D. “State” is the State of California.

 

Sec. 1401. Violations.
 

The violation of any provision of this Charter or of any ordinance of the City shall constitute a misdemeanor, and may be prosecuted in the name of the People of the State of California or may be redressed by civil action. Any such violation shall upon conviction be punishable by a fine of not exceeding five hundred (500) dollars or by imprisonment for a term of not exceeding six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

 

Sec. 1402. Severability.
 

If any provision of this Charter or the application thereof to any person or circumstances is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

 

Sec. 1403. Headings.
 

The headings given in this Charter to articles and sections thereof shall not affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of this Charter.

 

Sec. 1404. Absence from the State.
 

Any Councilmember may leave the state for a period not exceeding sixty (60) days without permission of the City Council upon filing.

 

Sec. 1405. Publication.
 

Notwithstanding any provisions of the law of the State of California or provisions of this Charter, if the City Council determines by motion that the required publication of any ordinance or resolution would jeopardize the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the City of Los Alamitos and that time does not permit the publication due to the lack of a daily newspaper being published and circulated within the City of Los Alamitos then such ordinance or resolution shall be posted in three (3) public places within the City of Los Alamitos designed by the City Council and also posted on or near the door of the Council Chambers.

 

Sec. 1406. Nepotism.
 

The Council shall not appoint any person to any salaried position in the City government who is a relative by blood or marriage within the second degree of any member of the Council, nor shall the City Manager nor any officer or department head appoint any relative of his/hers within such degree to any such position.

 

Sec. 1407. Official Bonds.
 

The City Council shall fix by ordinance or resolution the amounts and terms of the official bonds of all officials or employees who are required by this Charter or by ordinance to give such bonds. All bonds shall be executed by responsible corporate surety, shall be approved as to form by the City Attorney, and shall be filed with the City Clerk. Premiums on official bonds shall be paid by the City.

 

There shall be no personal liability upon, or any right to recover against, a superior officer, or his/her bond, for any wrongful act or omission of his/her subordinate, unless such superior officer was a party to, or conspired in, such wrongful act or omission.

 

Sec. 1408. Illegal Interest in Contracts.
 

No member of the Council or other officer or department head of the City shall have any financial interest in any contract, sale or transaction to which the City is a party if having such interest constitutes a violation of the State law pertaining to interest in contracts. Any such person having any such prohibited interest shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, in addition to such penalties as may be imposed by the court, such person shall forfeit his/her office. Any contract, sale or transaction in which there shall be any such prohibited interest shall become void at the election of the City when so declared by resolution of the Council.

 

Sec. 1409. Combination of Offices and Departments.
 

Where the positions are not in fact incompatible, the Council may, subject always to the restrictions of this Charter, combine under one officer or person the powers and duties of two or more offices or departments created or authorized by this Charter.

 

Sec. 1410. Oaths.
 

The City Clerk shall be responsible for administering all oaths as required by the State law, this Charter or ordinance.

 

Sec. 1411. Validity.
 

If any provision of this Charter, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Charter, and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.

Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS (Reserved)
Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
Chapter 1.12 ELECTIONS
Chapter 1.16 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES

Chapter 1.01 CODE ADOPTION
1.01.010 Adoption.
     There is adopted the “Los Alamitos Municipal Code,” as compiled, edited and published by Book Publishing Company, Seattle, Washington. (Ord. 590 § 1, 1995)

 

1.01.020 Title—Citation—Reference.
     This code shall be known as the “Los Alamitos Municipal Code” and it shall be sufficient to refer to said code as the “Los Alamitos Municipal Code” in any prosecution for the violation of any provision thereof or in any proceeding at law or equity. It shall be sufficient to designate any ordinance adding to, amending, correcting or repealing all or any part or portion thereof as an addition to, amendment to, correction or repeal of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code. References may be made to the titles, chapters, sections and subsections of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code and such references shall apply to those titles, chapters, sections or subsections as they appear in the code. (Ord. 590 § 2, 1995)

 

1.01.030 Reference applies to all amendments.
     Whenever a reference is made to this code as the “Los Alamitos Municipal Code” or to any portion thereof, or to any ordinance of the city of Los Alamitos, codified herein, the reference shall apply to all amendments, corrections and additions heretofore, now or hereafter made. (Ord. 590 § 3, 1995)

 

1.01.040 Title, chapter and section headings.
     Title, chapter and section headings contained herein shall not be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any title, chapter or section hereof. (Ord. 590 § 4, 1995)

 

1.01.050 Reference to specific ordinances.
     The provisions of this code shall not in any manner affect matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with ordinances which are therein specifically designated by number or otherwise and which are included within the code, but such reference shall be constructed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 590 § 5, 1995)

 

1.01.060 Ordinances passed prior to adoption of the code.
     The last ordinance included in this code was Ordinance No. 585, adopted October 10, 1994. The following ordinances, passed subsequent to Ordinance No. 585 but prior to adoption of this code, are adopted and made a part of this code: Ordinance No. 586, adopted February 27, 1995; Ordinance No. 587, adopted March 27, 1995; Ordinance No. 588, adopted April 10, 1995; and Ordinance No. 589, adopted March 13, 1995. Ordinance No. 588 specifically repeals and replaces Chapter 17.48, Adult Entertainment Businesses, of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code which is adopted by Ordinance No. 590. (Ord. 590 § 6, 1995)

 

1.01.070 Effect of code on past actions and obligations.
     The adoption of this code does not affect prosecutions for ordinance violations committed prior to the effective date of this code, does not waive any fee or penalty due and unpaid on the effective date of this code, and does not affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit posted, filed or deposited pursuant to the requirements of any ordinance. (Ord. 590 § 7, 1995)

 

1.01.080 Constitutionality.
     If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this code. (Ord. 590 § 8, 1995)

 

1.01.090 References to prior code.
     References in city forms, documents and regulations to the chapters and sections of the former city code shall be construed to apply to the corresponding provisions contained within this code. (Ord. 590 § 9, 1995)

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS (Reserved)

Chapter 1.08 CITY SEAL
1.08.010 Selected.
     A.    The city council, after viewing several proposals, does select as the official city seal that seal whose imprint is hereinafter set forth.

 



 

     B.     Said seal shall be used on all official documents pertaining to the city wherein a seal is necessary. (Ord. 36 §§ 2, 3, 1960)

Chapter 1.12 ELECTIONS
1.12.010 Date of election.
     The date of the general municipal election of the city is established to coincide with the date of the statewide general election to be held on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in each even-numbered year, and said general municipal election is ordered consolidated therewith. (Ord. 504 § 1, 1988)

 

1.12.020 Filing fees.
     A filing fee established by resolution of the city council shall apply to defray the costs of processing candidate’s nomination papers for elective offices at municipal elections held in the city of Los Alamitos. The filing fee shall be paid to the city clerk by each candidate for an elective office at the time the candidate’s nomination paper is filed with the city clerk. The city clerk shall pay to the city treasurer all fees received and said fees shall be deposited into the general fund. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 657 § 2, 2002)

Chapter 1.16 ARREST AND CITATION PROCEDURE
1.16.010 Notice to appear in court.
     A.    Whenever a person is arrested for any violation of any city, county or state law or ordinance within the city and such person is not retained in custody, the arresting officer may prepare in duplicate or triplicate, a written notice to appear in court, containing the name and address of such person, the license number of his or her vehicle, if any, the offense charged and the time and place when and where such person shall appear in court. The written notice to appear may also contain such other information as the arresting officer may deem necessary or proper.

     B.     The time specified in the notice to appear must be at least five days after such arrest.

     C.     The place specified in the notice to appear shall be the Municipal Court of the West Orange County Judicial District.

     D.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this code shall, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code or by statute, be guilty of a misdemeanor; provided, that where the city’s prosecuting attorney determines that such action would be in the interests of justice, the city’s prosecuting attorney may prosecute any such offense as an infraction. In the event a notice to appear is prepared as a misdemeanor, the city’s prosecuting attorney may nonetheless prosecute any such offense as an infraction. (Ord. 681 § 1, 2004; Ord. 585 § 1, 1994; Ord. 49 §§ 1—3, 1960)

 

1.16.020 Written promise to appear in court.
     A.    The arrested person, in order to secure his or her release from custody, must give his or her written promise to appear in court by signing the notice, and the officer shall deliver one copy of such notice to appear to the arrested person. The signed original and triplicate copy of such notice shall be retained by the officer, who shall thereupon release the person arrested from custody.

     B.     A written promise to appear in court may be complied with by appearance by counsel. (Ord. 49 §§ 4, 5, 1960)

 

1.16.030 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any person wilfully violating the written promise to appear in court shall be guilty of a misdemeanor regardless of the disposition of charge upon which he or she was originally arrested. (Ord. 49 § 6, 1960)

Chapter 1.20 GENERAL PENALTY
1.20.010 Violation—Penalty.
     A.    Whenever in this code or in any other ordinance of the city or in any rule, regulation or order promulgated by any officer or agency of the city under authority duly vested in him or her or if any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, or the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful or an offense or a misdemeanor, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, if any section of this code is specifically deemed to be an infraction, as specified in the applicable section, chapter or title, it shall be treated as an infraction. In addition, unless otherwise specifically provided in this code, and as prescribed by Section 42001 of the Vehicle Code of the state, every person convicted of an infraction involving a vehicle shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00), and for a second conviction within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00), and for a third or any subsequent conviction within a period of one year, by a fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). A pedestrian convicted of an infraction for a violation of this code as adopted pursuant to the Vehicle Code of the state, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding fifty dollars ($50.00).

     C.     Notwithstanding anything contained in this code, the prosecutor, in his or her sound discretion, may prosecute a violation of this code as an infraction, rather than as a misdemeanor. The prosecutor may also reduce or agree to the reduction of a previously filed misdemeanor to an infraction.

     D.    Notwithstanding anything contained in this code, every person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation convicted of an infraction for violation of any provision of this chapter other than one covered in subsection B of this section, shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, a fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation of the same section within a year and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation of the same section within one year. A fourth violation within one year shall constitute a misdemeanor.

     E.     In addition to the penalties provided by this section, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this code, or the provisions of any code adopted by reference by this code, shall be deemed a public nuisance, subject to abatement in accordance with law.

     F.     Each day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this code is committed, continued or permitted, constitutes a new and separate offense. (Ord. 14-01 § 1, 2014; Ord. 128 § 4, 1965)

Chapter 1.24 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES AND PENALTIES
1.24.010 Purpose and intent.
     A.    This chapter authorizes the imposition of administrative fines on any person who violates any provision of this code in order to encourage and obtain compliance with the provisions of this code for the benefit and protection of the entire city. This chapter governs the imposition, enforcement, collection and administrative review of all administrative fines imposed under authority of California Government Code Section 53069.4 and the police power of the city.

     B.     The issuance of citations imposing administrative fines may be performed at the discretion of the officials of the city authorized hereunder; and the issuance of a citation to any person constitutes but one remedy of the city to address violations of the code by any person and to obtain immediate compliance. By adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, the city does not intend to limit its authority to employ any other remedy, civil or criminal, to address any violation of this code by any person, which the city may otherwise pursue.

     C.     Every person who applies for and receives a permit, license, land use approval (e.g., subdivision map, conditional use permit, variance) or any other approval required by the city shall comply with all conditions imposed upon the issuance of such permit, license or approval. A violation of any condition of such permit, license or approval shall be subject to an administrative fine under the provisions of this chapter. Likewise, any person who fails to obtain any permit, license, land use approval or any other approval from the city when such a person is so required by the code shall be subject to an administrative fine pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Because of the serious blighting conditions that result from persistent or prolonged failure to comply with the provisions of this code and the effect of such conditions on the desirability and marketability of surrounding properties and the adverse impacts on the public health, safety and welfare, this chapter imposes strict civil liability upon the owners of real property for all violations of this code existing on their real property. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.020 Definitions.
     The following definitions shall apply for purposes of administering this chapter:

     “Citation” means an administrative citation issued pursuant to this chapter to remedy a violation.

     “Citee” means any person served with an administrative citation charging him or her as a responsible person for a violation of this code.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos or his or her designee.

     “Code” means the Los Alamitos Municipal Code and any code adopted by reference.

     “Code enforcement officer” means any employee or agent of the city of Los Alamitos designated by the city manager to enforce any provision of this code who has issued a citation pursuant to this chapter.

     “Costs” shall have the meaning set forth in California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1033.5, including, without limitation, attorneys’ fees. In addition to such items, all of the following shall be included within the definition of “costs”:

     1.     Personnel costs of the city, as actually incurred by the city (for contractors and consultants) or based on established rates of employee costs as adopted by resolution of the city council from time to time. Such personnel costs shall include, but not be limited to, the costs incurred by the city to pay any contractor to abate a public nuisance.

     2.     Costs of administrative hearings, including, hearing officer costs and reporter costs.

     3.     Accrued interest at the maximum rate established by law.

     “Day” means a calendar day.

     “Department” means any department of the city of Los Alamitos that shall have issued an administrative citation.

     “Hearing officer” means the person, whether a city employee or third party, selected by the city manager to serve as the hearing officer for administrative hearings held pursuant to this chapter.

     “Issuance,” “issued” or “served” means either of the following:

     1.     The preparation and service in the same manner as a summons in a civil action in accordance with Article 3 (commencing with Section 415.10) of Chapter 4 of Title 5 of Part 2 of the Code of Civil Procedure; or

     2.     Mailing by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the address of the responsible person, the citee, or the owner of the subject property, as shown on the county of Orange last equalized assessment roll or the supplemental roll, whichever is more current, as the case may be. Service shall be deemed complete at the time of deposit into the mail.

     “Nontransient violation” means any violation of this code that pertains to zoning, building, plumbing, electrical, or other similar structural or zoning issues, that does not create an immediate danger to health or safety.

     “Person” means a natural person or a legal entity that is also an owner, tenant, lessee or other person with any right to possession or control of the property where a violation of this code exists.

     “Responsible person” means a person who causes a violation of this code to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue to exist, by his or her action or failure to act, or whose agent, employee, or independent contractor causes a violation to occur, or allows a violation to exist or continue. There is a rebuttable presumption that the record owner of a parcel, as shown on the county of Orange latest equalized property tax assessment rolls, and a lessee of a parcel has notice of any violation existing on such property. For the purposes of this chapter, there may be more than one responsible person for a violation.

     “Transient violation” means any violation of this code other than a nontransient violation.

     “Violation” or “violates” refers to any violation of any provision of this code, the failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any permit, license, land use approval, or any other approval issued to a person under or pursuant to this code, and the failure to obtain any permit, license, land use approval, or any other approval required pursuant to this code. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.030 Administrative citations.
     A.    An administrative citation may be issued to any responsible person for a violation of any provision of this code, for a failure to comply with any condition or requirement imposed on any permit, license, land use approval or other approval issued under or pursuant to this code, or the failure to obtain any permit, license, land use approval, or any other approval required pursuant to this code.

     B.     Any peace officer, code enforcement officer or any other person designated by the city manager and/or the code may issue an administrative citation to a responsible person pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     A citee shall be liable for and shall pay to the city the fine(s) described in the citation unless: (1) such person corrects the violation or violations described in the citation within the period specified in the citation; or (2) such person appeals the imposition of the fine(s) by requesting an administrative hearing, as provided herein, and is relieved of the obligation to pay the fine(s). The payment of fines shall not relieve any person from any violation of the provisions of the code for which such fines have been imposed and paid. Any such person shall continue to be responsible for complying with the provisions of the code and correcting any and all violations of the code.

     D.    Each administrative citation shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name of the person charged with any violation of the code;

     2.     The date(s) on which the person violated the code;

     3.     The location where the violation occurred;

     4.     The section(s) of the code violated and a description of the violation;

     5.     A description of the action required to correct the violation;

     6.     The amount of the fine to be imposed for each violation of the code;

     7.     A description of the fine payment process, including a description of the time within which and the place to which the fine shall be paid;

     8.     A description of the administrative citation review process, including the time within which the administrative citation may be contested and the place from which an administrative hearing request form may be obtained;

     9.     The name and signature of the code enforcement officer who issued the citation;

     10.   The date the citation is issued;

     11.   Any other information deemed necessary by the city manager for enforcement or collection purposes.

     E.     Each and every day a violation of the code exists constitutes a separate and distinct offense and shall be subject to a separate administrative fine or penalty. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.040 Administrative fines.
     A.    Each person who is issued a citation shall be subject to the imposition and payment of an administrative fine or fines as provided herein.

     B.     The amount of the administrative fines shall be established by resolution of the city council.

     C.     In the case of a violation of any transient violation, a fine shall imposed without an opportunity to cure or correct such violation, and the citee shall be required to abate the violation, if necessary, immediately.

     D.    In the case of a violation of any nontransient violation, the fine(s) imposed by the citation shall not become effective for fifteen (15) days following the date on which the citation is issued for the purpose of allowing the citee to correct the violation without incurring any liability to the city for the payment of such fine(s). However, the director of the department that issued the citation may, in his or her sole discretion, extend the period for up to thirty (30) additional days; provided that the citee demonstrates that he or she has made substantial progress to correct the violation, that he or she has been diligent in correcting the violation and that he or she was unable to correct the violation within the initial fifteen (15) day period from the issuance of the citation. The citee must submit a written request, within five business days of the issuance of the citation, to such director seeking an extension. The request shall contain a description of the corrections made, the corrections remaining to be made, the date when the violation shall be corrected, and the facts indicating why correcting the violation is not possible or practicable within the initial fifteen (15) day period. The director of the department that issued the citation shall respond in writing within five business days of receipt of the request; and the decision of the director shall be final. Unless the citee corrects the violation(s) described in the citation within the fifteen (15) day period from the issuance of the citation or such other extended period as may have been granted, the fine(s) imposed by the citation shall become effective on the sixteenth day following the issuance of the citation and the fine(s).

     E.     All administrative fines imposed hereunder shall be made payable to the city of Los Alamitos. Payment of a fine shall not excuse the citee from complying with the provision of the code. The issuance of a citation or payment of any fine, or both, shall not bar the city from instituting any other enforcement action or remedy to obtain compliance with the provisions of the code, including the issuance of additional civil and/or criminal citations. In the event such other enforcement action includes a court action, and the citation has not been both appealed and resolved in the citee’s favor, the court may include in any order issued by that court, an order or judgment requiring payment of any fines theretofore issued and unpaid. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.050 Administrative hearing requests.
     A.    Any citee may contest the citation and the proposed fine by filing a written request for an administrative hearing. To request a hearing, the citee shall sign and file the request form provided by the city clerk. The request form shall state the grounds for contesting the citation and/or the proposed fine. A citee may contest the citation and the proposed fine by denying that the citee owns, possesses, or controls the property where the violation exists, denying that the citee is responsible for the violation described in the citation, denying that a violation exists or existed, or proving that the violation was corrected within the period described in the citation or such further period granted by the applicable director. A citee may not raise any issue or defense at the hearing, or in any subsequent court action, that was not included on the request form.

     B.     To be effective, the request for an administrative hearing must be filed with the city clerk within ten (10) days of the date the citation was issued. If the citee mails the request form, the request form shall be deemed filed with the city clerk on the date on which it is received in the office of the city clerk.

     C.     A citee who has requested an administrative hearing must deposit with the city the amount of the proposed fine to ensure his or her appearance at the hearing. A request for a hearing shall not be complete and shall not be accepted unless it is accompanied by the deposit required by this section.

     D.    Notwithstanding subsection C of this section, any citee who intends to request an administrative hearing and is financially unable to make the advance deposit of the fine or penalty as required herein, may file a request for an advance deposit hardship waiver. The citee shall complete an advance deposit hardship waiver form and return it to the city manager along with the written request for hearing. The citee may request an advance deposit hardship waiver form by telephone, mail or in person, but shall be solely responsible for assuring its receipt, completing and returning it within the required time. The city manager may waive the requirement of an advance deposit and issue the advance deposit hardship waiver only if the citee submits the required advance deposit hardship waiver form and includes a sworn affidavit and any supporting documents or materials demonstrating to the satisfaction of the city manager that it would be a significant financial detriment on the citee to deposit the full amount of the fine or penalty in advance of the hearing. The requirement for depositing the full amount of the fine or penalty shall be delayed until the city manager makes this determination. Written notice of the city manager’s determination on the hardship waiver shall be served on the citee. The notice shall include a brief description of the reasons for the city manager’s determination to issue or not issue the advance deposit hardship waiver. The written determination of the city manager shall be final. If the city manager determines not to issue an advance deposit hardship waiver, the citee shall remit the deposit amount to the city manager within five days of service of that decision.

     E.     In the event that the citee files a timely request for a hearing, the city manager shall advise the citee by letter of the date, time and place set for the hearing at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the hearing. The hearing shall be set on a date that is no less than fifteen (15) days and no more than sixty (60) days from the date the request for a hearing is filed with the city in accordance with this section. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.060 Conduct of administrative hearings.
     An administrative hearing conducted pursuant to this chapter shall comply with the following:

     A.    The hearing shall be conducted by a hearing officer on the date, time and place specified in the notice issued pursuant to Section 1.24.050(E). The hearing shall proceed solely on the issues or defenses raised in the request for a hearing filed by the citee. All matters not contested in said request shall be deemed admitted.

     B.     The city shall have the burden to establish the truth of any matter in the citation that has been contested by the citee by a preponderance of the evidence. In addition, the city may present such other evidence and reports as may be necessary or helpful to the hearing officer to resolve the issues raised by the citee. If the code enforcement officer submits an additional written report concerning the citation to the hearing officer, then a copy of such report shall be served on the citee by certified mail, return receipt requested at least five days prior to the date of the hearing.

     C.     The citee shall be given the opportunity to testify and to present written and oral evidence relevant to the matters raised in the request regarding the violation(s) described in the citation.

     D.    The citation and any additional report submitted by the code enforcement officer shall be admitted into evidence and shall constitute prima facie evidence of all matters contained therein.

     E.     The hearing shall be conducted informally and the rules of evidence need not be followed provided that the decision of the hearing officer on any material issue may not be based upon hearsay evidence alone.

     F.     The failure of the citee to appear at the administrative hearing shall constitute forfeiture of the fine and a failure to exhaust his or her administrative remedies. Such failure to appear shall constitute an admission of the truth of all matters contained in the citation and a validation of the fine(s) imposed in the citation, which shall be ordered in the decision of the hearing officer. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.070 Administrative hearing officer and decisions.
     A.    The hearing officer shall be selected by the city manager in a manner consistent with applicable law. If the hearing officer selected is not an employee of the city, he or she may be compensated for the time expended in providing such service based upon a written agreement for that purpose. The hearing officer’s employment or compensation shall not be based on the number of citations affirmed or denied by the hearing officer.

     B.     The hearing officer may continue the hearing on a citation upon the request of the citee, or the citee’s representative, or the representative of the city, upon a showing of good cause. All continuance requests shall be made in person at or before the hearing. If the continuance is granted, a new hearing date shall be set within fifteen (15) days. The hearing officer shall have the authority to issue subpoenas.

     C.     After considering all the evidence and testimony submitted at the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue his or her written decision on the contested citation within fifteen (15) days. The decision of the hearing officer shall either uphold or deny the citation, or any portion thereof, and state the facts and reasons supporting the decision. If the citation is upheld, the hearing officer also shall order the imposition of a fine in the amount stated in the citation, plus any costs incurred and requested by the city, and compliance with the code within five days. If the citation is denied, the hearing officer shall order the return of the deposited fine, which return shall occur within sixty (60) days following the written order of the hearing officer. The written decision shall be filed with the city clerk and the citee shall be served with a copy thereof.

     D.    All decisions and orders of a hearing officer shall become final unless appealed for judicial review by the citee as provided herein. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.080 Judicial review.
     A.    The citee or the city may seek judicial review of the decision of the hearing officer in accordance with the provisions of California Government Code Section 53069.4 by filing an appeal with the superior court within twenty (20) days after service of the hearing officer’s written decision upon the citee pursuant to section 1.24.070(C). No appeal shall be permitted from a decision based upon the failure of the citee or the city to appear at the administrative hearing or upon any other waiver of the administrative hearing by the citee or the city.

     B.     If an appeal of any decision or order of a hearing officer that ordered the citee to pay any fine(s) and/or costs to the city is affirmed, in whole or part, the judicial officer hearing the appeal shall enter an order requiring the citee to pay such fine(s) and/or costs to the city and said order on appeal shall constitute a money judgment in favor of the city against the citee. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

 

1.24.090 Collection of fines.
     A.    Each final order of a hearing officer that establishes the amount of fines or costs payable by a citee to the city shall constitute a money judgment. Each such money judgment shall be enforceable pursuant to the general laws of the state of California.

     B.     Each final order of a hearing officer that establishes the amount of fines or costs payable by a citee to the city also shall constitute a sister state judgment. To enforce any such sister state judgment, the city may apply for the entry of a judgment pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 1710.10) of Title 11 of Part 3 of the Code of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 686 § 1, 2005)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL
Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
Chapter 2.16 CITY TREASURER
Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY
Chapter 2.24 CITY ENGINEER
Chapter 2.28 POLICE DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.29 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
Chapter 2.30 CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES GENERALLY
Chapter 2.32 CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES MEETING PROCEDURES
Chapter 2.36 PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION
Chapter 2.38 PLANNING COMMISSION
Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC COMMISSION
Chapter 2.52 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
Chapter 2.54 BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS
Chapter 2.56 EMERGENCY SERVICES
Chapter 2.60 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Chapter 2.64 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Chapter 2.65 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF EMINENT DOMAIN AND INCLUSION OF RESIDENTIALLY-ZONED PROPERTY

Chapter 2.04 CITY COUNCIL
2.04.010 Regular meetings.
     The regular meetings of the city council shall be held on the third Monday in each month to commence at the hour of six p.m. Study sessions shall be limited to public sessions of the city council, along with any other boards, commissions or public bodies if deemed necessary by the presiding officer, involving detailed discussions without final action of any kind by the city council and may be commenced at any time consistent with the notice requirements of the Ralph M. Brown Act and the notice and call therefor. Closed session matters, if any, shall commence at the hour of five p.m. or as soon thereafter as is deemed necessary by the presiding officer. Regular meetings shall be held in the council chamber of the City Hall, 3191 Katella Avenue, or in such other place within the city limits to which the meeting may be adjourned. When the day for any regular meeting falls on a legal holiday, no meeting shall be held on the holiday, but a regular meeting shall be held at the same hour on the following business day. (Ord. 12-02 § 1, 2012; Ord. 679 § 1, 2004; Ord. 678 § 1, 2004; Ord. 646 § 1, 2001; Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 321 § A, 1975; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.020 Special meetings.
     At the direction of the mayor or two members of the city council, the city clerk or city manager may call a special meeting at any time by delivering or by mailing written notice to each councilmember and to each newspaper of general circulation, radio or television station requesting notice in writing. Such notice must be delivered personally or by mail and shall be received at least twenty-four (24) hours before the time of such meeting as specified in the notice. The call and notice shall specify the time and place of the special meeting and the business to be transacted. No other business shall be considered at such meetings. Such written notice may be disposed with as to any councilmember who at or prior to the time the meeting convenes files with the city clerk a written waiver of notice. Such waiver may be given by telegram. Such written notice may also be dispensed with as to any councilmember who is actually present at the meeting at the time it convenes. The call and notice shall be posted at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meeting in a location that is freely accessible to members of the public. (For special meetings see Government Code Section 54956; for emergency meetings see Government Code Section 54956.5.) (Ord. 12-03 § 1, 2012; Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.030 Meeting to be public—Exception for closed sessions.
     A.    All regular and special meetings on the city council shall be public; provided, however, the city council may hold closed sessions during a regular meeting or special meeting, from which the public may be excluded, for the purpose of considering matters permitted by the laws of the state of California.

     B.     No member of the city council, employee of the city, or any other person present during closed session of the council shall disclose to any person the content or substance of any discussion which took place during the closed session unless the city council shall authorize the disclosure of such information by majority vote. No record or transcript of such closed session shall be made without approval of a majority of the city council. If such record or transcript is made it shall be kept in the confidential files of the office of the city attorney. (For closed sessions see Government Code Sections 54954.5 and 54956.7 through 54957.1.) (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.040 Agenda.
     All reports, communications, ordinances, resolutions, contract documents or other matters to be submitted to the council at a city council meeting shall be delivered to the city clerk prior to the deadline established by administrative policy. The city clerk shall prepare the agenda under the direction of the city manager. Any councilmember desiring to place an item on the agenda shall accordingly inform the city clerk and city manager and shall provide any documentation and information on the item prior to the agenda deadline. The agenda shall be made available to the councilmembers on the Friday preceding the Monday council meeting to which it pertains. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.050 Council correspondence.
     Authority of city manager and city clerk. The city manager and city clerk are authorized to open and examine all mail or other written communications addressed to the city council and to give it immediate attention to the end that all administration business referred to in such communications and not necessarily requiring council action may be acted upon between council meetings. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.060 Order of business.
     The business of the council shall be taken up for consideration and disposition in accordance with policy resolutions which are from time to time adopted by the city council. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.070 Preparation of minutes— Retention of tapes.
     The city clerk shall have exclusive responsibility for preparation of the minutes, and any directions for change in the minutes shall be made only by majority action of the city council. (Ord. 10-03 § 1, 2010; Ord. 632 § 1, 2000; Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 3, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.080 Reading of minutes.
     Unless the reading of the minutes of a council meeting is ordered by a majority vote of the council, such minutes may be approved without reading if the city clerk has previously furnished each councilmember with a copy. No minutes shall be official until approved by the council. (Ord. 598 §

1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.090 Presiding officer.
     The mayor shall be the presiding officer at all meetings of the city council. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall preside. In the absence of the mayor and mayor pro tempore, the city clerk shall call the council to order, whereupon a temporary presiding officer shall be elected by the councilmembers present to serve until the arrival of the mayor or the mayor pro tempore or until adjournment. Wherever in this chapter the term “mayor” is used, it shall apply equally to the presiding officer as defined in this section. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.100 Election of mayor and mayor pro tempore.
     A.    Annually, at the first regularly scheduled city council meeting in December, the city council shall elect a member of the city council to serve as mayor. Immediately after the mayoral election, the newly elected mayor shall conduct a city council election to select a mayor pro tempore.

     B.     At any regular or regular adjourned meeting of the city council, and upon motion duly adopted by a majority of the entire council, as then constituted, the mayor or mayor pro tempore, or both, may be removed from that office and thereupon his, her or their successor(s) shall be elected by the members of the city council. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 4, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.110 Powers and duties of presiding officer.
     A.    Participation. The presiding officer may move, second, debate and vote from the chair.

     B.     Question to Be Stated. The presiding officer or such member of the city staff as he or she may designate shall verbally restate each question immediately prior to calling for the vote. Following the vote, the city clerk may announce whether the question carried or was defeated. The presiding officer in his or her discretion may publicly explain the effect of a vote for the audience, or he or she may direct a member of the city staff to do so, before proceeding to the next item of business.

     C.     Signing of Documents. The presiding officer shall sign all ordinances, resolutions, contracts and other documents necessitating his or her signature which were adopted in his or her presence, unless he or she is unavailable, in which case the signature of an alternate presiding officer may be used.

     D.    Sworn Testimony. The presiding officer may require any person addressing the city council to be sworn as a witness and to testify under oath, and the presiding officer shall so require if directed to do so by a majority vote of the council. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.120 Rules of debate.
     A.    Getting the Floor. Every councilmember desiring to speak shall first address the chair, gain recognition by the presiding officer and shall confine him or herself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and indecorous language.

     B.     Questions to Staff. Every councilmember desiring to question the city staff shall, after recognition by the presiding officer, address his or her questions to the city manager, the city clerk or the city attorney, who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiry or designate a member of the staff for that purpose.

     C.     Interruptions. A councilmember, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer unless a point of order of business or personal privilege is raised by another councilmember. If a councilmember, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if determined to be in order, he or she may proceed. Members of the city staff after recognition by the presiding officer shall hold the floor until completion of their remarks or until recognition is withdrawn by the presiding officer.

     D.    Points of Order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order subject to the right of any councilmember to appeal to the council. If an appeal is taken, the question shall be: “Shall the decision of the Presiding Officer be sustained?” A majority vote shall conclusively determine such question of order.

     E.     Point of Personal Privilege. The right of a councilmember to address the council on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity, character or motives are questioned or where the welfare of the council is concerned. A councilmember raising a point of personal privilege may interrupt another councilmember who has the floor only if the presiding officer recognizes the privilege.

     F.     Limitation of Debate. No councilmember shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any particular subject until every other councilmember desiring to do so shall have spoken. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.130 Remarks of councilmember and synopsis of debate.
     A councilmember may request through the presiding officer the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the council entered in the minutes. If the council consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.140 Protest against council action.
     Any councilmember shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from, or his or her protest against any action of the council entered in the minutes. Such dissent or protest to be entered in the minutes shall be made in the following manner: “I would like the minutes to show that I am opposed to this action for the following reasons. . .” (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.150 Rules of order.
     Except as provided in this code, the City Charter, other rules adopted by the city council, or applicable provisions of state law, the procedure of the council shall be governed by majority vote of the city council. Robert’s Rules of Order may be used as a guide but shall not be conclusive authority on any question of order or procedure. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.160 Failure to observe rules of order.
     Rules adopted to expedite the transaction of the business of the council in an orderly fashion are deemed to be procedural only and the failure to strictly observe such rules shall not affect the jurisdiction of the council or invalidate any action taken at a meeting that is otherwise held in conformity with laws. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.170 Addressing the council.
     A.    Manner of Addressing Council. Each person desiring to address the council shall step up to the microphone in the front of the council chamber, is requested to state his or her name and address for the record, state the subject he or she wishes to discuss, state whom he or she is representing if he or she represents an organization or other persons, and, unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council, shall limit his or her remarks to three minutes at the time an agenda item is called and five minutes during oral communications. All remarks shall be addressed to the council as a whole and not to a member thereof. No question shall be asked of a councilmember or a member of the city staff without the permission of the presiding officer.

     B.     Spokesperson for Group of Persons. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the council on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the council and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member of the group, to limit the number of such persons addressing the council.

     C.     After Motion. After motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the council from the audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by a majority vote of the council. (Ord. 11-05 § 1, 2011; Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.180 Rules of decorum.
     A.    Councilmembers. While the council is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the council or disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer. Members of the council shall not leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer.

     B.     Employees. Members of the city staff and employees shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as are applicable to the city council, with the exception that members of the city staff may leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer.

     C.     Persons Addressing the Council. Any persons making impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the council shall be called to order by the presiding officer and, if such conduct continues, may at the discretion of the presiding officer be ordered barred from further audience before the council during that meeting.

     D.    Members of the Audience. Any person in the audience who engages in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting, or who refuses to comply with the lawful orders of the presiding officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon instructions from the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms to remove any such person from the council chamber and to place him or her under arrest.

     E.     Persons Authorized at Council Dais. During a city council meeting no person, except members of the city council and the city staff, shall be permitted on, at or within five feet of the council dais without the prior consent of the presiding officer. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.190 Enforcement of decorum.
     The chief of police, or such member or members of the police department as the chief may designate, shall be sergeant at arms of the city council and shall carry out all orders by the presiding officer for the purpose of maintaining order and decorum at the council meetings. Any councilmember may move to require the presiding officer to enforce the rules and the affirmative vote of a majority of the council shall require the sergeant at arms to do so. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.200 Motion—Second required.
     A motion by any member of the council, including the presiding officer, may not be considered by the council without receiving a second. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.210 Voting procedure.
     Any vote of the council including a roll call vote, may be registered by the members by answering “yes” or “aye” for an affirmative vote or “no” or “nay” for a negative vote upon his or her name being called by the city clerk, or by pressing a switch to cause a green light to show for an affirmative vote and a red light to show for a negative vote upon being called by the presiding officer. The result of any vote registered by means of a lighting system shall be audibly announced by the city clerk and recorded and in the minutes as the vote. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.220 Disqualification for conflict of interest.
     Any councilmember who is disqualified from voting on a particular matter by reason of a conflict of interest shall publicly state or have the presiding officer state the nature of such disqualification in open meeting. Where no clearly disqualifying conflict of interest appears, the matter of disqualification may, at the request of the councilmember affected, be decided by the other councilmembers. A councilmember who is disqualified by reason of a conflict of interest in any manner shall not remain seated during the debate and vote on such matter, but shall request and be given the permission of the presiding officer to step down from the council table and leave the council chamber. A councilmember stating such disqualification shall not be counted as a part of a quorum and shall be considered absent for the purpose of determining the outcome of any vote on such matter. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.230 Failure to vote.
     Every councilmember should vote unless disqualified by reason of conflict of interest or bias/prejudice. A councilmember who abstains from voting without a disqualifying conflict of interest or bias/prejudice thereby consents that a majority of the quorum may decide the question voted upon. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.240 Tie vote.
     Tie votes shall be lost motions and may be reconsidered. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996: amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.250 Changing vote.
     A member may change his or her vote prior to adjournment of meeting but not thereafter. A councilmember who publicly announces that he or she is abstaining from voting on a particular matter shall not subsequently be allowed to withdraw the abstention. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.260 Reconsideration.
     A motion to reconsider any action taken by the council may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion may be made only by one of the councilmembers who voted with the prevailing side. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any councilmember from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the council. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 §1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.270 Ordinances, resolutions and contracts.
     A.    All ordinances shall be approved by the city attorney, and no ordinances shall be prepared for presentation to the council unless ordered by a majority vote of the council, or requested by the mayor, or city manager, or prepared by the city attorney on his or her own initiative.

     B.     Prior to Approval by Administrative Staff. All ordinances, resolutions and contract documents shall, before presentation to the council, have been approved as to form and legality by the city attorney and shall have been examined and approved for administration by the city manager or authorized representative. (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

 

2.04.280 Reading of ordinances and resolutions.
     At the time of the adoption of an ordinance, it shall be read in full unless, after reading of the title thereof, the further reading thereof is waived by unanimous consent of the councilmembers present. Such consent may be expressed by a statement by the presiding officer that “if there is no objection, the further reading of the ordinance or resolution shall be waived. If any councilmember so requests an ordinance or resolution shall be read in full.” (Ord. 598 § 1, 1996; Ord. 419 § 1, 1981; Ord. 293 § 2, 1974)

Chapter 2.08 CITY MANAGER
2.08.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be known as the Los Alamitos City Manager Ordinance. (Ord. 165 § 1, 1969)

 

2.08.020 Power and duties.
     The city manager shall have the powers and duties as follows:

     A.    The city manager shall be the administrative head of the government of the city under the direction and control of the city council except as otherwise provided in this chapter. He shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all the affairs of the city which are under his control. In addition to his general powers as administrative head, and not as a limitation thereon, it shall be his duty and he shall have the powers set forth in the following subsections.

     B.     It shall be the duty of the city manager to enforce all laws and ordinances of the city and to see that all franchises, contracts, permits and privileges granted by the city council are faithfully observed.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the city manager, and he shall have the authority to control, order and give directions to all heads of departments and to subordinate officers and employees of the city under his jurisdiction through their department heads.

     D.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to appoint, remove, promote, demote or suspend all employees of the city except those officers and employees whose appointment is vested by the City Charter in the city council. The manager shall authorize the head of any department to appoint, remove or suspend subordinates in such departments. In case of the appointment or removal of any department head, the city manager shall first review such appointment or removal with the city council and obtain its approval.

     E.     It shall be the duty and responsibility of the city manager to conduct studies and effect such administrative reorganization of offices, positions or units under his direction as may be indicated in the interest of efficient, effective and economical conduct of the city’s business.

     F.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall recommend to the city council for adoption such measures and ordinances as he deems necessary.

     G.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to attend all meetings of the city council unless at his request he is excused therefrom by the city council, except when his removal is under consideration.

     H.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to keep the city council at all times fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city.

     I.      It shall be the duty of the city manager to see that no demand shall be submitted or recommended to the city council except on approval of the city manager or his authorized representative. The city manager, or his authorized representative, shall be responsible for the purchase of all supplies for all the departments or division of the city.

     J.      It shall be the duty of the city manager to prepare and submit the proposed annual budget and the proposed annual salary plan to the city council for its approval.

     K.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to make investigations into the affairs of the city and any department or division thereof, and any contract or the proper performance of any obligations of the city. Further, it shall be the duty of the city manager to investigate all complaints in relation to matters concerning the administration of the city government and in regard to the service maintained by public utilities in the city.

     L.     It shall be the duty of the city manager and he shall exercise general supervision over all public buildings, public parks, and all other public property which are under the control and jurisdiction of the city council.

 

     M.    It shall be the duty of the city manager to perform such duties and exercise such other powers as may be delegated to him from time to time by ordinance or resolution or other officer action of the city council. (Ord. 165 § 2, 1969)

Chapter 2.12 CITY CLERK
2.12.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be referred to as the Ordinance of the city defining the responsibilities, powers and duties of the city clerk. (Ord. 166 § 1, 1969)

 

2.12.020 Powers and duties.
     Pursuant to the authority vested in the city council by Section 802 of the City Charter as amended, the city clerk shall have the power, and be required to perform the functions and responsibilities hereinafter specifically set forth:

     A.    Attend all meetings of the city council and be responsible for the recording and maintaining of a full and true record of all the proceedings of the city council in books which shall bear appropriate titles and be devoted to such purpose;

     B.     Maintain separate books in which shall be recorded respectively all ordinances and resolutions, with a certificate of the clerk annexed to each thereof stating the same to be the original or a corrected copy, and as to an ordinance requiring publication, stating that the same has been published or posted in accordance with the City Charter; to keep all books properly indexed and open to public inspection when not in actual use;

     C.     Maintain separate books in which a record shall be made of all written contracts and fidelity and performance bonds;

     D.    Be the custodian of the seal of the city;

     E.     Administer oaths or affirmations, take affidavits and depositions pertaining to the affairs and business of the city, and certify copies of official records;

     F.     Be ex officio assessor, unless the city council has availed itself or does in the future avail itself of the provisions of the general laws of the state relative to any assessment of property and the collection of the city taxes, if any, by county officers, or if the city council by ordinance provided otherwise;

     G.    Be responsible for the conduct of all city elections;

     H.    Deputize other persons to assist in carrying out the duties of the city clerk;

     I.      Perform such other duties consistent with the City Charter as amended from time to time, and as may be required or granted by ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Ord. 166 § 2, 1969)

 

2.12.030 Appointment—Removal from office.
     A.    The city clerk shall be appointed by the city council and shall serve at its pleasure. The appointment of the city clerk shall be by resolution by the city council.

     B.     At any time the city clerk may be removed at a regular meeting of the city council and upon the affirmative votes of a majority of the members of the city council. At least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of his removal, the city clerk shall be furnished with a written notice stating the council’s intention to remove him and the reasons therefor. Within seven (7) days after receipt of such notice, the city clerk may by written notification to the mayor request a public hearing before the city council, in which event the council shall fix a time for a public hearing which shall be held at its regular meeting place before the expiration of the thirty (30) day period above referred to. The city clerk shall appear and be heard at such hearing. After furnishing the city clerk with written notice of his intended removal, the city council may suspend him from duty. In removing the city clerk, the city council shall use its uncontrolled discretion, and its action shall be final and shall not depend upon any particular showing or degree of proof at the hearing, the purpose of which is to allow the city council and the city clerk to present to each other and to the public all pertinent facts prior to the final action of removal. (Ord. 518 § 1, 1989; Ord. 300 § 2, 1975; Ord. 166 § 3, 1969)

 

2.12.040 Bond required.
     A.    The city council, in conformance with Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state does fix the penal sum of the bond for city clerk in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).

     B.     Pursuant to Section 1450 et seq., the city clerk shall file the bond in his office with his endorsing approval. (Ord. 124 §§ 2, 3, 1965)

Chapter 2.16 CITY TREASURER
2.16.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be known as the City Treasurer Ordinance. (Ord. 306 § 1, 1975)

 

2.16.020 Powers and duties.
     Pursuant to Section 803 of the City Charter as amended, the city treasurer shall have the power, and be required to perform the functions and responsibilities as follows:

     A.    Approve in writing the procedures of the finance department in the collection of all revenues due the city from all sources;

     B.     Approve in writing the procedures for the custody of all public funds belonging to or under control of the city or any office, department or agency of the city government and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depository as may be designated by resolution of the city council or if no such resolution be adopted, then in a depository selected by the city treasurer;

     C.     Approve disbursement in writing, of the moneys, on proper warrants in the manner provided for in the Charter and this chapter;

     D.    Ascertain that the financial records are being properly maintained and are in accordance with proper accounting principles; and that full disclosure of all moneys received and disbursed is made in the records;

     E.     Prepare and submit to the city council monthly written reports of all receipts, disbursements and funds balances, copies of which reports shall be filed with the city manager.

     F.     Perform such other duties consistent with the Charter and this chapter, as the council may from time to time require. (Ord. 306 § 2, 1975)

 

2.16.030 Appointment.
     The city treasurer shall be appointed by the council and shall serve at its pleasure. The appointment of the city treasurer shall be by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 519 § 1, 1989; Ord. 306 § 3, 1975)

 

2.16.040 Bond required.
     A.    The city council, in conformance with Section 36518 of the Government Code of the state does fix the penal sum of the bond for the city treasurer in the amount of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00).

     B.     Pursuant to Section 1450 et seq., the city clerk shall file the bond in his office with his endorsing approval. (Ord. 124 §§ 2, 3, 1965)

Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY
2.20.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Los Alamitos City Attorney Ordinance.” (Ord. 168 § 1, 1969)

 

2.20.020 Powers and duties.
     Pursuant to Section 804 of the City Charter as amended, the city attorney shall have the power and be required, to:

     A.    Represent and advise the city council and all city officers in matters of law pertaining to their office;

     B.     Represent and appear for the city in any or all actions and proceedings in which the city is concerned or is a party to prosecute on behalf of the people, when directed by the city council, any or all criminal cases arising from violations of the provisions of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code and such state law violations as the city has the power to prosecute, and represent and appear for any city officer or employee, or former city officer or employee, in any or all actions and proceedings in which any such officer or employee is concerned or is a party, for any act arising out of his/her employment or by reason of his/her official capacity;

     C.     Attend all regular meetings of the city council and give his advice and opinions in writing whenever requested to do so by the city council or by any of the boards or officers of the city;

     D.    Approve the form of all contracts made by and all bonds given to, the city, endorsing his approval thereon in writing;

     E.     Prepare any and all proposed ordinances or resolutions for the city and amendments thereto;

     F.     Perform such other duties consistent with the Charter and this chapter, as may be required from time to time. (Ord. 2017-06 § 2, 2017; Ord. 168 § 2, 1969)

Chapter 2.24 CITY ENGINEER
2.24.010 Office created.
     There is created the office of city engineer. (Ord. 302 § 1, 1975)

 

2.24.020 Appointment.
     The city engineer shall be appointed by the majority vote of the city council and shall serve at its pleasure, subject to such lawful contractual arrangements as may from time to time be made. (Ord. 302 § 2, 1975)

 

2.24.030 Powers and duties.
     The city engineer shall be required to perform the functions and responsibilities hereinafter set forth:

     A.    Keep accurate maps, plats and records of all public works, lamps and property owned by the city;

     B.     Advise the city council and city officials on all engineering matters referred to him or her including, but not limited to, reports regarding public improvements, repairs of streets or sidewalks, or such other work as the city council may request;

     C.     Bring to the attention of the city such engineering matters as the engineer may from time to time deem appropriate and necessary. (Ord. 302 § 3, 1975)

Chapter 2.28 POLICE DEPARTMENT
2.28.010 Established.
     A police department for the city is established. (Ord. 64 § 1, 1961)

 

2.28.020 Composition.
     The police department shall consist of a chief of police and such subordinate officers and personnel as are necessary to enforce the laws and keep the peace within the city. (Ord. 64 § 2, 1961)

 

2.28.030 Subordinate officers to report to chief.
     All subordinate police officers shall report to the chief of police each day as to events occurring while such officers are on duty, and all other information pertaining to general police regulations in the city which come to their notice. (Ord. 64 § 3, 1961)

 

2.28.040 Dereliction of duty—Chief to report to manager.
     The chief of police shall report to the city manager in writing without delay any dereliction of duty or misbehavior of any police officer, and shall attend upon any and all investigations that may be held by the city manager touching the conduct of any police officer. (Amended during 1944 codification; Ord. 64 § 4, 1961)

 

2.28.050 Officers subject to orders of chief.
     All police officers shall, at all times, be subject to the orders of the chief of police and shall be subject to call by the chief of police at any time during the day or night. (Ord. 64 § 5, 1961)

 

2.28.060 Advancement and salary increase.
     All advancements to the next higher classification and salary increase shall be made according to the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 64 § 6, 1961).

 

2.28.070 Chief of police and deputy police—Appointment.
     The chief of police shall be appointed by the city manager with approval by the city council. All deputy police shall be appointed by the chief of police. (Amended during 1994 codification; Ord. 64 § 7, 1961)

 

2.28.080 Recruitment and training standards.
     A.    The city desires to qualify to receive aid from the state of California under provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 4, Part 4 of the California Penal Code.

 

     B.     The city will, while receiving aid from the state of California, adhere to the standards of recruitment and training established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training. (Ord. 90 §§ 1, 2, 1963)

 

2.28.090 Duty to enforce laws and statutes.
     It shall be the duty of each and every member of the police department to enforce impartially all the laws and statutes of the United States and of the state of California, all ordinances of the county of Orange and the city of Los Alamitos within the limits of this city and to perform such other and further duties as by statute and ordinance now existing or hereafter enacted that may be imposed upon them in their capacity as peace officers. (Ord. 64 § 8, 1961)

 

2.28.100 Authority of officers to arrest.
     Each and every member of the police department is authorized to make arrests and detain prisoners in all cases where a peace officer is so authorized under the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 64 § 9, 1961)

 

2.28.110 False report to department unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person to wilfully make to the police department, or any officer in the department, any false, misleading or unfounded report for the purpose of interfering with the operation of the department or officer, or for the purpose of inducing or causing to be issued to complaint or indictment against any person, firm or corporation. If such report be so filed, it shall be a misdemeanor punishable as set forth by the laws of the state of California. (Ord. 64 § 10, 1961)

 

2.28.120 State laws and powers to apply to city officers.
     The chief of police and deputy officers shall have the same powers that are now or may hereafter be conferred by the laws of this state, and shall be entitled to the same protection as set forth by state laws. (Ord. 64 § 11, 1961)

 

2.28.130 Noncompliance with laws—Duty to assist investigation.
     It shall be the duty of the chief of police and all deputy officers to help or assist in the prosecution and investigation of all noncompliance with any ordinance or laws which shall come to the knowledge of the police department. (Ord. 64 § 12, 1961)

 

2.28.140 Reserve officers.
     The chief of police is authorized to appoint qualified reserve officers to the status of peace officer. Such appointment shall be made only for reserve officers who have met the training requirements established by the California Commission on Peace Officer Standards and Training for a Level 1 Reserve Police Officer. Any such appointment shall be for temporary purposes only and is revocable at will by the chief of police. No reserve officer shall, by reason of such appointment, acquire any rights to permanent status as a peace officer. (Ord. 416 § 1, 1981)

 

2.28.150 Use of police personnel at loud or unruly assemblages—Cost liability.
     When any loud or unruly assemblage occurs or is held, and the city’s police officers are required to respond to the scene in response to citizen complaints and the senior police officer at the scene determines that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare, then that senior police officer shall notify the owner of the property and/or the person in charge of the property where the assemblage exists, and/or the person responsible for the assemblage, that such person or persons, or in the case of a minor, the parents and/or guardians of such minor, will be held personally liable for the cost of providing additional police personnel on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided by the police department in response to such assemblage. Such person or persons shall be given a first warning, in the form of notification by the senior police officer as above described, that the police response as above described, shall be deemed to be the normal police services provided. The police personnel necessarily utilized after such first warning to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be deemed to be on special security assignment over and above the normal services provided and the owner of the property and/or person in charge of the property where such assemblage occurs and/or the person responsible for such assemblage, shall be personally responsible for the cost of such special security assignment in an amount determined upon a cost accounting basis by the city. The cost of such special security assignment, shall include damage to city property and/or injuries to the city personnel. (Ord. 497 § 1, 1987)

Chapter 2.29 PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT
2.29.010 Established.
     There is hereby established a Department of Public Works (“Department”). (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

 

2.29.020 Director—Appointment.
     The director of public works (“director”) shall be the head of the department. The director shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the city manager, consistent with the charter, municipal code and applicable law. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

 

2.29.030 Director—Powers and duties.
     The director shall be responsible for the administration of all public works operations, which embodies overall responsibility for the infrastructure of the city. Specific duties shall include managing the activities of the engineering bureau and the public services bureau. The director shall have such other powers and duties as the city manager shall prescribe from time to time, consistent with the charter, municipal code and applicable law. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

 

2.29.040 Engineering bureau—Established.
     There is hereby established the engineering bureau within the department. The engineering bureau shall be managed by the city engineer. The engineering bureau shall perform such duties and functions as the city manager shall prescribe from time to time, consistent with the charter, municipal code and applicable law. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

 

2.29.050 Public services bureau—Established.
     There is established the public services bureau within the department. The public services bureau shall be managed by a public services manager. The public services bureau shall perform such duties and functions as the city manager shall prescribe from time to time, consistent with the charter, municipal code and applicable law. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

 

2.29.060 Personnel ordinance—Applicability.
     Pursuant to Section 2.64.020, the director, city engineer and public services manager shall be exempted from the applicability of the personnel ordinance. (Ord. 682 § 1, 2005)

Chapter 2.30 CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES GENERALLY
2.30.010 Appointment and filling vacancies.
     A.    All members shall be appointed for a term of three years.

     B.     Members of the commission shall be residents of the city who are neither officers nor employees of the city.

     C.     To aid the city council in selecting succeeding members for appointment, it shall be the duty of the commission to submit the names of qualified, interested persons for each vacancy to be filled.

     D.    If any vacancy shall occur in the membership of a commission, other than by expiration of the term of office, it shall be filled by a majority vote of the city council for the unexpired term of the vacated office. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.020 Absence from meetings.
     Absence from three consecutive meetings or from one-third of the total of the regularly scheduled meetings during any calendar year shall be deemed to constitute the resignation of such member and the position shall automatically become vacant. The chair or vice-chair of the commission shall thereupon promptly notify the city clerk. The city clerk will notify the city council and the former commissioner of the fact of the vacancy. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.030 Removal of members.
     Members of the commission shall serve at the will and pleasure of the city council. Therefore, they may, at any time, be removed from office, with or without cause, by a majority vote of the city council whenever, in its discretion, the best interests of the city shall be served thereby. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.040 Officers—Election and vacancy.
     A.    The officers of city boards, commissions, and committees shall consist of a chair and a vice chair. The chair and vice chair shall be elected annually at the first regular meeting of each calendar year and shall hold office for a term of one year or until a successor is duly elected and qualified. Election shall be by a majority vote cast by those members present and voting at the meeting at which the election is held. Officers shall assume office immediately upon election.

     B.     The secretary shall be the staff liaison who oversees the commission appointed by the city manager.

     C.     Any vacancy in office shall be filled at the next regular meeting. The successor to any vacancy shall hold office for the balance of the unexpired term of that office. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.050 Rules and procedures.
     The city council shall adopt rules and procedures by resolution to govern its commission meetings and procedures. The rules may be amended from time to time by resolution, but only upon notice to all members that the proposed amendments shall be acted upon at a specified meeting. A majority vote of the council shall be required for the approval of the proposed amendment. Said resolutions shall be kept on file in the city clerk’s office. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.060 Commission staff.
     The commission shall have the authority to utilize the services of the city staff and such professional and other personnel as may be employed by the city from time to time as long as services rendered are within the city’s adopted budget. The commission shall make all requests for discussion items publicly at a commission meeting and require the support of the majority of the members present to have the item researched by staff and added to the agenda. Staff will prioritize requests and bring items forward to the commission in a timely manner. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.070 Compliance with Brown Act and Political Reform Act.
     A.    All meetings held by the commission shall be conducted in compliance with the Brown Act, California Government Code Section 54950 et seq., and its requirement that public commissions, boards, and councils and other public agencies conduct the people’s business openly.

     B.     All commissioners shall comply with the provisions of the Political Reform Act of 1974, California Government Code Sections 1090 et seq., and 87100 et seq., concerning conflicts of interest. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

 

2.30.080 Compensation.
     All members of the cable television commission, parks, recreation and cultural arts commission, planning commission, personnel appeals board, and traffic commission of the city shall be provided a ten thousand dollar ($10,000.00) group life insurance policy while appointed to the commission or board, with the premium of the policy to be paid by the city during such time. Upon expiration of their term or removal from office, such members shall not be entitled to any further compensation, including such policy. (Ord. 15-06 § 3, 2015)

Chapter 2.32 CITY BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES MEETING PROCEDURES
2.32.010 Agenda.
     A.    All reports to be submitted to the city boards, commissions, and committees at a scheduled meeting shall be delivered to the secretary prior to the deadline established by administrative policy. The secretary shall prepare the agenda under the direction of the department director.

     B.     The commission shall make all requests for discussion items to be placed on an agenda publicly at a commission meeting and require the support of the majority of the members present to have the item researched by staff and added to the agenda. Staff will prioritize requests and bring items forward to the commission in a timely manner. Documentation and information on the item shall be provided to staff by the requesting commission member prior to the agenda deadline.

     C.     Staff will add necessary items to the agenda as needed for commission consideration.

     D.    The agenda shall be made available to the members at least seventy-two (72) hours preceding the regular meeting to which it pertains and twenty-four (24) hours preceding a special meeting. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.020 Rules of debate.
     A.    Getting the Floor. Every member desiring to speak shall first address the chair, gain recognition by the presiding officer and shall confine him or herself to the question under debate, avoiding personalities and indecorous language.

     B.     Questions to Staff. Every member desiring to question the city staff shall, after recognition by the presiding officer, address his or her questions to the city manager, the city clerk or the city attorney, who shall be entitled either to answer the inquiry or designate a member of the staff for that purpose.

     C.     Interruptions. A member, once recognized, shall not be interrupted when speaking unless called to order by the presiding officer unless a point of order of business or personal privilege is raised by another member. If a member, while speaking, is called to order, he or she shall cease speaking until the question of order is determined and, if determined to be in order, he or she may proceed. Members of the city staff after recognition by the presiding officer shall hold the floor until completion of their remarks or until recognition is withdrawn by the presiding officer.

     D.    Points of Order. The presiding officer shall determine all points of order subject to the right of any member to appeal to the commission or board. If an appeal is taken, the question shall be: “Shall the decision of the Presiding Officer be sustained?” A majority vote shall conclusively determine such question of order.

     E.     Point of Personal Privilege. The right of a member to address the body on a question of personal privilege shall be limited to cases in which his or her integrity, character or motives are questioned or where the welfare of the body is concerned. A member raising a point of personal privilege may interrupt another member who has the floor only if the presiding officer recognizes the privilege.

     F.     Limitation of Debate. No member shall be allowed to speak more than once upon any particular subject until every other member desiring to do so shall have spoken. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.030 Remarks of members and synopsis of debate.
     A member may request through the presiding officer the privilege of having an abstract of his or her statement on any subject under consideration by the body entered in the minutes. If the body consents thereto, such statement shall be entered in the minutes. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.040 Protest against action.
     Any member shall have the right to have the reasons for his or her dissent from, or his or her protest against any action of the body entered in the minutes. Such dissent or protest to be entered in the minutes shall be made in the following manner: “I would like the minutes to show that I am opposed to this action for the following reasons...” (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.050 Rules of order.
     Except as provided in this code, the City Charter, other rules adopted by the city council, or applicable provisions of state law, the procedure of the body shall be governed by majority vote of the body. Rosenberg’s Rules of Order may be used as a guide but shall not be conclusive authority on any question of order or procedure. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.060 Addressing the boards, commissions, and committees.
     A.    Manner of Addressing the Boards, Commissions, and Committees. Each person desiring to address the body shall step up to the microphone in the front of the council chamber, state his or her name and address for the record, state the subject he or she wishes to discuss, state whom he or she is representing if he or she represents an organization or other persons, and, unless further time is granted by majority vote of the council, shall limit his or her remarks to three minutes at the time an agenda item is called and five minutes during oral communications. All remarks shall be addressed to the body as a whole and not to a member thereof. No question shall be asked of a member or a member of the city staff without the permission of the presiding officer.

     B.     Spokesperson for Group of Persons. In order to expedite matters and to avoid repetitious presentations, whenever any group of persons wishes to address the body on the same subject matter, it shall be proper for the presiding officer to request that a spokesperson be chosen by the group to address the body and, in case additional matters are to be presented by any other member of the group, to limit the number of such persons addressing the body.

     C.     After Motion. After motion has been made or a public hearing has been closed, no member of the public shall address the body from the audience on the matter under consideration without first securing permission to do so by a majority vote of the body. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.070 Rules of decorum.
     A.    Members. While the body is in session, the members must preserve order and decorum, and a member shall neither by conversation or otherwise delay or interrupt the proceedings or the peace of the body or disturb any member while speaking or refuse to obey the orders of the presiding officer. Members of the body shall not leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer.

     B.     Employees. Members of the city staff and employees shall observe the same rules of order and decorum as are applicable to the body, with the exception that members of the city staff may leave their seats during a meeting without first obtaining the permission of the presiding officer.

     C.     Persons Addressing the Body. Any persons making impertinent, slanderous or profane remarks or who becomes boisterous while addressing the body shall be called to order by the presiding officer and, if such conduct continues, may at the discretion of the presiding officer be ordered barred from further audience before the body during that meeting.

     D.    Members of the Audience. Any person in the audience who engages in disorderly conduct such as hand clapping, stamping of feet, whistling, using profane language, yelling and similar demonstrations, which conduct disturbs the peace and good order of the meeting, or who refuses to comply with the lawful orders of the presiding officer shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. Upon instructions from the presiding officer, it shall be the duty of the secretary to contact the police department to remove any such person from the council chamber and to place him or her under arrest.

     E.     Persons Authorized at Dais. During a meeting no person, except members of the body and the city staff, shall be permitted on, at or within five feet of the council dais without the prior consent of the presiding officer. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.080 Motion—Second required.
     A motion by any member of the body, including the presiding officer, may not be considered by the body without receiving a second. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.090 Voting procedure.
     Any vote of the body including a roll call vote, may be registered by the members by answering “yes” or “aye” for an affirmative vote or “no” or “nay” for a negative vote upon his or her name being called by the secretary. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.100 Disqualification for conflict of interest.
     Any member who is disqualified from voting on a particular matter by reason of a conflict of interest shall publicly state or have the presiding officer state the nature of such disqualification in open meeting. Where no clearly disqualifying conflict of interest appears, the matter of disqualification may, at the request of the member affected, be decided by the other members. A member who is disqualified by reason of a conflict of interest in any manner shall not remain seated during the debate and vote on such matter, but shall request and be given the permission of the presiding officer to step down from the dais and leave the council chamber. A member stating such disqualification shall not be counted as a part of a quorum and shall be considered absent for the purpose of determining the outcome of any vote on such matter. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.110 Failure to vote.
     Every member should vote unless disqualified by reason of conflict of interest or bias/prejudice. A member who abstains from voting without a disqualifying conflict of interest or bias/prejudice thereby consents that a majority of the quorum may decide the question voted upon. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.120 Tie vote.
     Tie votes shall be lost motions and may be reconsidered. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.130 Changing vote.
     A member may change his or her vote prior to adjournment of meeting but not thereafter. A member who publicly announces that he or she is abstaining from voting on a particular matter shall not subsequently be allowed to withdraw the abstention. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

 

2.32.140 Reconsideration.
     A motion to reconsider any action taken by the body may be made only on the day such action was taken. It may be made either immediately during the same session, or at a recessed or adjourned session thereof. Such motion may be made only by one of the members who voted with the prevailing side. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent any member from making or remaking the same or any other motion at a subsequent meeting of the body. (Ord. 15-06 § 4, 2015)

Chapter 2.36 PARKS, RECREATION AND CULTURAL ARTS COMMISSION
2.36.010 Established.
     A Los Alamitos parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission consisting of seven members is established with membership, powers, and duties as provided for in this chapter and other applicable law. (Ord. 15-06 § 5, 2015)

 

2.36.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Advisory capacity” means the commission only advises or suggests what should be done under the circumstances and does not have the authority or the responsibility to make definitive actions.

     “Chair” means the chairperson of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Commission” means the parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission.

     “Commissioner(s)” means any duly appointed member(s) of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission.

     “Secretary” means the staff liaison who oversees the committee appointed by the city manager.

     “Vice-chair” means the vice-chairperson of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 5, 2015)

 

2.36.030 Officers’ duties.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the chair to:

     1.     Preside at all meetings of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission;

     2.     Call, and preside at, special meetings;

     3.     Sign all necessary and appropriate resolutions and other documents in the name of the commission;

     4.     Name and appoint all necessary and appropriate committees of the commission;

     5.     Represent the commission or designate a representative of the commission at all meetings and functions required by law or otherwise.

     B.     It shall be the duty of the vice chair to perform all duties of the chair in the absence or temporary illness of the chair.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the secretary to:

     1.     Make and maintain minutes of the proceedings of the commission;

     2.     Prepare and send, in the name of the commission, all communications authorized and directed by the chair or by the commission as a whole;

     3.     Receive, and bring to the attention of the commission, all communications addressed to it;

     4.     Sign, as secretary, in the name of the commission, all necessary and appropriate resolutions, notices and other documents authorized and directed by the commission;

     5.     Prepare and distribute an agenda for all meetings of the commission;

     6.     Receive and process all applications and all matters relating to the commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 5, 2015)

 

2.36.040 Powers and duties.
     A.    The commission shall have such power, authority and duties as may be assigned by resolution of the city council, as such may be adopted or amended by the city council from time to time.

     B.     The city council may, from time to time, empower the commission:

     1.     To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to public recreation, parks and community services, and to cooperate with other governmental agencies and civil groups in the advancement of sound recreation and parks planning and programming;

     2.     To act in an advisory capacity to the city council in all matters pertaining to fine arts and cultural affairs, including proposing programs that will develop fine arts and cultural affairs activities in the city, such as improving the local library services, sponsoring art exhibits, musical and dramatic productions and working closely with all community organizations, agencies, schools and interested individuals in developing programs and activities for the cultural enrichment of city residents;

     3.     To formulate policies on recreational services and cultural enrichment for approval by the city council;

     4.     To advise the city council on problems of development of recreation and fine arts areas, facilities, programs and services;

     5.     To assist the city council, when necessary, in the coordination of community-wide services sponsored by other governmental agencies and voluntary organizations;

     6.     To make periodic appraisals of the total recreation and parks operations in the city, to make periodic appraisals of the total fine arts and cultural affairs activities in the city, and to interpret the needs of the public in this regard to the city council. (Ord. 15-06 § 5, 2015)

Chapter 2.38 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.38.010 Established.
     A Los Alamitos planning commission consisting of seven members is established with membership, powers, and duties as provided for in this chapter and other applicable law. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

 

2.38.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Chair” is the chair of the planning commission as provided for hereunder.

     “City” is the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Commission” is the planning commission of the city created by this chapter.

     “Council” is the city council of the city.

     “Secretary” means the staff liaison who oversees the committee appointed by the city manager. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

 

2.38.030 Officers’ duties.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the chair to:

     1.     Preside at all meetings of the planning commission;

     2.     Call, and preside at, special meetings;

     3.     Sign all necessary and appropriate resolutions and other documents in the name of the commission;

     4.     Name and appoint all necessary and appropriate committees of the commission;

 

     5.     Represent the commission or designate a representative of the commission at all meetings and functions required by law or otherwise.

     B.     It shall be the duty of the vice chair to perform all duties of the chair in the absence or temporary illness of the chair.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the secretary to:

     1.     Make and maintain minutes of the proceedings of the commission;

     2.     Prepare and send, in the name of the commission, all communications authorized and directed by the chair or by the commission as a whole;

     3.     Receive, and bring to the attention of the commission, all communications addressed to it;

     4.     Supervise the proper and legal publication and posting of notices of all hearings before the commission;

     5.     Sign, as secretary, in the name of the commission, all necessary and appropriate resolutions, notices and other documents authorized and directed by the commission;

     6.     Prepare and distribute an agenda for all regular meetings of the commission;

     7.     Receive and process all applications for rezonings, variances and use permits, and all matters relating to subdivisions. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

 

2.38.040 Rules and procedures.
     Rules and procedures, including amendments, are adopted by the city council by resolution. The commission shall make recommendations for amendments to the city council from time to time. A majority vote of the commission shall be required to forward the proposed amendment to the city council. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

 

2.38.050 Meetings.
     A.    Regular Meetings. The commission shall meet in regular session on regularly scheduled dates as established by resolution of the city council.

     B.     Special Meetings. The council, the chair or any four members of the commission shall have the authority to call special meetings of the commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

 

2.38.060 Powers and duties.
     The planning commission shall have the powers and duties provided by the statutes of the state of California and local ordinances. (Ord. 15-06 § 6, 2015)

Chapter 2.40 TRAFFIC COMMISSION
2.40.010 Established.
     A Los Alamitos traffic commission consisting of seven members is established with membership, powers, and duties as provided for in this chapter and other applicable law. (Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

 

2.40.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Chair” means the chairperson of the traffic commission.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Commission” means the traffic commission.

     “Commissioner(s)” means any duly appointed member(s) of the traffic commission.

     “Secretary” means the staff liaison who oversees the committee appointed by the city manager.

     “Vice-chair” means the vice-chairperson of the traffic commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

 

2.40.030 Officers’ duties.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the chair to:

     1.     Preside at all meetings of the traffic commission;

     2.     Call, and preside at, special meetings;

     3.     Sign all necessary and appropriate resolutions and other documents in the name of the commission;

     4.     Name and appoint all necessary and appropriate committees of the commission;

     5.     Represent the commission or designate a representative of the commission at all meetings and functions required by law or otherwise.

     B.     It shall be the duty of the vice chair to perform all duties of the chair in the absence or temporary illness of the chair.

     C.     It shall be the duty of the secretary to:

     1.     Make minutes of the proceedings of the commission that will be filed with the city clerk;

     2.     Prepare and send, in the name of the commission, all communications authorized and directed by the chair or by the commission as a whole;

     3.     Receive, and bring to the attention of the commission, all communications addressed to it;

     4.     Sign, as secretary, in the name of the commission, all necessary and appropriate resolutions, notices and other documents authorized and directed by the commission;

     5.     Prepare and distribute an agenda for all regular meetings of the commission;

     6.     Receive and process all applications and all matters relating to the commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

 

2.40.040 Rules and procedures.
     Rules and procedures, including amendments, are adopted by the city council by resolution. The commission shall make recommendations for amendments to the city council from time to time. A majority vote of the commission shall be required to forward the proposed amendment to the city council. (Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

 

2.40.050 Meetings.
     A.    Regular Meetings. The commission shall meet in regular session on regularly scheduled dates as established by resolution of the city council.

     B.     Special Meetings. The council, the chair or any four members of the commission shall have the authority to call special meetings of the commission. (Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

 

2.40.060 Powers and duties.
     A.    The traffic commission shall have such power, authority and duties as may be assigned by resolution of the city council, as such may be adopted or amended by the city council from time to time.

     B.     The city council may, from time to time, empower the commission to:

     1.     Review requests for traffic safety regulatory signs and markings and make determinations pertaining thereto;

     2.     Initiate special studies on any unsafe or malfunctioning traffic condition and determine solutions to such conditions;

     3.     Review complaints, requests or suggestions concerning traffic safety and on-street parking conditions;

     4.     Perform such other functions as the city council may request from time to time;

     5.     Review on-street parking requests, speed limits, one-way street designations, speed humps/bumps, traffic signals and any other device for traffic control and make recommendations to the city council pertaining thereto;

     6.     Except as specified above, the traffic commission is an advisory body to the city council. (Ord. 2017-01 § 1, 2017; Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015)

Chapter 2.52 ARCHITECTURAL REVIEW COMMITTEE
2.52.010 Findings and policy.
     A.    The city’s history, location and ideal climatic conditions render the aesthetic quality of the city an important asset.

     B.     All of these factors constitute an important economic asset for the city, both for those who reside here and for those who earn their living here.

     C.     The appearance of buildings, structures and the land, as visible from public and private streets, places and ways, has a material and substantial relationship to property values in the city.

     D.    To protect the economic welfare of the community, it is the policy of the city council to protect, maintain and enhance the social and economic values created by past and present investments in the community, by requiring all future developments to become a compatible part of the total community environment.

     E.     The policy will be implemented and maintained by the creation of an architectural review committee to develop appropriate standards and guidelines for all future development projects. The guidelines shall specify an Early California theme defined in broad terms to include elements of Western, Ranch, Spanish, Monterey and Victorian styles of architecture. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.020 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of the architectural review committee is to recognize the interdependence of land values and aesthetics, and to provide a method by which the city may implement this interdependence to its benefit, and to the benefit of its individual citizens.

     B.     To preserve and enhance the beauty and environmental amenities of the city by:

     1.     Stimulating creative design;

     2.     Encouraging the innovative use of materials, methods and techniques;

     3.     Preserving balance and harmony;

     4.     Integrating the functions, appearance and locations of buildings and improvements, including parking, so as to best achieve a balance between private prerogatives and preferences and the public interest and welfare. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.030 Committee structure.
     An architectural review committee is established, consisting of the members of the planning commission, as appointed by the city council. The planning commission rules and procedures for the conduct of business shall be applicable to the committee. The architectural review committee shall have the authority to review, conditionally approve and disapprove architectural plans, drawings and sketches. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.040 Architectural review and approval prior to issuance of permit.
     All applications for permits for the construction of any building, structure, physical improvement, addition, extension, exterior change or sign, except for residential developments, shall be preceded by architectural review, unless the committee certifies that the project is minor or incidental, and need not be reviewed. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.050 Review process.
     A.    The architectural review committee shall review architectural plans immediately following review and approval of the required land use permit, such as conditional use permit or site plan review, by the planning commission.

     B.     A representative of the planning staff shall serve the committee. A design resource person will, when available, provide staff with a review of all architectural plans. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.060 Architectural review committee guidelines and standards.
     A.    The committee may adopt rules, regulations and procedures as required for the transaction of its business.

     B.     The committee shall establish, and the city council shall adopt, standards and guidelines which shall be applied by the committee in reviewing applications for development. Such guidelines and standards are to be set forth in pictorial and/or narrative form and may illustrate undesirable as well as desirable examples of design. A document containing the guidelines and standards shall be available for public reference in the planning department. The committee shall periodically review these standards and architectural guidelines and may make appropriate amendments subject, in all cases, to the city council approval.

     C.     The architectural theme for the city will be Early California, and will be specifically defined in the architectural guidelines. The theme is defined in broad terms to include elements of Western, Ranch, Spanish, Monterey and Victorian schools of architecture. Some characteristics of this theme are as follows:

     1.     Use of structural, architectural design element, i.e., corridors, heavy beams, posts, arches, columns, colonnades, canopies, cornices, etc.;

     2.     Strong textured look, using woods, tiles, pavers, stuccos, stones, blocks and bricks, colors, plant material, recesses, etc.;

     3.     Strong feeling of overhead treatment such as roof overhangs, balconies or dark fascias;

     4.     Earthen colors. Colors with warm, natural tones. Colors range from whites, yellows, browns, clays, slates;

     5.     Wall relief (graphics, three dimensional design, landscaping, heavy textured stucco, wood, tiles, etc.);

     6.     Strong window statement (treatment of frame, mullions, border, etc.) (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.070 Appeals.
     In the event the applicant, any interested person, or the city, is aggrieved by the decision of the architectural review committee, an appeal may be made to the city council in the manner set forth under Chapter 17.68. (Ord. 12-05 § 2, 2012; Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.080 Project conformance with approved plans.
     All projects shall be developed in strict conformance with the plans approved by the architectural review committee. Failure to conform in any respect with the architectural plans shall constitute grounds for immediate stoppage of work, or, if the work or any part thereof is already completed, it shall be demolished or otherwise modified to conform with said approved plans. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.090 Revocation of approval.
     In the case of noncompliance with any of the conditions imposed by the architectural review committee, the planning commission may recommend revocation of the architectural review committee approval. The procedure for revocation shall be the same as revocation of conditional use permits, as set forth in Section 17.54.080. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

 

2.52.100 Duration of approval.
     The duration of the architectural review approval shall be one year from the date of approval. If construction has been commenced and is being pursued diligently toward completion within this one-year period, the approval shall stay in force for another year period. In the case of unavoidable delay, the architectural review committee may, upon application, extend the time limit for completion of the project, subject to the amendment of previously adopted conditions of approval. (Ord. 535 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 2.54 BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS
2.54.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the board of building appeals is to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the building official relative to the application and interpretation of the Uniform Building Code, Uniform Housing Code, National Electrical Code, Uniform Plumbing Code, Uniform Mechanical Code, Uniform Swimming Pool Code and Uniform Code of Abatement of Dangerous Buildings (“Uniform Codes”). References to the Uniform Codes in this chapter shall mean the latest versions of the Uniform Codes which have been adopted by the city council. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.020 Creation of board.
     There shall be and there hereby is created a board of building appeals. The board shall consist of three members who are qualified electors of the city and who are qualified to pass on matters pertaining to building construction, substandard buildings, housing conditions, dangerous buildings and matters related thereto. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.030 Appointment of members—Building official ex officio.
     The members of the board shall be appointed by majority vote of the city council as needed and shall hold office at the pleasure of the city council. The city clerk shall maintain a list of qualified candidates for the appointment at all times. The city’s duly appointed building official shall be an ex officio member and shall act as secretary to the board but shall not have a vote on any matter before the board. (Ord. 643 § 1, 2001; Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.040 Terms of office.
     In the event of a duly filed application for an appeal or modification as authorized by this chapter, the city council shall appoint and convene the board for the purposes of deciding the request set forth in the application. Except as otherwise provided herein, members shall serve from the date of appointment until a final determination is made regarding the request. (Ord. 643 § 2, 2001; Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.050 Rules of procedure—Meetings—Quorum.
     The board shall adopt rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall meet as necessary to hear and consider the application. Meetings shall be noticed and posted in accordance with the Ralph M. Brown Act. Meetings for which an agenda is posted at least seventy-two (72) hours in advance of the meeting shall be considered regular meetings of the board for purposes of the Act. Two of the members shall constitute a quorum, and a quorum may conduct the business of the board. (Ord. 643 § 3, 2001; Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.060 Powers and duties.
     The board of building appeals shall have the following powers and duties:

     A.    To carry out the duties and perform the functions provided for the board of appeals in the Uniform Codes.

     B.     To make slight modifications in individual cases in the application of the building provisions of this code, or any of the codes mentioned herein, provided that in each such modification the board first has found that:

     1.     A special individual reason makes the strict letter of the code or regulations adopted pursuant to this code impractical; and

     2.     The modification authorized is in conformity with the spirit and purpose of the regulations involved, the provisions of this code do not definitively cover the point raised, or that a manifest injustice might be done or unnecessary hardship or inconvenience be suffered by a strict adherence to the provision of this code.

     C.     To authorize the substitution of materials or methods of construction or installation if such substitution is provided for in any new standard code being considered for adoption by the city, or where such method of construction or installation has received the approval of a recognized research laboratory; provided, however, no such change, deviation, substitution, or modification shall be approved or authorized by the board unless it finds and determines that the public peace, health, safety and welfare will not be endangered thereby and that the building or use, by reason of such change, deviation, substitution, modification or authorization will comply with the minimum standards necessary for the public peace, health, safety and welfare, considering the type of use and structure involved.

     D.    The board shall have no authority relative to interpretation of the administrative provisions of the Uniform Codes nor shall it be empowered to waive the requirements thereof. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.070 Applications.
     Applications for appeals, modifications, changes, deviations, or alternate means of construction or materials shall be in writing and in a form approved by the building official and shall specify in detail the change desired, shall be signed by the property owner or his agent, and shall be filed with the building official. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.080 Application fees.
     The council, by resolution, may determine the fees to be charged for filing an application. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.090 Notice of meeting.
     Written notice shall be given to the applicant, at the address set forth on the application, at least ten days in advance of the meeting when the matter will be considered by the board of building appeals. The applicant may be present and offer testimony. No public hearing shall be required, but the board, if it deems necessary, may set the matter for public hearing at such time and upon such notice as the board deems advisable. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

 

2.54.100 Decision of the board.
     Decisions of the board of building appeals shall be by an affirmative vote of not less than two members of the board. Such decision shall be rendered in writing within ten days of the final day of the board meeting(s) where the matter is considered and the decision of the board shall be the final administrative action of the city. (Ord. 621 § 1, 1998)

Chapter 2.56 EMERGENCY SERVICES
2.56.010 Purpose.
     The declared purposes of this chapter are to provide for the preparation and carrying out of plans for the protection of persons and property within this city in the event of an emergency; the direction of the emergency organization; and the coordination of the emergency functions of this city with all other public agencies, corporations, organizations and affected private persons. (Ord. 248 § 1, 1972)

 

2.56.020 Emergency defined.
     As used in this chapter, “emergency” means the actual or threatened existence of conditions of disaster or of extreme peril to the safety of persons and property within this city caused by such conditions as air pollution, fire, flood, storm, epidemic, riot or earthquake, or other conditions, including conditions resulting from war or imminent threat of war, but other than conditions resulting from a labor controversy, which conditions are or are likely to be beyond the control of the services, personnel, equipment and facilities of this city, requiring the combined forces of other political subdivisions to combat. (Ord. 248 § 2, 1972)

 

2.56.030 Disaster council membership.
     The Los Alamitos disaster council is created and shall consist of the following:

     A.    The mayor, who shall be chairperson;

     B.     The director of emergency services, who shall be the city manager;

     C.     Such chiefs of emergency services as are provided for in a current emergency plan of this city, adopted pursuant to this chapter;

     D.    Such representatives of civic, business, labor, veterans, professional or other organizations having an official emergency responsibility, as may be appointed by the director with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 248 § 3, 1972)

 

2.56.040 Disaster council powers and duties.
     It shall be the duty of the Los Alamitos disaster council, and it is empowered, to develop and recommend for adoption by the city council, emergency and mutual aid plans and agreements and such ordinances and resolutions and rules and regulations as are necessary to implement such plans and agreements. The disaster council shall meet upon call of the chairperson or, in his or her absence from the city or inability to call such meeting, upon call of the vice chairperson. (Ord. 248 § 4, 1972)

 

2.56.050 Director of emergency services.
     There is created the office of director of emergency services. The city manager shall be the director of emergency services. (Ord. 248 § 5, 1972)

 

2.56.060 Director of emergency services—Powers and duties.
     A.    The director is empowered to:

     1.     Request the city council to proclaim the existence or threatened existence of a local emergency if the city council is in session, or to issue such proclamation if the city council is not in session. Whenever a local emergency is proclaimed by the director, the city council shall take action to ratify the proclamation within seven days thereafter or the proclamation shall have no further force or effect;

     2.     Request the Governor to proclaim a “state of emergency” when, in the opinion of the director, the locally available resources are inadequate to cope with the emergency;

     3.     Control and direct the effort of the emergency organization of this city for the accomplishment of the purposes of this chapter;

     4.     Direct cooperation between and coordination of services and staff of the emergency organization of this city; and resolve questions of authority and responsibility that may arise between them;

     5.     Represent this city in all dealings with public or private agencies on matters pertaining to emergencies as defined herein;

     6.     In the event of the proclamation of a local emergency as herein provided, the proclamation of a “state of emergency” by the Governor or the Director of the State Office of Emergency Services, or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” the director is empowered:

     a.     To make and issue rules and regulations on matters reasonably related to the protection of life and property as affected by such emergency; provided, however, such rules and regulations must be confirmed at the earliest practicable time by the city council,

     b.     To obtain vital supplies, equipment and such other properties found lacking and needed for the protection of life and property and to bind the city for the fair value thereof and, if required immediately, to commandeer the same for public use,

     c.     To require emergency services of any city officer or employee and, in the event of the proclamation of a “state of emergency” in the county in which this city is located or the existence of a “state of war emergency,” to command the aid of as many citizens of this community as he deems necessary in the execution of his duties; such persons shall be entitled to all privileges, benefits and immunities as are provided by state law for registered disaster service workers,

     d.     To requisition necessary personnel or material of any city department or agency, and

     e.     To execute all of his ordinary power as city manager, all of the special powers conferred upon him by this chapter or by resolution or emergency plan pursuant hereto adopted by the city council, all powers conferred upon him by any statute, by any agreement approved by the city council, and by any other lawful authority.

     B.     The director of emergency services shall designate the order of succession to that office, to take effect in the event the director is unavailable to attend meetings and otherwise perform his duties during an emergency. Such order of succession shall be approved by the city council. (Ord. 248 § 6, 1972)

 

2.56.070 Emergency organization.
     All officers and employees of this city, together with those volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency, and all groups, organizations and persons who may by agreement or operation of law, including persons impressed into service under the provisions of Section 2.56.060 (A) (6) (c), be charged with duties incident to the protection of life and property in this city during such emergency, shall constitute the emergency organization of the city. (Ord. 248 § 7, 1972)

 

2.56.080 Emergency plan.
     The Los Alamitos disaster council shall be responsible for the development of the city emergency plan, which plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all of the resources of this city, both public and private, to meet any condition constituting a local emergency, state of emergency or state of war emergency; and shall provide for the organization, powers and duties, services, and staff of the emergency organization. Such plan shall take effect upon adoption of the city council. (Ord. 248 § 8, 1972)

 

2.56.090 Expenditures.
     Any expenditures made in connection with emergency activities, including mutual aid activities, shall be deemed conclusively to be for the direct protection and benefit of the inhabitants and property of the city. (Ord. 248 § 9, 1972)

 

2.56.100 Violations—Penalties.
     It shall be a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment for not to exceed six months, or both, for any person, during an emergency, to:

     A.    Wilfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency organization in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by virtue of this chapter;

     B.     Do any act forbidden by any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such a nature as to give or be likely to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the lives or property of inhabitants of this city, or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof;

     C.     Wear, carry or display, without authority, any means of identification specified by the emergency agency of the state. (Ord. 248 § 10, 1972)

Chapter 2.60 PURCHASING SYSTEM
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 480, 485, 499 and 578.

 

2.60.010 Purchasing system adopted.
     In order to establish efficient procedures for the purchase of supplies and equipment, to secure for the city supplies and equipment at the lowest possible cost commensurate with quality needed to exercise positive financial control over purchases, to clearly define authority for the purchasing function and to assure the quality of purchases, a purchasing system is adopted. The purchasing ordinance is divided into two sections; formal contract and open market procedures, each having its own distinct requirement. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.020 Purchasing officer.
     There is created the position of purchasing officer. The city manager shall be the purchasing officer. The city manager may delegate any of the powers and duties conferred upon him or her as purchasing officer to any other officer or employee of the city. The purchasing officer shall:

     A.    Purchase or contract for supplies and equipment required by any department in accordance with purchasing procedures prescribed by this chapter, such administrative regulations as the purchasing officer shall adopt, and such other rules and regulations as shall be prescribed by the city council;

     B.     Negotiate and recommend execution of contracts for the purchase of supplies and equipment;

     C.     Act to procure for the city the needed quality in supplies and equipment;

     D.    Discourage uniform bidding and endeavor to obtain full and open competition on all purchases; provided, however, the purchasing officer may request bids based on brand name or specific make or model when he or she has made the determination that such specific makes or names are clearly in the best interest of the city. Such determination shall be made in writing and shall state the factors taken into account, including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     Prior or existing use by the city of the brand or name,

     2.     Familiarity of the city’s employees with the product,

     3.     Cost savings expected,

     4.     Spare parts or accessories on hand,

     5.     Elimination of the need for training on new equipment,

     6.     Unique adaptability of the brand or name to the city function which it will perform;

     E.     Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, prices, market conditions and new products;

     F.     Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably necessary to the operation of this chapter and any other rules and regulations;

 

     G.    Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment purchased to ensure conformance with specifications;

     H.    Recommend the transfer of surplus or unused supplies and equipment between departments as needed and recommend the sale of all supplies and equipment which cannot be used by any agency or which have become unsuitable for city use;

     I.      Maintain a bidders’ list, vendors’ catalog file and records needed for the efficient operation of the purchasing department.

     The purchasing officer may consult with Orange County centralized purchasing before purchases are made. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.030 Formal contract procedure.
     Except as otherwise provided herein purchases and contracts for supplies and equipment of estimated value greater than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) shall be awarded by written contract approved by the city council to the most qualified vendor pursuant to the procedure prescribed herein.

     A.    Request for Proposals. A request for proposals solicitation document shall be publicly noticed and made available to prospective vendors. The request for proposals shall describe the requested supplies and equipment in general terms, how to obtain more detailed information concerning the procurement, and state the time, place, and deadline for submission of proposals.

     1.     Published Notice. The request for proposals shall be publicly noticed in any generally accepted manner, which includes on the city’s official website. In addition, such notice may include publication in an adjudicated newspaper of general circulation, printed and published in the city, posting in at least three public places within the city that have been designated by resolution as the places for posting public notices, and/or a public bulletin board in City Hall.

     B.     Proposal Opening Procedure. Proposals shall be submitted to the purchasing officer and shall be identified as formal competitive proposals on the outside of the sealed envelope. Proposals shall be opened in public at the time and place stated in the request for proposals. A tabulation of all proposals received shall be open for public inspection during regular business hours for a period of not less than thirty (30) calendar days after the proposal opening.

     C.     Rejection of Proposals. At its discretion, the city council may reject any and all proposals presented for any reason or for no reason, and may suspend, delay, or otherwise cancel the procurement, or may order the re-advertisement of the request for proposals.

     D.    Award of Contracts. Contracts shall be awarded by the city council to the lowest cost proposer, except as otherwise provided herein, consistent with the most qualified vendor selection criteria set forth below.

     1.     Most Qualified Vendor. In determining the most qualified vendor, consideration is to be given to price, quality, and performance of the supplies or equipment to be purchased. Criteria for determining the most qualified vendor shall include but not be limited to the following:

     a.     The cost and quality of the supplies or equipment;

     b.     The ability, capacity, and skill of the vendor to perform the contract and to provide the supplies or equipment requested;

     c.     The ability of the vendor to provide the supplies or equipment requested promptly or within the time specified, without delay, interference, or service interruption;

     d.     The ability of the vendor to demonstrate the attributes of trustworthiness, quality, fitness, capacity, and experience to satisfactorily perform;

     e.     The character, integrity, reputation, judgment, references, experience, and efficiency of the vendor;

     f.      The quality of vendor’s performance history and record on previous purchases or contracts with the city;

     g.     The ability of the vendor to provide future maintenance, repair parts, and services for the use of the supplies or equipment purchased; and

     h.     The ability of the vendor to demonstrate its prior, current, and continued compliance during the contract term with all applicable federal, state, and local laws, statutes, ordinances and all lawful orders, rules, and regulations promulgated thereunder.

     E.     Performance Bonds. The purchasing officer shall have authority to recommend that a performance bond or other form of security or guarantee be required before entering a contract in such amount as may be reasonably necessary to protect the best interest of the city. If the city council requires a performance bond or other form of security of guarantee, the form and amount of the bond, security or guarantee shall be described in the request for proposals, and the performance bond, security or guarantee shall be in a form approved by the city attorney. (Ord. 19-01 § 2, 2019; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.040 Open market procedure.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment of an estimated value in the amount of between five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be made by the purchasing officer in the open market without observing the procedure prescribed by Section 2.60.030, but the following procedures shall be followed:

     A.    Minimum Number of Bids. Open market purchase shall, wherever possible, be based on at least three bids, and shall be awarded to the lowest cost bidder, consistent with the most qualified vendor selection criteria set forth in Section 2.60.030.

     B.     Notice Inviting Bids. The purchasing officer shall solicit bids by written requests to prospective vendors, and/or by telephone, and/or by public notice posted on a public bulletin board in City Hall and/or published on the city’s official website.

     C.     Written Bids. Written bids shall be submitted to the purchasing officer who shall keep a record of all open market bids or the placing of orders. This record, while so kept, shall be open to public inspection. (Ord. 19-01 § 3, 2019; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.050 Exemptions from centralized purchasing.
     The purchasing officer may authorize any department in writing to purchase or contract for specified supplies and equipment of a value not to exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), independently of the purchasing department, but he or she shall require that such purchases or contracts shall be made in conformity with the procedures established by this chapter, and shall further require periodic reports from the department on the purchases and contracts made under such written authorization. (Ord. 19-01 § 4, 2019; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.060 Requisitions.
     Departments shall submit requests for supplies and equipment to the purchasing officer by standard requisition forms. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.070 Bidding.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be by bid procedures pursuant to Sections 2.60.030 and 2.60.040. Bidding shall be dispensed with only when an emergency requires that an order be placed with a known available source of supply, when the amount involved is less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00), or when the commodity can be obtained from only one vendor. (Ord. 19-01 § 5, 2019; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.080 Purchase orders required—Exception.
     Purchases of supplies and equipment shall be made only by purchase order; provided, however, that any city department that maintains a city issued credit card may make purchases with such credit card of less than one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00). (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.090 Encumbrance of funds.
     Except in cases of emergency, the purchasing officer shall not issue any purchase order for supplies or equipment unless there exists an unencumbered appropriation in the fund account against which the purchase is to be charged. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.100 Inspection and testing.
     The purchasing officer shall inspect supplies and equipment delivered to determine their conformance with the specifications set forth in the order or contract. The purchasing officer shall have authority to require chemical and physical tests of samples submitted with bids and samples of deliveries which are necessary to determine their quality and conformance with specifications. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.110 Purchases through other agencies.
     The procurement policies and procedures set forth in Sections 2.60.030, 2.60.040, 2.60.120 and 2.60.140 need not be followed when the city council or city manager determines that another public agency or government entity, including without limitation the county of Orange, the state of California, and the Federal Government (hereinafter “the acquiring agency”) has selected the vendor using competitive bidding procedures substantially the same as or similar to those normally utilized by the city for the acquisition of such materials, supplies, equipment, or services. If such a determination is made, the city manager or city council as applicable may proceed to purchase the materials, supplies, equipment or services at a price equivalent to that offered to the acquiring agency. (Ord. 19-01 § 6, 2019; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.120 Purchase of electronic data processing and telecommunications equipment.
     The city has found that electronic data processing and telecommunications equipment, goods and services are unique, and of such importance to city programs as to warrant a separate acquisition authority therefor.

     A.    Electronic Data Processing and Telecommunications Equipment—Acquisition by Competitive Means—Exceptions. Acquisition of electronic data processing and telecommunications goods and services by the city shall be conducted through competitive means, except when the city determines one of the following:

     1.     The goods and services proposed for acquisition are the only goods and services which can meet the city’s needs;

     2.     The goods and services are needed in case of an emergency where immediate acquisition is necessary for the efficient operation and preservation of the city’s services.

     B.     Procedure for Acquisition. The mode of acquisition to be used and the procedure to be followed shall be approved by the purchasing officer who shall adopt appropriate criteria and procedures to ensure compliance with the intent of this chapter. However, the procedure shall provide for issuance by the city of a solicitation document to, and for the submission of proposals by, prospective contractors.

     C.     Cost-Effective Solution to City Requirements—Evaluation—Exclusion of Vendors.

     1.     Contract awards shall be based on the proposal which provides the most cost-effective solution to the city’s requirements, as determined by the evaluation criteria contained in the solicitation document. The evaluation procedures may provide for the selection of a vendor on a basis other than cost alone.

     2.     Evaluation of proposals for the purpose of determining contract award shall provide for consideration of a bidder’s best financing alternative unless the city determines that a particular financing alternative should not be considered.

     3.     To the extent practical, the solicitation documents shall provide for a contract to be written to enable acquisition of additional items to avoid essentially redundant acquisition processes when it can be determined that it is economical to do so.

     D.    Disposal of excess goods—Manner. Electronic data processing goods and telecommunications equipment which are determined to be surplus to the city’s needs shall be disposed of in a manner best serving the interest of the city, which may include auction, sale or transfer to other governmental entities or nonprofit entities.

     E.     Policies and Procedures—Price Negotiations, Performance, Availability Standards and Bonding or Penalty Assessments. The city may establish policies and procedures for all of the following:

     1.     Price negotiation with respect to all acquisitions conducted under this chapter;

     2.     System or equipment component performance or availability standards, including an assessment of the added cost to the city to receive contractual guarantee of a level of performance;

     3.     Requirement of a bond or assessment of a cost penalty with respect to a contract or consideration of a contract offered by a vendor whose performance has been determined unsatisfactory by the city.

     F.     Additional Rules and Regulations. The finance department may adopt additional rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

     G.    Contract for Goods and Services—Terms and Conditions—Progress Payments—Performance Bond. Any contract for electronic data processing goods and telecommunications equipment and services, to be manufactured or performed by the contractor especially for the city and not suitable for sale to others in the ordinary course of the contractor’s business, may provide for such terms and conditions as the city deems necessary to protect its interests including, but not limited to, progress payments as the work is performed; provided that, at least ten (10) percent of the contract price is required to be withheld until final delivery and acceptance of the goods or services, and that the contractor is required to submit a performance bond of at least one-half the total payable under the contract. (Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.130 City manager purchasing authority—Informal award of non-public project contracts.
     A.    Exemption for Personal, Professional, and Consulting Services. Except as provided in this section and Section 2.60.140, contracts involving the acquisition of personal, professional, consulting, or other services shall not be subject to the terms of this chapter.

     B.     City Manager Authority to Contract for Personal, Professional, and Consulting Services. The city manager is authorized to contract for personal, professional, and consulting services and to purchase equipment and supplies pursuant to this chapter without prior approval of the city council when the amount of the contract is less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and there exists an unencumbered amount in the fund account against which the expense is to be charged at least equal to the contract cost. (Ord. 19-01 § 7, 2019; Ord. 12-01 § 2, 2012; Ord. 622 § 1, 1999)

 

2.60.140 City Council review—Formal award of non-public project service contracts.
     A.    Personal, Professional and Consulting Services. The city council shall review and approve the scope of services prepared for every personal, professional, or consulting services contract of more than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00). Contracts for personal, professional, or consulting services shall be awarded to the contractor who will best serve the interests of the city, taking into account the demonstrated competence, qualifications, and suitability for the project in general. The city may consider the cost of personal, professional, or consulting services if the authorized contracting party (i.e., the city council or city manager, as applicable) determines it to be a relevant factor under the circumstances.

     B.     Procedure. Except as provided by ordinance, prior to the award pursuant to this section of a contract for services in which cost is to be considered as a factor, a notice inviting bids or request for proposals shall be given to various qualified providers and all proposals received shall be considered. If the director of the using department certifies that, to the best of his or her knowledge, the service can be obtained only from one vendor or contractor, and that no equivalent services are available, the notice inviting formal bids or request for proposals may be sent exclusively to such vendor or contractor. Award of the contract shall be by formal motion, resolution, or ordinance of the city council within twenty-four (24) months of receipt of bids.

     C.     Proposals and Awards in Substantial Compliance. Proposals received pursuant to a request for proposals process in substantial compliance with the provisions of this section may be considered by the city and may be the basis for a contract award. (Ord. 19-01 § 8, 2019; Ord. 12-01 § 3, 2012)

Chapter 2.64 PERSONNEL SYSTEM
Article I. General Provisions
2.64.010 Adopted—Purpose.
     In order to establish an equitable and uniform procedure for dealing with personnel matters, to attract to municipal service the best and most competent persons available, to assure that appointments and promotions of employees will be based on merit and fitness as determined by competitive tests and to provide a reasonable degree of security for qualified employees, the personnel system set out in this chapter is adopted. This chapter may be referred to as the Personnel Ordinance. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 1, 1994)

 

2.64.020 Applicability of chapter.
     A.    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the competitive service, which is defined as all offices, positions and employments in the service of the city, except:

     1.     Elective officers;

     2.     Members of appointive boards, commissions and committees;

     3.     Persons engaged under contract to supply expert, professional or technical services for a definite period of time;

     4.     Volunteer personnel, who receive no regular compensation from the city;

     5.     The city manager;

     6.     Assistant city manager;

     7.     The city clerk;

     8.     The city attorney;

     9.     City engineer;

     10.   Student interns;

     11.   Employees who are employed less than full time, which is defined as employees who work, or are expected to work, less than one thousand eight hundred twenty (1,820) hours per calendar year;

     12.   All department and bureau heads appointed after July 1, 1993;

     13.   Any newly created position, which is designated at the time of its creation as being exempt from these rules. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 2, 1994)

 

2.64.030 Personnel officer.
     The city manager, or the city manager’s designee, shall be the personnel officer. The personnel officer shall be responsible for administration of this chapter and the rules adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 3, 1994)

 

2.64.040 Preparation, adoption and revision of personnel rules.
     Personnel rules shall be prepared by the personnel officer for adoption by the city council. The rules shall establish specific procedures and regulations governing competitive service, including, but not limited to, the following phases of the personnel system:

     A.    Prepare, or cause to be prepared, a plan of compensation and revisions, covering all classification titles for authorized city positions. The plan and any revisions shall become effective upon approval of the council;

     B.     Public announcement of all tests and the acceptance of applications for employment;

     C.     Preparation and conduct of tests;

     D.    Certification and appointment of persons;

     E.     Establishment of probationary periods and evaluation of employees during the probationary period;

     F.     Appointment, transfer, promotion, demotion and reinstatement of employees;

     G.    Separation of employees from the city service through lay-off, suspension and dismissal;

     H.    Standardization of hours of work, attendance and leave regulations, working conditions and the development of employee morale, welfare and training;

     I.      The establishment of disciplinary, grievance and appeal procedures;

     J.      Content, maintenance and use of personnel records and forms. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 §4, 1994)

 

2.64.050 Discrimination prohibited.
     No person in the competitive service, or seeking admission thereto, shall be employed, pro-moted, demoted or discharged or in any way favored or discriminated against because of political opinions or affiliations, because of race, creed, color, national origin, religion, sex, age, sexual orientation, gender identity, marital status, medical condition, physical disability, or for any other unlawful reason. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 5, 1994)

 

2.64.060 Contracts for special services.
     The city manager shall consider and make recommendations to the city council regarding the extent to which the city should contract for the performance of technical services in connection with the establishment or operation of the personnel system. The city council may contract with any qualified person or agency for the performance of all or any of the following responsibilities and duties imposed by this chapter, including, but not limited to:

     A.    The preparation of personnel rules and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     B.     The preparation of a position classification plan and subsequent revision and amendments thereof;

     C.     The preparation of a plan of compensation and subsequent revisions and amendments thereof;

     D.    The preparation, conduct and grading of competitive tests;

     E.     Special and technical services of advisory or informational character on matters relating to personnel administration. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 6, 1994)

 

2.64.070 Appropriation of funds.
     The city council shall appropriate such funds as are necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 7, 1994)

 

2.64.080 Status of present employees.
     Any person holding a position included in the competitive service who, on date of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, shall have served continuously in such position, or in some other position in the competitive service, for a period equal to the probationary period prescribed in the rules for his or her class, shall assume regular status in the competitive service, in the position held on such date without qualifying test, and shall thereafter be subject in all respects to the provisions of this chapter and the personnel rules. Any other persons holding positions in the competitive service shall be regarded as probationers who are serving out the balance of their probationary period as prescribed in the rules before obtaining regular status. The probationary period shall be computed from the date of appointment or employment. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 8,1994)

 

Article II. Personnel Appeals
2.64.090 Procedure adopted.
     In order to provide an appeals procedure for employees in the competitive service, the following personnel appeals procedure is adopted. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 9, 1994)

 

2.64.100 Personnel appeals commission—Created—Appointment and terms of members.
     A.    The personnel appeals commission consisting of five members is confirmed as a city commission. The current members shall continue to serve unless removed by the city council or until their present terms expire, at which time the same or new members shall be appointed by the city council for four-year terms.

     B.     The commission shall elect a chairperson and vice-chairperson from among its members. The chairperson shall preside over the meetings and hearings of the commission and otherwise carry out the duties and responsibilities set forth in this article and the personnel rules. In the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson shall perform the duties of the chairperson. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 10, 1994)

 

2.64.110 Personnel appeals commission—Filling of vacancies—Removal and residence requirement of members.
     A.    Vacancies on the commission shall be filled by appointment of the city council for the unexpired terms. Each member shall serve until a successor is appointed. A majority vote of the city council shall be required to appoint a member to the commission, and a majority vote shall be necessary to remove any member from the commission prior to the expiration of the term.

     B.     Members of the personnel appeals commission shall be residents of the city. No person shall be appointed to the commission who holds any salaried public office or employment within the city. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 11, 1994)

 

2.64.120 Personnel appeals commission—Powers and duties.
     The powers and duties of the commission shall consist of:

     A.    To determine the order of business for the conduct of its meetings and hearings, and to hold such meetings as may be required by the rules or on call of the chairperson or a majority of the members of the commission. A majority of the members of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business;

     B.     As provided by this chapter and by the personnel rules, to receive and hear appeals submitted by any person in the competitive service relative to any dismissal, demotion, reduction in pay or suspension without pay for forty (40) hours or more and to certify the findings and recommendations as provided in this article;

     C.     In any hearing conducted by the commission, it shall have the power to examine witnesses under oath and compel their attendance or production of evidence by subpoenas issued in the name of the city and attested by the city clerk. It shall be the duty of the chief of police to cause all such subpoenas to be served and refusal of a person to attend or to testify in answer to such subpoena shall subject the person to prosecution in the same manner set forth below for failure to appear before the city council in response to a subpoena issued by the city council. Each member of the personnel appeals commission shall have the power to administer oaths to witnesses;

     D.    Within ten (10) days after concluding the hearing, the personnel appeals commission shall affirm, revoke or modify the action taken and certify its findings and decision to the city council, city manager and to the affected employee. The decision of the personnel appeals commission shall be final and binding upon the city and its officials;

     E.     Prepare rules of procedure for the conduct of appeal hearings including, but not limited to, requiring attendance of witnesses, swearing of witnesses, order and burden of proof, examination of witnesses by the parties and commission, deliberation by the commission and preparation of findings and conclusions. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 582 § 12, 1994)

 

2.64.125 Service on other city boards, commissions, and committees.
     Seated members of the personnel appeals commission may serve concurrently on one additional city board, commission, or committee. Members will be subject to the same recruitment and appointment process as any other qualified resident. Appointment to each city board, commission, or committee will be considered separate and subject to the rules and regulations outlined in the Los Alamitos Municipal Code. (Ord. 18-02 § 2, 2018)

 

Article III. Criminal History Information
2.64.130 Definitions.
     As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings ascribed below:

     A.    In addition to subsection F of this section, “crime of violence” means any felony or misdemeanor conviction for any of the offenses specified in subdivision (c) of Section 667.5 of the Penal Code or a violation or attempted violation of Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 207), Chapter 8 (commencing with Section 236) or Chapter 9 (commencing with Section 240) of Title 8 of Part 1 of the Penal Code.

     B.     In addition to subsection F of this section, “drug crime” means any crime described in the California Uniform Controlled Substances Act (Division 10, commencing with Section 11000 of the Health and Safety Code).

     C.     “Employer” means the city and any nonprofit corporation performing contractual services for the city (or other organizations specified by the attorney general) which employs or uses the services of volunteers in positions in which the employee or volunteer has supervisory or disciplinary power over a child or children.

     D.    “Requester” means the city, its city manager, personnel director, chief of police, recreation director and any “employer” as defined above.

     E.     In addition to subsection F of this section, “sex crime” means a conviction for a violation or attempted violation of Penal Code Sections 220, 261, 261.5, 264.1, 267, 272, 273a, 273d, 285, 286, 288, 288a, 289, 314, 647.6 or former Section 647a, or subdivision (d) of Section 647, or commitment as a mentally disordered sex offender under former Article 1 (commencing with Section 6300) of Chapter 2 of Part 2 of Division 6 of the Welfare and Institutions Code.

     F.     Conviction for a violation or attempted violation of an offense committed outside the state of California is a crime of violence, drug crime or sex crime if the offense would have been a crime or offense as defined in this article if such crime or offense was committed in California. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 550 § 1, 1992)

 

2.64.140 Criminal background check required for certain positions.
     A.1.  Any applicant for employment with the city shall be subject to a criminal background investigation. The investigation will be performed in order to determine the character and fitness of the person applying for employment or contracted services. The request shall consist of a request to the California State Department of Justice for records of all convictions.

     2.     Any applicant for employment, licensing or as a volunteer with an employer as defined above in any human services field involving the care and security of children, the elderly, the handicapped or the mentally impaired shall be subject to a criminal background investigation. The investigation will be performed in order to determine the character and fitness of the applicant. The investigation shall consist of a request to the California State Department of Justice for records of all convictions, of any arrest for which the applicant was released on bail, or of any arrest for which the applicant was released on his or her own recognizance pending trial and the offense involved any crime of violence, drug crime or sex crime. Only positions which involve supervisory or disciplinary power over a minor, the elderly, handicapped or the mentally impaired under the applicant’s care are subject to the provisions of this subsection.

     B.     Any request for criminal records shall include the applicant’s fingerprints, which may be taken by the requester, and any other data required by the Department of Justice.

     C.     A copy of the information will be sent to the requester and to the applicant. All information obtained hereunder shall be confidential and used only for the purposes set forth herein. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to release or use such information for any purpose not authorized herein. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 550 § 1, 1992)

 

2.64.150 Request for federal criminal information and/or out-of-state criminal background information.
     The requester in his or her own discretion is authorized to seek criminal background information through the U.S. Department of Justice and/or the Federal Bureau of Investigation in accordance with the provisions of California and federal law. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 550 § 1, 1992)

 

2.64.160 Fees authorized.
     The city or other requesting entity shall be authorized to charge the applicant a fee sufficient to reimburse the city or requester for Department of Justice charges to provide such information to the city or requesting entity. (Ord. 685 § 1, 2005; Ord. 550 § 1, 1992)

Chapter 2.65 LIMITATIONS ON USE OF EMINENT DOMAIN AND INCLUSION OF RESIDENTIALLY-ZONED PROPERTY
2.65.010 Limitations on use of eminent domain and inclusion of residentially-zoned property.
     A.    The city council shall prohibit the exercise of the power of eminent domain by the Los Alamitos redevelopment agency in all redevelopment plans and project areas for the acquisition of privately-owned property.

     B.     The city council shall prohibit the inclusion of residentially-zoned property in all redevelopment plans and project areas.

     C.     Subsections A and B of this section shall only be changed by vote of the people. (Measure X, 6/92 Election)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE
Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
Chapter 3.08 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
Chapter 3.12 SALES AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.14 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
Chapter 3.20 UTILITY USER TAX
Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
Chapter 3.28 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY
Chapter 3.32 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY

Chapter 3.04 TRANSFER OF TAX ASSESSMENT AND COLLECTION DUTIES TO COUNTY
3.04.010 Transfer of duties to county.
     The duties of assessing property and collecting taxes, provided by law to be performed by the assessor and tax collector of the city, shall be performed by the county tax collector of the county of Orange, state of California, in accordance with the provisions of Sections 51500 to 51519, inclusive of the Government Code of the state of California, for the fiscal year 1960—1961, and for each succeeding year until the ordinance codified in this chapter is revoked. (Ord. 17 § 1, 1960)

Chapter 3.08 REAL PROPERTY TRANSFER TAX
3.08.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be known as the Real Property Transfer Tax Ordinance of the city of Los Alamitos. It is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Part 6.7 (commencing with Section 11901) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 152 § 1, 1967)

 

3.08.020 Tax imposed.
     There is imposed on each deed, instrument or writing by which any lands, tenements or other realty sold within the city shall be granted, assigned, transferred or otherwise conveyed to, or invested in, the purchaser or purchasers or any other person or persons, by his or their direction, when the consideration or value of the interest or property conveyed (exclusive of the value of any lien or encumbrances remaining thereon at the time of sale) exceeds one hundred dollars ($100.00) a tax at the rate of twenty-seven and one-half cents ($0.275) for each five hundred dollars ($500.00) or fractional part thereof. (Ord. 152 § 2, 1967)

 

3.08.030 Payment responsibility.
     Any tax imposed pursuant to Section 3.08.020 shall be paid by any person who makes, signs or issues any document or instrument subject to the tax, or for whose use or benefit the same is made, signed or issued. (Ord. 152 § 3, 1967)

 

3.08.040 Exemptions.
     The exemptions to the documentary transfer set forth in Sections 11921 et seq., of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, as amended from time to time, shall be applicable to the tax imposed in this chapter. (Ord. 585 § 3, 1994)

 

3.08.050 Additional exemptions.
     Any deed, instrument or writing to which the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof, any state or territory, or political subdivision thereof, is a party shall be exempt from the tax imposed pursuant to this chapter when the exempt agency is acquiring title. (Ord. 152 § 5, 1967)

 

3.08.060 Administration of provisions.
     The county recorder shall administer this chapter in conformity with the provisions of Part 6.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and the provisions of any county ordinance adopted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 152 § 9, 1967)

 

3.08.070 Claims for refund.
     Claims for refund of taxes imposed pursuant to this chapter shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 5 (commencing with Section 5096) of Part 9 of Division 1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California. (Ord. 152 § 10, 1967)

Chapter 3.12 SALES AND USE TAX
3.12.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Ordinance. (Ord. 274 § 1, 1973)

 

3.12.020 Purpose.
     The city council declares that the ordinance codified in this chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other, purposes, and directs that the provisions of this chapter be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     A.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which complies with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     B.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the state of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code;

     C.     To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which imposes a tax and provides a measure therefor that can be administered and collected by the State Board of

Equalization in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the State Board of Equalization in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes;

     D.    To adopt a sales and use tax ordinance which can be administered in a manner that will, to the degree possible consistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting city sales and uses taxes and at the same time minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 274 § 4, 1973)

 

3.12.030 Sales tax imposed—Rate.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail a tax is imposed upon all retailers in the city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.040 of the gross receipts of the retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in this city on and after the operative date. (Ord. 274 § 6, 1973)

 

3.12.040 Rate.
     The rate of sales tax and use tax imposed by this chapter shall be one percent. (Ord. 274 § 2, 1973)

 

3.12.050 Contract with state.
     Prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, this city shall contract with the State Board of Equalization to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this sales and use tax ordinance; provided, that if this city shall not have contracted with the State Board of Equalization prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract rather than the first day of the first calendar quarter following the adoption of said ordinance. (Ord. 274 § 5, 1973)

 

3.12.060 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the state sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the state or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the State Board of Equalization. (Ord. 274 § 7, 1973)

 

3.12.070 Use tax.
     An excise tax is imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this city of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date for storage, use or other consumption in this city at the rate stated in Section 3.12.040 of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to state sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 274 § 8, 1973)

 

3.12.080 Adoption of provisions of state law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 274 § 9, 1973)

 

3.12.090 Limitations on adoption of state law.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, wherever the state of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this city shall be substituted therefor. The substitution, however, shall not be made when the word “state” is used as part of the title of the State Controller, the State Treasurer, the State Board of Control, the State Board of Equalization, the State Treasury or the Constitution of the State of California; the substitution shall not be made when the result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city, or any agency thereof rather than by or against the State Board of Equalization, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter; the substitution shall not be made in those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the state of California, where the result of the substitution would be to provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the state under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or to impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the state under the said provisions of that Code; the substitution shall not be made in Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code; and the substitution shall not be made for the word “state” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 or in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203. (Ord. 274 § 10, 1973)

 

3.12.100 Permit not required when.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional seller’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 274 § 11, 1973)

 

3.12.110 Exclusions.
     There shall be excluded from the gross receipts by which the tax is measured:

     A.    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

     B.     The gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the city in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 458 § 3, 1983)

 

3.12.120 Exemptions.
     There shall be exempt from the tax due under this chapter:

     A.    The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state of California upon a retailer or consumer;

     B.     The storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property, the gross receipts from the sale of which has been subject to sales tax under a sales and use tax ordinance enacted in accordance with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code by any city and county, county or city in this state;

     C.     In addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, the storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of the state, the United States or any foreign government. (Ord. 458 § 3, 1993)

 

3.12.130 Amendments.
     All subsequent amendments of the Revenue and Taxation Code which relate to the sales and use tax and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code shall automatically become a part of this chapter. (Ord. 274 § 15, 1973)

 

3.12.140 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the state or this city or against any officer of the state or this city, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.5 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 274 § 16, 1973)

 

3.12.150 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 274 § 17, 1973)

Chapter 3.14 TRANSACTIONS AND USE TAX
3.14.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the “Los Alamitos Transactions and Use Tax Ordinance.” The city of Los Alamitos hereinafter shall be called “City”. This chapter shall be applicable in the incorporated territory of the City. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.020 Operative date.
     “Operative date” means the first day of the first calendar quarter commencing more than one hundred ten (110) days after the adoption of the ordinance enacting this chapter, the date of such adoption being as set forth below. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.030 Purpose.
     This chapter is adopted to achieve the following, among other purposes, and directs that the provisions hereof be interpreted in order to accomplish those purposes:

     A.    To impose a retail transactions and use tax in accordance with the provisions of Part 1.6 (commencing with Section 7251) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code and Section 7285.9 of Part 1.7 of Division 2 which authorizes the City to adopt this tax ordinance which shall be operative if a majority of the electors voting on the measure vote to approve the imposition of the tax at an election called for that purpose.

     B.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that incorporates provisions identical to those of the Sales and Use Tax Law of the State of California insofar as those provisions are not inconsistent with the requirements and limitations contained in Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

     C.     To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that imposes a tax and provides a measure therefore that can be administered and collected by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in a manner that adapts itself as fully as practicable to, and requires the least possible deviation from, the existing statutory and administrative procedures followed by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration in administering and collecting the California State Sales and Use Taxes.

     D.    To adopt a retail transactions and use tax ordinance that can be administered in a manner that will be, to the greatest degree possible, consistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, minimize the cost of collecting the transactions and use taxes, and at the same time, minimize the burden of record keeping upon persons subject to taxation under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.040 Contract with State.
     Prior to the operative date, the City shall contract with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration to perform all functions incident to the administration and operation of this transactions and use tax ordinance; provided, that if the City shall not have contracted with the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration prior to the operative date, it shall nevertheless so contract and in such a case the operative date shall be the first day of the first calendar quarter following the execution of such a contract. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.050 Transactions tax rate.
     For the privilege of selling tangible personal property at retail, a tax is hereby imposed upon all retailers in the incorporated territory of the City at the rate of one and one-half percent of the gross receipts of any retailer from the sale of all tangible personal property sold at retail in said territory on and after the operative date of the ordinance enacting this chapter. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.060 Place of sale.
     For the purposes of this chapter, all retail sales are consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. The gross receipts from such sales shall include delivery charges, when such charges are subject to the State sales and use tax, regardless of the place to which delivery is made. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be determined under rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.070 Use tax rate.
     An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property purchased from any retailer on and after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter for storage, use or other consumption in said territory at the rate of one and one-half percent of the sales price of the property. The sales price shall include delivery charges when such charges are subject to State sales or use tax regardless of the place to which delivery is made. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.080 Adoption of provisions of State law.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all of the provisions of Part 1 (commencing with Section 6001) of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.090 Limitations on adoption of provisions of State law and collection of use taxes.
     In adopting the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code:

     A.    Wherever the State of California is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this City shall be substituted therefor. However, the substitution shall not be made when:

     1.     The word “State” is used as a part of the title of the State Controller, State Treasurer, State Treasury, or the Constitution of the State of California;

     2.     The result of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against this City or any agency, officer, or employee thereof rather than by or against the California Department of Tax and Fee Administration, in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter;

     3.     In those sections, including, but not necessarily limited to, sections referring to the exterior boundaries of the State of California, where the result of the substitution would be to:

     a.     Provide an exemption from this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not otherwise be exempt from this tax while such sales, storage, use or other consumption remain subject to tax by the State under the provisions of Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, or

     b.     Impose this tax with respect to certain sales, storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property which would not be subject to tax by the State under the said provision of that code;

     4.     In Sections 6701, 6702 (except in the last sentence thereof), 6711, 6715, 6737, 6797 or 6828 of the Revenue and Taxation Code.

     B.     The word “City” shall be substituted for the word “State” in the phrase “retailer engaged in business in this State” in Section 6203 and in the definition of that phrase in Section 6203.

     1.     “A retailer engaged in business in the District” shall also include any retailer that, in the preceding calendar year or the current calendar year, has total combined sales of tangible personal property in this State or for delivery in the State by the retailer and all persons related to the retailer that exceeds five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00). For purposes of this section, a person is related to another person if both persons are related to each other pursuant to Section 267(b) of Title 26 of the United States Code and the regulations thereunder. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.100 Permit not required.
     If a seller’s permit has been issued to a retailer under Section 6067 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, an additional transactor’s permit shall not be required by this chapter. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.110 Exemptions and exclusions.
     A.    There shall be excluded from the measure of the transactions tax and the use tax the amount of any sales tax or use tax imposed by the State of California or by any City, City and County, or County pursuant to the Bradley-Burns Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law or the amount of any State-administered transactions or use tax.

     B.     There are exempted from the computation of the amount of transactions tax the gross receipts from:

     1.     Sales of tangible personal property, other than fuel or petroleum products, to operators of aircraft to be used or consumed principally outside the county in which the sale is made and directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property under the authority of the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government.

     2.     Sales of property to be used outside the City which is shipped to a point outside the City, pursuant to the contract of sale, by delivery to such point by the retailer or his or her agent, or by delivery by the retailer to a carrier for shipment to a consignee at such point. For the purposes of this paragraph, delivery to a point outside the City shall be satisfied:

     a.     With respect to vehicles (other than commercial vehicles) subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, and undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code by registration to an out-of-City address and by a declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, stating that such address is, in fact, his or her principal place of residence; and

     b.     With respect to commercial vehicles, by registration to a place of business out-of-City and declaration under penalty of perjury, signed by the buyer, that the vehicle will be operated from that address.

     3.     The sale of tangible personal property if the seller is obligated to furnish the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     4.     A lease of tangible personal property which is a continuing sale of such property, for any period of time for which the lessor is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by the lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     5.     For the purposes of subparagraphs (B)(3) and (B)(4) of this section, the sale or lease of tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

     C.     There are exempted from the use tax imposed by this chapter, the storage, use or other consumption in this City of tangible personal property:

     1.     The gross receipts from the sale of which have been subject to a transactions tax under any State-administered transactions and use tax ordinance.

     2.     Other than fuel or petroleum products purchased by operators of aircraft and used or consumed by such operators directly and exclusively in the use of such aircraft as common carriers of persons or property for hire or compensation under a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued pursuant to the laws of this State, the United States, or any foreign government. This exemption is in addition to the exemptions provided in Sections 6366 and 6366.1 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the State of California.

     3.     If the purchaser is obligated to purchase the property for a fixed price pursuant to a contract entered into prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     4.     If the possession of, or the exercise of any right or power over, the tangible personal property arises under a lease which is a continuing purchase of such property for any period of time for which the lessee is obligated to lease the property for an amount fixed by a lease prior to the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     5.     For the purposes of subparagraphs (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, storage, use, or other consumption, or possession of, or exercise of any right or power over, tangible personal property shall be deemed not to be obligated pursuant to a contract or lease for any period of time for which any party to the contract or lease has the unconditional right to terminate the contract or lease upon notice, whether or not such right is exercised.

     6.     Except as provided in subparagraph (C)(7), a retailer engaged in business in the City shall not be required to collect use tax from the purchaser of tangible personal property, unless the retailer ships or delivers the property into the City or participates within the City in making the sale of the property, including, but not limited to, soliciting or receiving the order, either directly or indirectly, at a place of business of the retailer in the City or through any representative, agent, canvasser, solicitor, subsidiary, or person in the City under the authority of the retailer.

     7.     “A retailer engaged in business in the City” shall also include any retailer of any of the following: vehicles subject to registration pursuant to Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 4000) of Division 3 of the Vehicle Code, aircraft licensed in compliance with Section 21411 of the Public Utilities Code, or undocumented vessels registered under Division 3.5 (commencing with Section 9840) of the Vehicle Code. That retailer shall be required to collect use tax from any purchaser who registers or licenses the vehicle, vessel, or aircraft at an address in the City.

     D.    Any person subject to use tax under this chapter may credit against that tax any transactions tax or reimbursement for transactions tax paid to a district imposing, or retailer liable for a transactions tax pursuant to Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code with respect to the sale to the person of the property the storage, use or other consumption of which is subject to the use tax. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.120 Amendments.
     All amendments subsequent to the effective date of this chapter to Part 1 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code relating to sales and use taxes and which are not inconsistent with Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, and all amendments to Part 1.6 and Part 1.7 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, shall automatically become a part of this chapter, provided however, that no such amendment shall operate so as to affect the rate of tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.130 Enjoining collection forbidden.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action or proceeding in any court against the State or the City, or against any officer of the State or the City, to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter, or Part 1.6 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code, of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

 

3.14.140 Severability.
     If any provision of this chapter or the application thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter and the application of such provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby. (Ord. 20-06 § 2, 2020)

Chapter 3.16 TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY TAX
3.16.010 Title for citation.
     This chapter shall be known as the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance of the city. (Ord. 115 § 1, 1964)

 

3.16.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Hotel” means any structure, or any portion of any structure, which is occupied or intended or designed for occupancy by transients for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes, and includes any hotel, inn, tourist home or house, motel, studio hotel, bachelor hotel, lodging house, rooming house, apartment house, dormitory, public or private club, mobilehome or house trailer at a fixed location, or other similar structure or portion thereof.

     “Occupancy” means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any room or rooms or portion thereof, in any hotel for dwelling, lodging or sleeping purposes.

     “Operator” means the person who is proprietor of the hotel, whether in the capacity of owner, lessee, sublessee, mortgagee in possession, licensee or any other capacity. Where the operator performs his or her functions through a managing agent of any type or character other than employee, the managing agent shall also be deemed an operator for the purposes of this chapter and shall have the same duties and liabilities as his or her principal. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter by either the principal or the managing agent shall, however, be considered to be compliance by both.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Rent” means the consideration charged, whether or not received, for the occupancy of space in a hotel valued in money, whether to be received in money, goods, labor or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property and services of any kind or nature, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever.

     “Tax administrator” means the city administrator.

     “Transient” means any person who exercises occupancy or is entitled to occupancy by reason of concession, permit, right of access, license or other agreement for a period of thirty (30) consecutive calendar days or less, counting portions of calendar days as full days. Any such person so occupying space in a hotel shall be deemed to be a transient until the period of thirty (30) days has expired unless there is an agreement in writing between the operator and the occupant providing for a longer period of occupancy. In determining whether a person is a transient, uninterrupted periods of time extending both prior and subsequent to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter may be considered. (Ord. 115 § 2, 1964)

 

3.16.030 Tax imposed.
     For the privilege of occupancy in any hotel, each transient is subject to and shall pay a tax in the amount of eight percent of the rent charged by the operator. Such tax constitutes a debt owned by the transient to the city which is extinguished only by payment to the operator or to the city. The transient shall pay the tax to the operator of the hotel at the time the rent is paid. If the rent is paid in installments, a proportionate share of the tax shall be paid with each installment. The unpaid tax shall be due upon the transient’s ceasing to occupy space in the hotel. If for any reason the tax due is not paid to the operator of the hotel, the tax administrator may require that such tax shall be paid directly to the tax administrator. (Ord. 493 § 1, 1987; Ord. 115 § 3, 1964)

 

3.16.040 Exemptions.
     A.    No tax shall be imposed upon:

     1.     Any person as to whom, or any occupancy as to which, it is beyond the power of the city to impose the tax herein provided;

     2.     Any federal or state of California officer or employee when on official business;

     3.     Any officer or employee of a foreign government who is exempt by reason of express provision of federal law or international treaty.

     B.     No exemption shall be granted except upon a claim therefor made at the time rent is collected and under penalty of perjury upon a form prescribed by the tax administrator. (Ord. 115 § 4, 1964)

 

3.16.050 Operator’s duties.
     Each operator shall collect the tax imposed by this chapter to the same extent and at the same time as the rent is collected from every transient. The amount of tax shall be separately stated from the amount of the rent charged, and each transient shall receive a receipt for payment from the operator. No operator of a hotel shall advertise or state in any manner, whether directly or indirectly, that the tax or any part thereof will be assumed or absorbed by the operator, or that it will not be added to the rent, or that, if added, any part will be refunded except in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 115 § 5, 1964)

 

3.16.060 Registration.
     Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or within thirty (30) days after commencing business, whichever is later, each operator of any hotel renting occupancy to transients shall register the hotel with the tax administrator and obtain from him a transient occupancy registration certificate to be at all times posted in a conspicuous place on the premises. The certificate shall, among other things, state the following:

     A.    The name of the operator;

     B.     The address of the hotel;

     C.     The date upon which the certificate was issued;

     D.    “This transient occupancy registration certificate signifies that the person named on the face hereof has fulfilled the requirements of the Uniform Transient Occupancy Tax Ordinance by registering with the tax administrator for the purpose of collecting from transients the transient occupancy tax and remitting said tax to the tax administrator. This certificate does not authorize any person to conduct any unlawful business or to conduct any lawful business in an unlawful manner, nor to operate a hotel without strictly complying with all local applicable laws, including but not limited to those requiring a permit from any board, commission, department or office of this city. This certificate does not constitute a permit. (Ord. 115 § 6, 1964)

 

3.16.070 Reporting and remitting.
     Each operator shall, on or before the last day of the month following the close of each calendar quarter, or at the close of any shorter reporting period which may be established by the tax administrator, make a return to the tax administrator, on forms provided by him, of the total rents charged and received and the amount of tax collected for transient occupancies. At the time the return is filed, the full amount of the tax collected shall be remitted to the tax administrator. The tax administrator may establish shorter reporting periods for any certificate holder if he deems it necessary in order to insure collection of the tax and he may require further information in the return. Returns and payments are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. All taxes collected by operators pursuant to this chapter shall be held in trust for the account of the city until payment thereof is made to the tax administrator. (Ord. 115 § 7, 1964)

 

3.16.080 Failure to collect and report tax.
     Determination of Tax by Tax Administrator. If any operator shall fail or refuse to collect the tax and to make, within the time provided in this chapter, any report and remittance of the tax or any portion thereof required by this chapter, the tax administrator shall proceed in such manner as he may deem best to obtain facts and information on which to base his estimate of the tax due. As soon as the tax administrator shall procure such facts and information as he is able to obtain upon which to base the assessment of any tax imposed by this chapter and payable by any operator who has failed or refused to collect the same and to make such report and remittance, he shall proceed to determine and assess against such operator the tax, interest and penalties provided for by this chapter. In case such determination is made, the tax administrator shall give a notice of the amount so addressed by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the operator so assessed at his last known place of address. Such operator may within ten days after the serving or mailing of such notice make application in writing to the tax administrator for a hearing on the amount assessed. If application by the operator for a hearing is not made within the time prescribed, the tax, interest and penalties, if any, determined by the tax administrator shall become final and conclusive and immediately due and payable. If such application is made, the tax administrator shall give not less than five days written notice in the manner prescribed herein to the operator to show cause at a time and place fixed in the notice why the amount specified therein should not be fixed for such tax, interest and penalties. At such hearing, the operator may appear and offer evidence why such specified tax, interest and penalties should not be so fixed. After such hearing the tax administrator shall determine the proper tax to be remitted and shall thereafter give written notice to the person in the manner prescribed herein of such determination and the amount of such tax, interest and penalties. The amount determined to be due shall be payable after fifteen (15) days unless an appeal is taken as provided in Section 3.16.090. (Ord. 115 § 9, 1964)

 

3.16.090 Appeal.
     Any operator aggrieved by any decision of the tax administrator with respect to the amount of such tax, interest and penalties, if any, may appeal to the council by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within fifteen (15) days of the serving or mailing of the determination of tax due. The council shall fix a time and place for hearing such appeal, and the city clerk shall give notice in writing to such operator at his last known place of address. The findings of the council shall be final and conclusive and shall be served upon the appellant in the manner prescribed above for service of notice of hearing. Any amount found to be due shall be immediately due and payable upon the service of notice. (Ord. 115 § 10, 1964)

 

3.16.100 Records.
     It shall be the duty of every operator liable for the collection and payment to the city of any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he may have been liable for the collection of and payment to the city, which records the tax administrator shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times. (Ord. 115 § 11, 1964)

 

3.16.110 Refunds.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any tax, interest or penalty has been overpaid or paid more than once or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city under this chapter it may be refunded as provided in subsections (B) and (C) of this section; provided, a claim in writing therefor, stating under penalty of perjury the specific grounds upon which the claim is founded, is filed with the tax administrator within three years of the date of payment. The claim shall be on forms furnished by the tax administrator.

     B.     An operator may claim a refund or take as credit against taxes collected and remitted the amount overpaid, paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received when it is established in a manner prescribed by the tax administrator that the person from whom the tax has been collected was not a transient; provided, however, that neither a refund nor a credit shall be allowed unless the amount of the tax so collected has either been refunded to the transient or credited to rent subsequently payable by the transient to the operator.

     C.     A transient may obtain a refund of taxes overpaid or paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city by filing a claim in the manner provided in subsection A of this section, but only when the tax was paid by the transient directly to the tax administrator or when the transient having paid the tax to the operator, establishes to the satisfaction of the tax administrator that the transient has been unable to obtain a refund from the operator who collected the tax.

     D.    No refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the claimant establishes his right thereto by written records showing entitlement thereto. (Ord. 115 § 12, 1964)

 

3.16.120 Actions to collect.
     Any tax required to be paid by any transient under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the transient to the city. Any such tax collected by an operator which has not been paid to the city shall be deemed a debt owed by the operator to the city. Any person owning money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an auction brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount. (Ord. 115 § 13, 1964)

 

3.16.130 Penalties and interest.
     A.    Original Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter within the time required shall pay a penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax.

     B.     Continued Delinquency. Any operator who fails to remit any delinquent remittance on or before a period of thirty (30) days following the date on which the remittance first became delinquent shall pay a second delinquency penalty of ten (10) percent of the amount of the tax in addition to the amount of the tax and the ten (10) percent penalty first imposed.

     C.     Fraud. If the tax administrator determines that the nonpayment of any remittance due under this chapter is due to fraud, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax shall be added thereto in addition to the penalties stated in subsections A and B of this section.

     D.    Interest. In addition to the penalties imposed, any operator who fails to remit any tax imposed by this chapter shall pay interest at the rate of one-half of one percent per month or fraction thereof on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent until paid.

     E.     Penalties Merged With Tax. Every penalty imposed and such interest as accrues under the provisions of this section shall become a part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 115 § 8, 1964)

 

3.16.140 Violations—Misdemeanor.
     A.    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punishable therefor by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the City/County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     B.     Any operator or other person who fails or refuses to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the tax administrator, or who renders a false or fraudulent return or claim, is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is punishable as aforesaid. Any person required to make, render, sign or verify any report or claim who makes any false or fraudulent report or claim with intent to defeat or evade the determination of any amount due required by this chapter to be made, is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable as aforesaid. (Ord. 115 § 14, 1964)

Chapter 3.20 UTILITY USER TAX
3.20.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known as the utility user tax ordinance. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.020 Tax imposed.
     There is established and imposed, on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, a utility user tax in the manner and at the rates set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.030 Purpose.
     This chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for the general governmental purposes of the city. All of the proceeds from the tax imposed by this chapter shall be placed in the city’s general fund and used for the usual current expenses of the city. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.040 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section govern the construction of this chapter.

     “Ancillary telecommunications services” means services that are associated with or incidental to the provision, use or enjoyment of telecommunications services, including, but not limited to, the following services:

     1.     Services that link two or more participants of an audio or video conference call and may include the provision of a telephone number.

     2.     Services that separately state information pertaining to individual calls on a customer’s billing statement.

     3.     Services that provide telephone number information and/or address information.

     4.     Services offered in connection with one or more telecommunications services that offer advanced calling features that allow customers to identify callers and to manage multiple calls and call connections.

     5.     Services that enable the customer to store, send or receive recorded messages.

     “Billing address” means the mailing address of the service user where the service supplier submits invoices or bills for payment by the customer.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Gas” means natural or manufactured gas or any alternate hydrocarbon fuel which may be substituted therefor.

     “Month” means a calendar month.

     “Person” means without limitation, any domestic, nonprofit or foreign corporation, firm, association, syndicate, joint-stock company, partnership of any kind, joint venture, club, trust, limited liability company, business or common-law trust, society, any natural individual, cooperative, receiver, trustee, guardian or other representative appointed by order of any court, or any municipal corporation (other than the city).

     “Private communications services” means any dedicated virtual or actual telecommunications services that entitle the user to the exclusive or priority use of communications channels.

     “Service supplier” means any person or entity required to collect or self-impose and remit a tax as imposed by this chapter.

     “Service user” means a person required to pay a tax imposed by this chapter.

     “Tax administrator” means the city manager or designee.

     “Telecommunications services” means the transmission, conveyance, or routing of voice, data, audio, video, or any other information or signals to a point, or between or among points, whatever the technology used, whether such transmission, conveyance or routing occurs by wire, cable, fiber-optic, light wave, laser, microwave, radio wave (including, but not limited to, cellular service, commercial mobile service, personal communications service (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR) and other types of personal wireless service, regardless of radio spectrum used, switching facilities, satellite or any other technology now existing or developed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this section, and includes, without limitation, fiber optic, coaxial cable and wireless. The term “telecommunications services” includes such transmission, conveyance, or routing in which computer processing applications are used to act on the form, code or protocol of the content for purposes of transmission, conveyance or routing without regard to whether such services are referred to as voice over internet protocol (VoIP) services or are classified by the Federal Communications Commission as enhanced or value added, and includes video and/or data services that are functionally integrated with telecommunications services. Telecommunications services include, but are not limited to, the following services, regardless of the manner or basis on which such services are calculated or billed: central office and custom calling features (including, but not limited to, call waiting, call forwarding, caller identification and three-way calling), local number portability, text messaging, ancillary telecommunication services; prepaid and post-paid services (including, but not limited to, prepaid calling cards); mobile telecommunications service; private communication service; paging service; and 800 service (or any other toll-free numbers designated by the Federal Communications Commission). Telecommunication service does not include charges for internet access services the taxation of which is prohibited by federal law, video programming services or digital downloads, such as downloads of books, music, ringtones, games and similar digital products.

     “Telephone corporation,” “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation,” and “water corporation,” shall have the same meanings as defined in Sections 234, 218, 222, 241, respectively, of the California Public Utilities Code except, “electrical corporation,” “gas corporation” and “water corporation” shall also be construed to include any municipality or public agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power or gas or water to a service user. “Electrical corporation” shall include any organization or municipality or agency engaged in the selling or supplying of electrical power to a service user. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.050 Constitutional exemptions—Effect of state and federal authorization.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon any person when imposition of such tax upon that person would be in violation of California statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state of California. To the extent that the city’s authorization to impose or collect the tax imposed in this chapter is expanded or limited as a result of changes in state or federal law, no amendment or modification of this chapter shall be required to conform the tax to those changes, and the tax shall be imposed and collected to the full extent of the city’s authorization up to the full amount of the tax imposed by this chapter. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.060 Additional exemptions.
     A.    The city council may, by order or resolution, establish one or more classes of persons or one or more classes of utility service otherwise subject to payment of a tax imposed by this chapter and provide that such classes of persons or service shall be exempt, in whole or in part from such tax.

     B.     The tax administrator shall prepare a list of the persons exempt from the provisions of this chapter by virtue of this section and furnish a copy thereof to each service supplier. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.070 Telecommunication users tax.
     A.    There is hereby imposed a tax upon every person with a billing address or service address in the city who uses telecommunication services, including intrastate, interstate (including calls to the District of Columbia), and international telecommunications services, to the extent permitted by state and federal law. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of five percent on the charges made for telecommunication services and shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier or its billing agent. To the extent allowed by law, the tax on telecommunication services shall apply to a service user if the billing address or service address of the service user is within the city’s boundaries.

     B.     Except as otherwise provided herein, telecommunication services shall include all telecommunication service for which there is a charge, regardless of the means or technology used to provide such services. The tax imposed under subsection A of this section shall not be imposed upon any person for using the following communications services:

     1.     Except with respect to local telephone service, services used in the collection of news for the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press or radio broadcasting, or in the dissemination of news through the public press, or a news ticker service furnishing a general news service similar to that of the public press or by means of radio broadcasting, if the charge for such service is billed in writing to such person.

     2.     Services furnished to a public international organization in which the United States participates pursuant to treaty or Act of Congress, or to the American National Red Cross.

     3.     Any toll telephone service which originates within a combat zone and is from a member of the Armed Forces of the United States performing service in such combat zone; provided a certificate, setting forth such facts as the Secretary of the United States Treasury may by regulations prescribe, is furnished to the person receiving such payment.

     4.     No tax shall be imposed under this section on the amount paid for any telecommunication services to the extent that the amount so paid is for use by a common carrier, telephone or telegraph company, or radio broadcasting station or network in the conduct of its business.

     5.     The installation of any instrument, wire, pole, switchboard, apparatus or equipment as is properly attributable to such installation.

     6.     Amounts paid by a nonprofit hospital for services furnished to such organization. For purposes of this exemption, the term “nonprofit hospital” means a hospital referred to in Section 170(b)(1)(A)(iii) of the Internal Revenue Code, which is exempt from federal income tax under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.

     7.     Services or facilities furnished to the government of any state, or any political subdivision thereof.

     8.     Services or facilities paid for by a nonprofit educational organization and furnished to such organization. For purposes of this subsection, the term ”nonprofit educational organization” means an educational organization that is exempt from income tax under Section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code. The term also includes a school operated as an activity of an organization described in Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, which is exempt from income tax under Section 501(a) of the same code, if such school normally maintains a regular faculty and curriculum and normally has a regularly enrolled body of pupils or students in attendance at the place where its educational activities are regularly carried on.

     C.     As used in this section, the term “charges” shall include the value of any other services, credits, property of every kind or nature, or other consideration provided by the service user in exchange for the telecommunication services.

     D.    To prevent actual multi-jurisdictional taxation of telecommunication services subject to tax under this section, any service user, upon proof to the tax administrator that the service user owed and has previously paid the same tax in another state or city on such telecommunication services, shall be allowed a credit against the tax imposed to the extent of the amount of such tax legally imposed in such other state or city; provided, however, the amount of credit shall not exceed the tax owed to the city under this section.

     E.     For purposes of imposing a tax or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax under this chapter, “substantial nexus” and “minimum contacts” shall be construed broadly in favor of the imposition, collection and/or remittance of the tax to the fullest extent permitted by state and federal law, and as it may change from time to time by judicial interpretation or by statutory enactment. Any telecommunication services used by a person with a service address in the city, shall be subject to a rebuttable presumption that “substantial nexus/minimum contacts” exists for purposes of imposing a tax, or establishing a duty to collect and remit a tax, under this chapter. For telecommunication services for which there is no billing address or primary physical location for the provision of services, the service address shall mean the point of sale of the services. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 697 §§ 1, 2, 2006; Ord. 696 § 2, Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.080 Electricity user tax.
     A.    There is imposed a tax on every person other than a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, water corporation or gas corporation, using electrical energy in the city. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such energy and shall be paid by the person paying for such energy. The tax applicable to electrical energy provided by a nonutility supplier shall be determined by applying the tax rate to the equivalent charge the service user would have incurred if the energy used had been provided by the electrical corporation furnishing the city. Rate schedules for this purpose shall be available from the city. Nonutility suppliers shall install, maintain and use an appropriate utility-type metering system which will enable compliance with this section. “Charges,” as used in this section, shall include charges made for metered energy and charges for service, including customer charges, service charges, standby charges, charges for temporary services, demand charges, annual and monthly charges, and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

     B.     As used in this section, the term “using electrical energy” shall not be construed to mean the storage of such energy by a person in a battery owned or possessed by him or her for use in an automobile or other machinery or device apart from the premises upon which the energy was received; provided, however, that the term shall include the receiving of such energy for the purpose of the mere receiving of such energy by an electric public utility or governmental agency at a point within the city for resale; nor shall the term include the use of such energy in the production or distribution of water by a public utility or a governmental agency; nor shall the term include the use of electrical energy used in the conduct of business by a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, water corporation or gas corporation.

 

     C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying such energy. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month, unless the due date occurs on a weekend or a holiday, in which case the due date is the first business day following. Taxes shall be deemed remitted on the date received by the tax administrator, or on the date postmarked, if remitted by first class United States mail with postage fully prepaid. With prior written approval of the tax administrator, remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier’s customers. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.090 Gas user tax.
     A.    There is imposed a tax on every person other than a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, water corporation or gas corporation, using, in the city, gas which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such gas and charges for service, including customer charges, service charges and annual and monthly charges and any other charge authorized by the California Public Utilities Commission or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission.

     B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed:

     1.     Charges made for gas which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes;

     2.     Charges made for gas sold for use in the generation of electrical energy or for the production or distribution of water by a public utility or governmental agency;

     3.     Charges made for gas used in the propulsion of a motor vehicle, as that phrase is defined in the Vehicle Code of the state of California, utilizing natural gas; and

     4.     Charges made for gas used by a nonutility supplier to generate electrical energy for its own use, or for sale or others, provided the electricity so generated is subject to the tax in accordance with Section 3.20.080.

     C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person selling the gas. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month, unless the due date occurs on a weekend or a holiday, in which case the due date is the first business day following. Taxes shall be deemed remitted on the date received by the tax administrator, or on the date postmarked, if remitted by first class United States mail with postage fully prepaid. With prior written approval of the tax administrator, remittance of tax may be predicated on a formula based upon the payment pattern of the supplier’s customers. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.100 Water users tax.
     A.    There is imposed a tax upon every person other than a telephone corporation, electrical corporation, water corporation or gas corporation, in the city using water which is delivered through mains or pipes. The tax imposed by this section shall be at the rate of six percent of the charges made for such water and shall be paid by the person paying for such water.

     B.     There shall be excluded from the base on which the tax imposed in this section is computed charges made for water which is to be resold and delivered through mains or pipes; and charges made by a municipal water department, public utility or a city or municipal water district for water used and consumed by such department, utility or district.

     C.     The tax imposed in this section shall be collected from the service user by the person supplying the water. The amount collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator on or before the last day of the following month. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.110 Penalty and interest.
     A.    Taxes collected from a service user or owed by a service user which are not remitted to the tax administrator on or before the due dates provided in this chapter are delinquent and are subject to penalties and interest. If the person required to collect and/or remit a tax imposed under this chapter fails to collect and remit the tax, such taxes are delinquent.

     B.     Any person who fails to remit taxes collected in the time required by this chapter shall pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax, and if not remitted within two working days after the date of delinquency, shall pay a total penalty of twenty (20) percent of the amount of tax owed. Such penalty shall attach to the amount of tax due and shall be paid by the person required to collect and remit the tax.

     C.     When fraud or gross negligence in reporting and remitting tax collections is discovered, the tax administrator shall have power to impose additional penalties of twenty (20) percent of taxes owed upon persons required to collect and remit taxes under the provisions of this chapter.

     D.    Any person required to remit to the tax administrator delinquent taxes as required in this section, shall pay interest at the rate of one and one-half percent per month, or portion thereof, on the amount of tax owed exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the tax first became delinquent until paid.

     E.     Notwithstanding the provisions of subsections B and D of this section, no penalty or interest shall be applied if delinquencies are the result of natural disasters or other phenomena beyond the control of the person charged with collecting and remitting the tax, provided the person being delinquent notifies the tax administrator as soon as normal communications permit.

     F.     Every penalty imposed under the provisions of this chapter shall become a part of the tax required to be remitted. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.120 Actions to collect.
     Any tax required to be paid by a service user under the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt owed by the service user to the city. Any such tax collected from a service user which has not been remitted to the tax administrator shall be deemed a debt owed to the city by the person required to collect and remit and shall no longer be a debt of the service user. In the event that a service supplier required to collect and remit a tax under the provisions of this chapter fails to do so in whole or in part, the amount of such unremitted tax shall be deemed a debt owed by the service supplier to the city. Any person owing money to the city under the provisions of this chapter shall be liable to an action brought in the name of the city for the recovery of such amount, plus any collection costs incurred by the city as a result of the person’s noncompliance with this chapter, including, but not limited to, reasonable attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.130 Duty to collect—Procedures.
     The duty to collect and remit the taxes imposed by this chapter shall be performed as follows:

     A.    The tax shall be collected insofar as practicable at the same time as and along with the charges made in accordance with the regular billing practices of the service supplier. Where the amount paid by a service user to a service supplier is less than the full amount of the utility charge and tax which has accrued for the billing period, such amount and any subsequent payments by a service user shall be applied to the utility charge first until such charge has been fully satisfied. Any remaining balance shall be applied to taxes due.

     B.     The duty to collect tax from a service user shall commence with the beginning of the first full regular billing period applicable to the service user where all charges normally included in such regular billing are subject to the provisions of this chapter. Where a person receives more than one billing, one or more being for different periods than another, the duty to collect shall arise separately for each billing.

     C.     The taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collected from the service user by the service supplier. The amount of tax collected in one month shall be remitted to the tax administrator, and must be received by the tax administrator on or before the twentieth (20th) day of the following month. Should the due date occur on a weekend or legal holiday, the return may be made on the first regular working day following a Saturday, Sunday, or legal holiday. If a service supplier uses a billing agent or billing aggregator to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax, the service supplier shall: (1) provide to the tax administrator the name, address and telephone number of each billing agent and billing aggregator currently authorized by the service supplier to bill, collect, and/or remit the tax to the city; and (2) upon request of the tax administrator, deliver, or effect the delivery of, any information or records in the possession of such billing agent or billing aggregator that, in the opinion of the tax administrator, is necessary to verify the proper application, calculation, collection and/or remittance of such tax to the city.

     D.    Each person required by this chapter to remit a tax shall file a return with the tax administrator on forms approved by the tax administrator on or before the due date. The full amount of the tax owed shall be included with the return and filed with the tax administrator. The tax administrator is authorized to require such further information as he or she deems necessary to properly determine if the tax hereby imposed is being levied and collected in accordance with this chapter. Returns and remittances are due immediately upon cessation of business for any reason. Pursuant to California Revenue and Taxation Code Section 7284.6, the tax administrator, and his or her agents, shall maintain such filing returns as confidential information, and not subject to the Public Records Act.

     E.     The Tax Administrator may, from time to time, issue and disseminate to service suppliers, which are subject to the tax collection requirements of this section, administrative rulings identifying those services that are subject to the taxes imposed by this chapter or otherwise interpreting the provisions of this chapter. To the extent that the tax administrator determines that any tax imposed under this chapter shall not be collected in full for any period of time, such a determination falls within the tax administrator’s discretion to settle disputes. The tax administrator’s exercise of prosecutorial forbearance under this section does not constitute a change in taxing methodology for purposes of Government Code Section 53750, and the city does not waive or abrogate its ability to impose the taxes under this chapter in full as a result of issuing such administrative rulings. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.140 Additional powers and duties of tax administrator.
     A.    The tax administrator shall have the power and duty, and is directed to enforce each and all of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     The tax administrator shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations not inconsistent with provisions of this chapter for the purpose of carrying out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the taxes herein imposed. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

     C.     The tax administrator may make administrative agreements to vary the strict requirements of this chapter so that collection of any tax imposed here may be made in conformance with the billing procedures of a particular service supplier so long as such agreements result in collection of the tax in conformance with the general purpose and scope of this chapter. A copy of each such agreement shall be on file in the tax administrator’s office.

     D.    The tax administrator shall determine the eligibility of any person who asserts a right to exemption from the tax imposed by this chapter. The tax administrator shall provide the service supplier with the name of any person who the tax administrator determines is exempt from the tax imposed, together with the address and account number to which service is supplied to any such exempt person. The tax administrator shall notify the service supplier of the termination of any person’s right to exemption hereunder, or the change of any address to which service is supplied to any exempt person. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.150 Assessment—Administrative remedy.
     A.    The tax administrator may make an assessment for taxes not remitted by a person required to remit.

     B.     Whenever the tax administrator determines that a service user has deliberately withheld the amount of the tax owed by him or her from the amounts remitted to a service supplier, or that a service user has failed to pay the amount of the tax for a period of two or more billing periods, or whenever the tax administrator deems it in the best interest of the city, he or she may relieve the service supplier of the obligation to collect taxes due under this chapter from certain named service users for specified billing periods. The service supplier shall provide the city with the names and addresses of such service users and the amounts of taxes owed or refused by the service users under the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     The tax administrator shall notify the service user that he or she has assumed responsibility to collect the taxes due for the stated periods and demand payment of such taxes. The notice shall be served on the service user by handing it to him or her personally or by deposit of the notice in the United States mail, postage prepaid thereon, addressed to the service user at the address to which billing was made by the service supplier; or should the service user have changed his or her address, to his or her last known address. If a service user fails to remit the tax to the tax administrator within fifteen (15) days from the date of the service of the notice upon him or her, which shall be the date of mailing if service is not accomplished in person, a penalty of twenty-five (25) percent of the amount of the tax set forth in the notice shall be imposed, along with interest at the rate of three-quarters of one percent per month, or any fraction thereof, on the amount of the tax, exclusive of penalties, from the date on which the remittance first became delinquent, until paid, but not less than five dollars. The penalty shall become part of the tax herein required to be paid. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.160 Records.
     A.    It shall be the duty of every person required to collect and/or remit to the city any tax imposed by this chapter to keep and preserve, for a period of at least three years, all records as may be necessary to determine the amount of such tax as he or she may have been liable for the collection of and remittance to the tax administrator, which records the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, shall have the right to inspect at all reasonable times.

     B.     If any person subject to record-keeping under this section unreasonably denies the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, access to such records, the tax administrator, or the tax administrator’s designated representative, may impose a penalty of five hundred dollars ($500.00) on such person for each day following the initial date that the person refuses to provide such access. This penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.170 Refunds.
     A.    Whenever the amount of any tax has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, it may be refunded as provided in this section.

     B.     The tax administrator may refund to the taxpayer any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that no refund shall be paid under the provisions of this section unless the taxpayer or his or her guardian, conservator, executor or administrator has submitted a written claim signed by the claimant to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish claimant’s right to the refund by written records showing entitlement thereto. No claim may be filed on behalf of a class or group of taxpayers unless such claim is signed by each taxpayer included in the class or group.

 

     C.     The tax administrator may refund to a service supplier any tax that has been overpaid, paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the tax administrator under this chapter, provided that the service supplier has submitted a written claim signed by the service supplier to the tax administrator within one year of the overpayment or erroneous or illegal collection of said tax. Such claim must clearly establish that the tax sought to be refunded was collected from the service user, that the service user from whom the tax was collected did not owe the tax and that the amount of the tax sought to be refunded was refunded in full to the service user prior to the service supplier submitting the claim.

     D.    The submission of a written claim, which is acted upon by the city council, shall be a prerequisite to a suit thereon. The city council shall act upon the refund claim within the time period set forth in Government Code Section 912.4. If the city council fails or refuses to act on a refund claim within the time prescribed by Government Code Section 912.4, the claim shall be deemed to be rejected by the city council on the last day of the period within which the city council was required to act upon the claim as provided in Government Code Section 912.4. It is the intent of the city council that the one-year written claim requirement of this section be given retroactive effect; provided, however, that any claims which arose prior to the commencement of the one-year claims period of this section, and which are not otherwise barred by a then-applicable statute of limitations or claims procedure, must be filed with the tax administrator as provided in this subsection within ninety (90) days following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section.

     E.     Notwithstanding other provisions of this section, whenever a service supplier, pursuant to an order of the California Public Utilities Commission or a court of competent jurisdiction, makes a refund to service users of charges for past utility services, the taxes paid pursuant to this chapter on the amount of such refunded charges shall also be refunded to service users, and the service supplier shall be entitled to claim a credit for such refunded taxes against the amount of tax which is due upon the next monthly return. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012; Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.180 Effective date—Commence of tax.
     This chapter shall become effective the eighth day of April, 1991. The tax imposed under this chapter shall apply to services furnished from the beginning of the first regular billing period commencing on or after June 1, 1991 or as soon thereafter as the respective utilities are physically and mechanically able to impose the charges. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.190 Termination or suspension of utility user tax.
     The service supplier shall, upon notification, terminate or suspend any utility user tax commencing with the first full billing period which occurs after the effective day of such action by the city council. (Ord. 540 § 1, 1991)

 

3.20.200 Bundling taxable and nontaxable charges.
     If a nontaxable service and a taxable service are billed together under a single charge, the entire charge shall be deemed taxable unless the service supplier or taxpayer reasonably identifies actual charges not subject to the utility users tax based upon books and records that are kept in the regular course of business, in a manner consistent with generally accepted accounting principles. The service supplier or taxpayer has the burden of proving the proper apportionment of taxable and nontaxable charges. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012)

 

3.20.210 Exemptions.
     A.    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as imposing a tax upon:

     1.     Any person or service if imposition of such tax upon that person or service would be in violation of a federal or California statute, the Constitution of the United States or the Constitution of the state of California;

     2.     The city;

     3.     Any person who is exempt under Section 3.20.050 of this chapter.

     B.     The exemptions granted by this section shall not eliminate the duty of the service supplier from collecting taxes from such exempt individuals, or the duty of such exempt individuals from paying such taxes to the service supplier; unless an exemption is applied for by the service user and granted in accordance with the provisions of this section.

     C.     Any service user exempt from the taxes imposed by this chapter because of the provisions of subsection A of this section, may file an application with the tax administrator for an exemption. Such application shall be made upon a form supplied by the tax administrator; and shall state those facts, declared under oath, which qualify the applicant for an exemption.

     D.    The tax administrator shall review all such applications, and shall certify as exempt those applicants determined to qualify therefor; and shall notify all service suppliers affected that such exemptions have been approved. For each exemption, the following information shall be transmitted to the service supplier:

     1.     Name of exempt applicant;

     2.     Account number shown on utility bill;

     3.     Address to which exempt service is being supplied; and

     4.     Any other information as may be necessary for the service supplier to remove the exempt service user from its tax billing procedure.

     E.     Upon receipt of such notice, the service supplier shall not be required to continue to bill any further tax imposed by this chapter from such exempt service user, until further notice by the tax administrator is given. The service supplier shall eliminate such exempt service user from its tax billing procedure no later than sixty (60) days after receipt of such notice from the tax administrator.

     F.     All exemptions shall continue and be renewed automatically by the tax administrator, so long as the prerequisite facts supporting the initial qualification for exemption shall continue; provided, however, that the exemption shall automatically terminate with any change in the service address or residence of the exempt individual; further provided such individual may nevertheless apply for a new exemption with each change of address or residence.

     G.    The tax administrator shall have the power and right to demand evidence of continued eligibility of a service user for exemption under the provisions of this section. Such evidence may include, but need not be limited to, copies of business records, letters or statements from the Social Security Administration, copies of income tax returns, and such other evidence concerning the service user or other members of his or her household as may tend to prove or disprove such eligibility. Failure to provide such evidence as is within the control of a service user to so provide, either directly by him or her or by his or her consent or the consent of a member of his or her household when such evidence is requested of the service user in writing by the tax administrator, shall be grounds for the immediate discontinuance of the service user’s eligibility for exemption under the provisions of this section. Evidence provided to the tax administrator upon request, or voluntarily provided by the service user without request, may not be used against such service user as evidence of violation of the provisions of this section; such evidence may only be used as grounds for termination of the exemption herein provided.

     H.    Any individual exempt from the tax shall notify the tax administrator within ten (10) days of any change in fact or circumstance which might disqualify said individual from receiving such exemption. It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to knowingly receive the benefits of the exemptions provided by this section, when the basis for such exemption either does not exist or ceases to exist.

     I.      Notwithstanding any of the provisions hereof, any service supplier who determines by any means that a new or nonexempt service user is receiving service through a meter or connection exempt by virtue of an exemption issued to a previous user or exempt user of the same meter or connection, such service supplier shall immediately notify the tax administrator of such fact; and the tax administrator shall conduct an investigation to ascertain whether or not the provisions of this section have been complied with, and where appropriate, order the service supplier to commence collecting the tax from the nonexempt service user.

     J.      If the tax administrator determines that an application for exemption is faulty, or that the applicant has failed to truthfully set forth such facts, the application for the exemption shall be denied in writing to the applicant. The applicant shall thereafter have a right to file an amended application for exemption; or to appeal the tax administrator’s decision to the city manager within a ten (10) day period after the mailing date of the tax administrator’s rejection. In the case of an appeal, the city manager shall review the facts in consultation with the city attorney, and shall render a final determination on such appeal.

     K.    Upon request of the tax administrator, a service supplier, or its billing agent, shall provide a list of the names and addresses of those customers which, according to its billing records, are deemed exempt from any tax imposed under this chapter. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012)

 

3.20.220 No injunction or writ of mandate.
     No injunction or writ of mandate or other legal or equitable process shall issue in any suit, action, or proceeding in any court against this city or against any officer of the city to prevent or enjoin the collection under this chapter of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected and/or remitted. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012)

 

3.20.230 Annual review and report.
     The city shall prepare an annual report regarding the utility users tax setting forth the amount of tax collected under this chapter during the preceding fiscal year, a comparison of the amount of tax collected as compared to prior years and any recommendations concerning the audit or expenditure of the funds collected and/or remitted in accordance with this chapter. Such annual report shall be presented to the city council and shall be a public document and made available to the public. (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012)

 

3.20.240 Amendment or repeal.
     Taxes imposed by this chapter may be decreased, repealed or amended by the city council, but may not be increased without a vote of the people as required in California Constitution Article XIIIC and California Government Code Section 53750(h). (Ord. 12-04 § 1, 2012)

Chapter 3.24 SPECIAL GAS TAX STREET IMPROVEMENT FUND
3.24.010 Established.
     To comply with the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state, there is established in the city treasury a special fund to be known as the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 325 § 3, 1976)

 

3.24.020 Moneys to be deposited.
     All money received by the city from the state under the provisions of the Streets and Highways Code of the state for the acquisition of real property or interests therein for the construction, maintenance or improvements of streets or highways shall be paid into the special gas tax street improvement fund. (Ord. 325 § 4, 1976)

 

3.24.030 Disposition of funds.
     All money in the gas tax street improvement fund shall be expended exclusively for the purpose authorized by, and subject to all the provisions of Article 5, Chapter 1, Division 1 of the Streets and Highways Code of the state. (Ord. 325 § 5, 1976)

Chapter 3.28 CLAIMS AGAINST CITY
3.28.010 Applicability.
     Pursuant to Section 935 of the Government Code, all claims against the city for money, damages or indemnification, including, but not limited to, those exempted by Section 905 of the Government Code from the provisions of Division 3.6 of the Government Code (Section 810 et seq.), including, but not limited to, Chapter 1 (commencing with Section 900) and Chapter 2 (commencing with Section 910), and is not governed by any other statute or regulation expressly relating thereto shall be governed by the procedure prescribed in this chapter. (Ord. 653 § 2, 2002; Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

 

3.28.020 Presentation of claim as prerequisite to suit.
     No suit for money, damages or indemnification as described in Section 3.28.020 may be brought against the city until a written claim therefor has been presented and acted upon, or has been deemed to have been rejected, in accordance with this chapter and Sections 945.4, 945.6 and 946 of the Government Code. (Ord. 653 § 3, 2002; Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

 

3.28.030 Time limitation.
     Any claim specified in Section 3.28.010 shall be presented in accordance with the time limitations set forth in Government Code, Section 911.2. In addition, pursuant to Government Code, Section 901, any claim against the city for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity shall be presented not later than six months after the date upon which a defendant is served with the complaint giving rise to the defendant’s claim for a cause of action for equitable indemnity or partial equitable indemnity against the city. (Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

 

3.28.040 Late filing.
     In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the late filing of claims pursuant to this chapter is regulated by Section 911.4 and 911.6 through 912.2, inclusive, of the Government Code. (Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

 

3.28.050 Presentation and contents.
     A signed, written claim shall be presented to the city clerk by mailing or delivering it to the city clerk. The claim shall conform to the requirements of Section 910 of the Government Code or to a form provided by the city, if such form is provided. (Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

 

3.28.060 Procedures for consideration.
     Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the procedure for consideration and action upon all claims filed pursuant to this chapter shall be the same as the procedure provided and required by Sections 910 through 915.4, inclusive, of the Government Code. In accordance with Section 935 of the Government Code, the consideration and action upon claims presented pursuant to Section 3.28.040 shall be the same as the procedure provided and required by Section 946.6 of the Government Code. (Ord. 653 § 4, 2002; Ord. 567 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 3.32 UNCLAIMED PROPERTY
3.32.010 Duty of disposal.
     It shall be the duty of the law enforcement agency of the city to dispose of all unclaimed property in its possession. Such property shall be handled and disposed of after complying with the provisions of Section 1873 of the Civil Code of the state of California as said code may be amended from time to time, exempting therefrom the property which would fall under Section 1411 of the Penal Code of the state of California, and as said code may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 75 § 1, 1962)

 

3.32.020 Holding period.
     All of such property falling under Section 1873 of the Civil Code of the state of California shall be held by such law enforcement agency for a period of at least six months. (Ord. 75 § 2, 1962)

 

3.32.030 Public auction allowed when.
     All unclaimed property subject of this chapter after being held in custody by the law enforcement agency for a period of six months and which remains unclaimed shall be sold at public auction to the highest bidder. (Ord. 75 § 3, 1962)

 

3.32.040 Other methods of disposal.
     In the event property cannot be sold at public auction, it may be given away to any fraternal, benevolent, patriotic, charitable or religious organization, not organized for profit, as directed by the city council by the city council. If any such property is of no value and cannot otherwise be disposed of by gift or sale, it may be destroyed as junk. No property shall be disposed of as junk or given away as a gift until due notice has been given as set forth in this chapter dealing with the sale of such property at a public auction. (Ord. 75 § 4, 1962)

 

3.32.050 Notice of publication.
     Notice of such sale at public auction shall be given by the law enforcement agency at least five days before the time fixed therefor, by appropriate publication in a newspaper at least once. The newspaper shall be of general circulation published within the county. The notice shall specify the time and place where such public sale will be held, and generally describe the property to be sold at the public auction. (Ord. 75 § 5, 1962)

 

3.32.060 Appearance of owner to reclaim property—Reimbursement to city required.
     In the event the owner of any such property shall appear on or before the date fixed for the sale thereof at public auction and reclaim the property and reimburse the city for all expenses incurred in the care and preservation of the property, then the property shall be restored to the owner. (Ord. 75 § 6, 1962)

 

3.32.070 Frequency of auction.
     The public sale shall be held at least once a year by the law enforcement agency of the city and may be held at more frequent intervals as determined by the law enforcement agency. (Ord. 75 § 7, 1962)

 

3.32.080 Use of revenue derived from sale of property.
     All revenue derived from the sale of the property shall be turned over to the Police Explorers Post No. 658. (Ord. 235 § 1, 1973; Ord. 75 § 8, 1962)

Title 4 (Reserved)

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS
Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Chapter 5.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
Chapter 5.12 AMBULANCE SERVICES
Chapter 5.16 BINGO
Chapter 5.18 REMOTE CALLER BINGO
Chapter 5.20 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
Chapter 5.24 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESS
Chapter 5.28 FORTUNETELLING AND SIMILAR PRACTICES
Chapter 5.32 MASSAGE
Chapter 5.36 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
Chapter 5.40 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES
Chapter 5.42 ADULT-ORIENTED LIVE ENTERTAINER LICENSES
Chapter 5.44 FIGURE MODEL LICENSES
Chapter 5.46 ESCORT LICENSES
Chapter 5.48 DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS—IN-STORE NEWSRACKS—BLINDERS REQUIRED
Chapter 5.50 PEDDLING, CANVASSING AND SOLICITATION

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS LICENSES GENERALLY
Article I. General Provisions
5.04.010 Purpose.
     The ordinance codified in this chapter is enacted solely to raise revenue for municipal purposes and is not intended for regulation. (Ord. 354 § 2, 1977)

 

5.04.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them by this section.

     “Apartments, motels, hotels, rooming houses, cottages and residential buildings having rental spaces” means a place where three or more rooms, apartments, cottages or rental spaces are located upon one parcel of property, or upon adjoining parcels of property under one ownership, and are designed for the independent living of three or more families.

     “Applicant” means any person who applies for a license from the license collector under the provisions of this chapter.

     “Automobile rental” means every motor vehicle used for the transportation of passengers over the public highways and not over defined routes, irrespective of whether or not such passengers are transported beyond the limits of the city, and at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per week or per month, and shall include the leasing, renting or hiring by the day, hour, trip or otherwise, whether with or without driver, of any vehicle, camper, sight-seeing car, omnibus, stage or taxicab used for carrying passengers over an undefined route, one terminus of which is inside the city; and also means and includes a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the transportation of property, which motor vehicle is rented, leased or hired without driver or operator, at rates per mile, per trip, per hour, per day, per week, per month or otherwise.

     “Auto wrecking” means the maintenance of a place, building or lot where secondhand automobiles, trucks or any parts thereof, are traded for or bought, for the purpose of dismantling, wrecking or otherwise tearing down the same; and the parts or accessories from such automobiles or trucks are offered for sale or exchange as usable; and the storage of metals and materials as may accumulate only from such automobiles or trucks.

     “Business” means any business, profession, trade, calling, occupation, show, exhibition or game, and every kind of calling whether or not carried on for profit or livelihood.

     “Business/building space” means the number of square feet rented, leased or owned by the applicant and being used or proposed to be used in the conduct of the business, including space or land area used for storage of goods, products or materials used in the business, and excluding area devoted to parking and landscaping.

     “Business license tax” means the privilege tax imposed upon persons engaged in business as defined herein, for the privilege of engaging in such business within the city.

     “Carnival company” means a collection of shows, exhibitions, feats of strength, rides, merchandise booths, games of skill, fortunetelling, games of chance, wheels of fortune or any other amusement device presented or offered upon the streets or vacant property within the city, other than circuses, animal shows or side shows with circuses.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, a municipal corporation of the state of California.

     “Collector,” as used in this chapter, means the city tax collector, finance officer or other city officer charged with the administration of this chapter.

     “Contractor” means a person who for either a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, profit and other compensation, other than wages, undertakes or offers to undertake, or proposes to have the capacity to undertake, to construct, alter, repair, add to or improve any building, highway, road, excavation or other structural project, development or improvement or to do any part thereof. Such term shall, unless specifically distinguished, include “subcontractor” and “specialty contractor.”

     Such term does not apply to any work or operation in one undertaking or project by one or more contracts, the aggregate contract price for which labor, materials and all other items is less than one hundred dollars ($100.00), such work or operations being considered as of casual, minor or inconsequential nature; provided, that this exemption does not apply in any case wherein the work of construction is only a part of a larger or major operation, whether undertaking by the same or a different contractor, or in which a division of the operation is made in contracts of amounts less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the purpose of evasion of the provisions of this chapter.

     Such term does not apply to owners of property, buildings or improving structures thereon for the occupancy of such owner and not intended for sale. If the structure is occupied and used by the owner, or a tenant of the owner, upon completion, and is not offered for sale prior to completion; provided, that not more than one of such buildings shall be so constructed in any one calendar year.

 

     “Dry cleaning - laundry agency” means a business separate and distinct from the business of a dry cleaner or a laundry whether or not such agency is owned or operated by a dry cleaner or a laundry, and for the purpose of this chapter, the term “dry cleaning - laundry agency” means and includes a place where goods of a textile nature may be left to be dry cleaned or laundered, for which dry cleaning or laundering a charge is made, and which service is not performed at the place of business of such agency.

     “Employee” means all persons engaged in operating or conducting any business, whether as owner, member of the owner’s family, partner, agent, manager, solicitor and any other person employed or working in such business, whether full-time or part-time.

     “Gross sales” means the total amount of the sale price of all sales and the total amount charged or received for the performance of any act, service or employment of whatever nature it may be, for which a charge is made or credit allowed, whether the sale of materials, goods, wares or merchandise; and includes all receipts, cash, credits and property of every kind or nature for which credit is allowed by the seller to the purchaser without any deduction therefrom on account of the cost of materials used, labor or service cost, interest paid or payable, losses or other expenses whatsoever. Excluded from “gross sales” shall be:

     1.     Cash discounts allowed and taken on sales;

     2.     Credit allowed on property accepted as part of the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

     3.     Any tax required by law to be included in or added to the purchase price and collected from the consumer or purchaser;

     4.     Such part of the sale price or property returned by purchasers upon rescission of the contract of sale as is refunded either in cash or by credit;

     5.     Receipts of refundable deposits, except that refundable deposits forfeited and taken into income of the business shall not be excluded;

     6.     As to a retail gasoline dealer: (a) a portion of his receipts from the sale of motor vehicle fuels equal to the motor vehicle fuel license tax imposed by and previously paid under the provisions of Part 2 of Division 2 of the Revenue and Taxation Code of the state of California; and (b) the special motor fuel tax imposed by Section 4041 of Title 26 of the United States Code if paid by the dealer or collected by him from the consumer or purchaser.

     “Itinerant vendor” means any person or individual, whether as principle or agent, who engages in a temporary or transient business in the city, selling goods, wares or merchandise, with the intention of conducting such business in the city for a period of not more than ninety (90) days, and who, for the purpose of carrying on such business, the exhibition or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, and the person so engaged shall not be relieved from the requirements of this chapter by reason of association temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary or transient business in connection with or as a part of or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer.

     “Junk collector” means any person not having a fixed place of business within the city, who goes about from place to place collecting, buying or selling articles commonly known as junk.

     “Junk dealer” means any person having a fixed place of business in the city, who buys or sells, either at wholesale or retail, for purposes of salvage, any rags, sacks, bottles, cans, papers, rubber, metal or other articles commonly known as junk.

     “Lunch stand, street kitchen or refreshment stand” means a stall or booth at which prepared food is sold, or food is cooked, for immediate sale, or where refreshments are served, which booth or stall is portable and so constructed that it can be moved from place to place.

     “Manufacturing business” means the business of producing or processing articles for use from raw or prepared materials by giving such materials new forms, qualities, properties or combinations.

     “Mobilehome park” means land or premises used or intended to be used, let or rented for occupancy by or of mobilehomes or movable dwellings.

     “Operate” means to manage, control or carry on.

     “Owner-builder” means any owner of property upon which he is building or improving structures thereon and not intended for sale. Proof of the sale or offering for sale of any such structure by the owner-builder within one year after completion of same is presumptive evidence that such structure was undertaken for purpose of sale.

     “Parking lot” means any parcel of land where motor vehicles, trailers and boats are parked or stand by the hour, day, week or month for a monetary consideration, whether direct or indirect, but shall not include any lot maintained exclusively for patrons of any business concern where no monetary consideration is charged.

     “Part-time employee” means any employee devoting less than twenty (20) hours per week to the business.

     “Person” includes all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock companies, partnerships of every kind, joint ventures, clubs, business or common law trusts, societies and individuals engaged in any business as business is defined herein, in the city.

     “Private dance” means a dance which is limited to those persons individually invited to which no admission charge is made or a dance conducted by a bona fide club, society or association, organized or incorporated for benevolent, charitable, dramatic, literary or dancing purposes, having an established membership and which holds meetings other than such dances at regular stated intervals and when the proceeds, if any, of such dances are used for the purpose of such club, society or association.

     “Public dance” means a dance open to the public for an admittance fee or charge and which is held on one day only.

     “Public dance hall” means a place open to the public upon the payment of an admittance fee wherein music is provided and people are allowed to dance, which place is so open at regular intervals or on regular days of the week.

     “Public dancing place” means a place where music is provided and the public is permitted to dance without payment of a fee.

     “Retail business” means the business of selling, leasing or renting goods, wares, merchandise, products and all other forms and kinds of personal property to any consumer for any purpose other than resale.

     “Sale” includes the transfer, in any manner or by any means whatsoever, of title to property for a consideration; the serving, supplying or furnishing for consideration of any property; and a transaction whereby the possession of property is transferred and the seller retains the title as security for the payment of the price shall likewise be deemed a sale. The foregoing definitions shall not be deemed to exclude any transaction which is or which, in effect, results in a sale within the contemplation of law.

     “Service business” means the business of furnishing, providing or performing labor, expertise or assistance for the purpose of maintenance, preservation or repair of goods, wares, merchandise, buildings and structures, and all other forms of personal and real property, or the furnishing, providing or performing of labor, expertise or assistance to or on the person of another, exclusive of professional or semiprofessional services.

     “Solicitors, canvassers, demonstrators or salesmen” means any person, whether principle or agent, who goes from place to place selling or taking orders or offering to sell or take orders for goods, wares or merchandise, or any articles for future delivery, or repairing of any article for future delivery.

     “Street” includes all streets, avenues, highways, alleys, courts, lanes, places, squares, drives, curbing, sidewalks or other public ways in this city which have been, or may hereafter be, dedicated as such as open to public use.

     “Sworn statement” means an affidavit sworn to before a person authorized to take oaths, or a declaration or certification made under penalty of perjury.

     “Wholesale business” means the business of selling goods, wares, merchandise, products or any other form or kind of personal property to a retail business or other outlet for the purpose of resale. (Ord. 354 § 1, 1977)

 

5.04.030 Effect of chapter provisions on other ordinances.
     Persons required to pay a license tax for transacting and carrying on any business under this chapter shall not be relieved from the payment of any license tax for the privilege of doing such business required under any other ordinance of the city and shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other ordinances. (Ord. 354 § 3, 1977)

 

5.04.040 License and tax payment required.
     A.    There are imposed upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations specified under this chapter license taxes in the amounts hereinafter prescribed. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession or calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to do so and paying the tax hereinafter prescribed or without complying with any and all applicable provisions of this chapter.

     B.     This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of the state of California. Persons not so required to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city, nevertheless, shall be liable for payment of the tax imposed by this chapter.

     C.     A business license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter constitutes a receipt for the license tax paid and shall have no other legal effect; a business license is a requirement, not a permit to conduct, manage or carry on any business activity in the city.

     D.    The license required by this chapter for persons to engage in professions, vocations or businesses which are also licensed by the state are for revenue purposes only and the regulatory provision of this code, including the power to deny, suspend or revoke the license of such person, shall not apply.

     E.     No license issued or payment of business tax under the provisions of this chapter shall be construed as authorizing the conduct or continuance of any illegal business or of a legal business in an illegal manner. Notwithstanding any provision in this code to the contrary, any business, operation or use that cannot be, or is not, conducted or carried out without being in violation of state or federal law shall be prohibited in all planning areas, districts, or zones within the city. (Ord. 07-04 § 1; Ord. 354 § 4, 1977)

 

Article II. Applicability
5.04.050 Branch establishments—Separate license required.
     A separate license must be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on, and for each separate type of business at the same location, and each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business licensed under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 511 § 1, 1988; Ord. 354 § 6, 1977)

 

5.04.060 Evidence of doing business.
     A.    When any person shall by use of personal contact, signs, circulars, cards, telephone books or newspapers, advertise, hold out or represent that he is in business in the city, or when any person holds an active license or permit issued by a governmental agency indicating that he is in business in the city, and such person fails to deny by a sworn statement given to the collector that he is not conducting a business in the city, after being requested to do so by the collector, then these facts shall be considered prima facie evidence that he is conducting a business in the city.

     B.     Every person who conducts an established business, profession, trade or calling outside the city, and who solicits, canvasses or advertises within the city, and delivers his products or performs a service within the city, shall obtain a business license under this chapter. (Ord. 354 § 7, 1977)

 

5.04.070 Association with local dealers.
     Any person who shall associate temporarily with any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, or by conducting any temporary business in conjunction with, or as a part of, or in the name of, any local business, dealer, trader or merchant, shall not be relieved from the provisions of this chapter and shall be required to pay appropriate business license tax as specified in this chapter. (Ord. 354 § 21, 1977)

 

Article III. Requirements and Procedures
5.04.080 Businesses requiring city council approval—Procedures.
     A.    No business license shall be issued for the conducting of any of the following businesses until approval shall have first been obtained from the city council granting the applicant the right to do business:

     1.     Recreation or amusement center;

     2.     Outside art show, exhibitions;

     3.     Circuses, carnivals, menageries, side shows, parades;

     4.     Boxing, wrestling, sparring exhibitions;

     5.     Dance halls, public dances;

     6.     Skating rinks;

     7.     Outdoor musical or special events;

or any other business similar in nature, as determined by the license collector, which may be construed to be dangerous to or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or dangerous to the surrounding property.

     B.     The city council may, by minute action, authorize one or more city officials to investigate and approve issuance of a license for any of the foregoing businesses, in which case council approval shall not be required.

     C.     Whenever any person desires to open or keep any business specified in this section, he shall petition the city council for specific authorization. The petition shall set forth: (1) the name of the applicant, (2) the character of the business, (3) the location where the business is to be conducted, and (4) any other pertinent information required by the license collector. Upon hearing such a petition the city council may grant approval in whole or in part and may impose whatever conditions are deemed reasonable by the city council in order to assure that the business is conducted in accordance with all state and local laws and that the operation of the subject business will not be to the detriment of the public. Should any business specified in this section be found by the city council to be dangerous to or to have an adverse effect on the public health, safety or welfare, or to be dangerous to surrounding property, the city council may deny approval of the petition and of the requested business license.

     D.    Notice of and conduct of the hearing shall be as set forth in Section 5.04.360. If the city council denies the application, written findings and conclusions shall be made, setting forth the reasons for such denial.

     E.     The city manager may also recommend to the city council that an individual business establishment shall be subject to council approval when, in his judgment, any such business establishment not specifically included in this section, has a detrimental effect upon the public health, safety or welfare.

     F.     Any applicant for a license to carry on any business specified hereinabove, or any other business which is similar thereto in the opinion of the city council or the city manager may be required to be fingerprinted by the police department of the city and the applicant may also be asked to answer such reasonable questions as may be put to him concerning his past history and method of business whether it be the same or a different business than the one applied for. Such application may also be referred to other departments of the city or any public agency for investigation and report. Employees of the applicant may also be required to be fingerprinted by the city police department and may be required to answer reasonable questions concerning the employee’s past record of employment.

     G.    The city council may, in addition to the payment of the required license tax, require from such businesses or activities as previously enumerated (or businesses of a similar nature) reasonable investigation fees based on standards set by the city manager and payable to the city prior to the police or departmental investigation. Such fees are not refundable. The city council may also require and levy a reasonable charge for special police protection. The city council may also require such business or activities to provide public liability and property damage insurance in an amount to be determined by the city council. (Ord. 511 § 3, 1988; Ord. 374 § 1, 1978; Ord. 354 § 18, 1977)

 

5.04.090 Application, processing and issuance of licenses.
     A.    Application for License. Before any license is issued to any person, such person shall complete and file a written application with the license collector which shall contain the following:

     1.     The exact nature or kind of business for which a license is requested and the number of persons employed by the business;

     2.     The place where such business is to be carried on, and if the same is not to be carried on at any permanent place of business, the place of residence of the owners of same;

     3.     In the event that application is made for the issuance of a license to a person doing business under a fictitious name, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of those owning those business;

     4.     In the event that the application is made for the issuance of a license to a corporation or a partnership, the application shall set forth the names and places of residence of the officers or partners thereof;

     5.     Such other information as may be deemed necessary which may include a brief personal record of the applicant.

     B.     Processing of Applications. Upon application being made as above provided and when the applicant has tendered the license fee required, the license collector shall process the application. If it is an application for a license for a new business or if he deems it necessary, he shall submit it to other departments so as to determine whether the business and premises to be occupied meet the requirements of state law and city ordinances. If it is a license requiring city council approval, it shall be transmitted to the city council only after it has been approved by such other departments, and at the time of application the applicant shall be advised to petition the city council for issuance of such license in the form and manner as hereafter provided in this chapter.

     C.     Issuance of License. Upon receiving the approval of departments to which the application may have been referred and, where necessary, the approval of the city council, the license collector shall prepare and issue the license showing upon the face of each license the following: (1) the person to whom the license is issued; (2) the kind of business licensed by either code number or other identification; (3) names and locations of such business; (4) the date of issuance of the license; and (5) the date of expiration of such license.

     D.    Effect of Mistake. In no case shall any mistake by any officer or employee of the city in stating the amount of a license prevent or prejudice the collection by the city of what should be actually due from any person carrying on a business subject to a license under the provisions of this chapter.

     E.     Void License. The city shall not be bound by the mistake of any officer or employee of the city in issuing a license contrary to the terms of this chapter, or to the terms of any zoning or other ordinances of the city. Such license shall be null and void. (Ord. 511 § 3, 1988; Ord. 354 § 12, 1977)

 

5.04.100 Statements and records.
     No application, statement or business record shall be conclusive as to the matters set forth herein, nor shall the filing of the same preclude the city from collecting by appropriate action such sum as is actually due and payable hereunder. Such record and each of the several items therein contained, shall be subject to audit and verification by the license collector, his deputies or authorized employees of the city, who are authorized to examine, audit and inspect such books and records of any license or applicant for license, as may be necessary in their judgment to verify or ascertain the amount of license tax due. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years. (Ord. 511 § 4, 1988; Ord. 354 § 23, 1977)

 

5.04.110 Confidential information.
     It is unlawful for the license collector or any person having an administrative duty under the provisions of this chapter to make known in any manner whatever the business affairs, operations or information obtained by an investigation of records and equipment of any person required to obtain a license, or pay a license tax, or any other person visited or examined in the discharge of official duty, or the amount or source of income, profits, losses, expenditures or any particular thereof, set forth in any statement or application, or to permit any statement or application, or copy of either, or any book containing any abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any person; provided, that nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent:

     A.    The disclosure to, or the examination of records and equipment by, another city official, employee or agent for collection of taxes for the sole purpose of administering or enforcing any provisions of this chapter or collecting taxes imposed hereunder;

     B.     The disclosure of information to, or the examination of records by, federal or state officials, or the tax officials of another city or county, or city and county, if a reciprocal arrangement exists, or to a grant jury or court of law, upon subpoena;

     C.     The disclosure of information and results of examination of records of particular taxpayers, or relating to particular taxpayers, to a court of law in a proceeding brought to determine the existence or amount of any license tax liability of the particular taxpayers to the city;

     D.    The disclosure after the filing of a written request to that effect, to the taxpayer him or herself, or to his successors, receivers, trustees, executors, administrators, assignees and guarantors, if directly interested, of information as to the items included in the measure of any paid tax, any unpaid tax or amounts of tax required to be collected, interest and penalties; further provided, however, that the city attorney approves each such disclosure and that the license collector may refuse to make any disclosure referred to in this subsection when in his opinion the public interest would suffer thereby;

     E.     The disclosure of the names and addresses of persons to whom licenses have been issued, and the general type or nature of their business, unless the city council has adopted a position of policy that such disclosure shall not be made;

     F.     The disclosure by way of public meeting or otherwise of such information as may be necessary to the city council in order to permit it to be fully advised as to the facts when a taxpayer files a claim for refund of license taxes, or submits an offer of compromise with regard to a claim asserted against him by the city for license taxes, or when acting upon any other matter;

     G.    The disclosure of general statistics regarding taxes collected or business done in the city. (Ord. 354 § 22, 1977)

 

5.04.120 License period—Payment of taxes—Delinquency dates— Refunds.
     A.    Time, Place and Medium of Payment. All business license taxes required by this chapter shall be payable in advance in lawful money of the United States.

     B.     Term of License. All annual licenses shall be for the period of one year beginning August 1st and ending July 31st.

     C.     Terms of New License. All new, annual licenses shall be for the period of time remaining in the current calendar year and shall expire on July 31st.

     D.    Grace Period for Renewals. All business license renewal taxes shall be due and payable on the first day of August each year, and shall become delinquent on the first day of September each year. Remittances sent by mail bearing a postmark date no later than August 31st will be considered nondelinquent and mail postmarked later than August 31st will be considered delinquent.

     All other business license taxes shall be due and payable on the first day the business is commenced or on the first day of the license term for which the license is required and no grace period shall be allowed.

     E.     License Tax for New Business. All new businesses for which flat rate fees are made the basis for fixing the amount of the license tax shall pay an amount equal to one-fourth of the annual tax therefor for each quarter and fraction of a quarter remaining in the license period, but in no case shall the amount be less than ten dollars ($10.00).

     F.     Refunds of Overpayments. No refund of an overpayment shall be allowed, in whole or in part, unless a claim for refund is filed with the license collector within a period of two years from the date of the claimed overpayment, and all such claims for refund of the amount of overpayment must be filed with the license collector on forms furnished by him and in the manner prescribed by him. Upon the filing of such claim and when it has been determined that an overpayment has been made, the license collector may authorize refund of the amount overpaid.

     G.    No Refund Upon Termination of Business. The business license taxes under the terms of this chapter are not refundable upon termination of business or for any unused portion or term of a license period. (Ord. 354 § 16, 1977)

 

5.04.130 Tax period.
     A.    Every person or company engaged in business as defined by this chapter at a specific location(s) within the city, shall pay the license tax for the period stated in the amounts prescribed in the following sections.

     B.     This article shall not apply to those activities exempted in Article IV of this chapter.

     C.     Unless otherwise indicated, the license tax period shall be for one year. The license tax year shall commence on August 1st. An authorized quarterly or six-month license tax period shall commence on the first day of the month in which the tax is first due. (Ord. 354 § 33, 1977)

 

5.04.140 Payment of license tax.
     A.    Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license taxes, under the provisions of this chapter, shall be due and payable on the first day of August of each year; except that license taxes covering new operations, commenced after the first day of August, shall be due and payable by the applicant prior to commencing the operation of such business.

     B.     An annual license tax covering new operations commenced after the first day of August may be prorated for the balance of the license period. The basis for prorating the balance of the license tax period is the unexpired quarter year using the first day of May, August and November as the beginning quarter dates.

     C.     A six-month license tax is due and payable on the first day of the first month in which the license is effective.

     D.    A three-month license tax is due and payable on the first day of the first month in which the license is effective.

     E.     Daily license taxes are due for each day in advance of the event. (Ord. 354 § 34, 1977)

 

5.04.150 Tax schedule.
     A.    Retail, wholesale, service and manufacturing businesses shall be taxed according to the following schedule unless specifically listed in subsequent sections. The tax rate shall be fixed by determining the number of employees in the business.

 

Classification

No. of Employees

Rate

 

 

 

I

0 — 3

$50.00

 

 

 

II

4 — 29

100.00

 

 

 

III

30 — 199

250.00

 

 

 

IV

100 or more

500.00

 

     B.     Professional, Semi-Professional and Related Businesses Within the City. Every person conducting, managing, operating or carrying on a business within the city which is enumerated in this subsection, shall pay an annual license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) per professional and four dollars ($4.00) per each nonprofessional employee:

     1.     Accounting services (including but not limited to auditor, certified public accountant, accountant as a principal);

     2.     Advertising council;

     3.     Agricultural adviser/counselor;

     4.     Appraiser;

     5.     Architectural services (including but not limited to architect, designer as a principal, draftsman as a principal, landscape architect);

     6.     Assayer;

     7.     Attorney at law;

     8.     Bail bond broker;

     9.     Chemist;

     10.   Claims adjuster;

     11.   Dealers in stocks, bonds and securities and investment counseling;

     12.   Dental services (including but not limited to dental laboratory, dentist, oral surgeon, orthodontist);

     13.   Detectives and detective agencies;

     14.   Engineering services (including but not limited to chemical, civic, construction, consulting, designer, electrical and/or mechanical engineering);

     15.   Geologist;

     16.   Gemologist, lapidary;

     17.   Insurance adjuster or insurance broker;

     18.   Interior decorator;

     19.   Mortician;

     20.   Medical services (including but not limited to chiropodist, chirothesian, optician, occulist, optometrist, osteopath, physician, surgeon and/or naturopath;

     21.   Real estate broker; each real estate sales person or agent occupying a desk or station within a real estate brokerage shall pay an annual license fee equal to thirty-three and one-third (331/3) percent of the annual real estate broker fee;

     22.   Surveyor;

     23.   Taxidermist;

     24.   Veterinarian;

     25.   Beauty, nail and hair salon/shop; each subcontractor or other nonemployee performing beauty, nail or hair treatments or services within a salon or shop shall pay an annual license fee equal to thirty-three and one-third (331/3) percent of the salon/shop fee;

     26.   Contract instructors/teachers/trainers of the arts, music, craft, dance, physical fitness business or professions, excluding city contractors, shall pay an annual license fee equal to thirty-three and one-third (331/3) percent of the fee established by this subsection.

     C.     Professional, Semi-Professional and Related Business Outside City. All businesses enumerated in subsection B of this section but located outside the city and doing business inside the city shall be charged twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for an annual license.

     D.    Coin-Operated Machines.

     1.     Vending (dispensing a product)—$10.00/machine;

     2.     Amusement — $10.00/machine;

     3.     Self-service (laundry, dry cleaning, etc.) — $25.00 per business location plus $.50/machine.

     E.     Pick-Up and Delivery. Vehicles operated as an incidental part of a business licensed and taxed under any other provision of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city shall not be separately licensed and taxed.

     Every person or company, except as provided for above, conducting a pick-up and/or delivery service, service by means of motor vehicle, wagon or any other conveyance, shall pay a license tax as follows:

     1.     Place of business inside city: tax rate—$30.00/vehicle.

     2.     Place of business outside city: tax rate—$20.00/vehicle.

     F.     Advertising or Publicity.

     1.     Place of Business Within the City. Advertising business shall be subject to the rates described in subsection A of this section if located within the city.

     2.     Place of Business Outside the City.

Each person working within city

$20.00

Billboard or signboard

100.00 (ea)

Loudspeaker (per day)

20.00

Permit for distributing

25.00 (1/4 year)

Spotlight (per day)

20.00

 

     G.    Contracting and Building.

 

 

Annual

Semi-Annual

General Contractor

$100.00

$60.00

Subcontractor

50.00

30.00

 

     H.    Apartments, Motels, Hotels, Rooming Houses, Mobilehome Park and Residential Buildings Having Rental Spaces.

 

Single units and duplexes

no fee

Tri-plexes and four-plexes

$25.00

5 or more units

$25.00 plus $3.00/unit after four units

Mobilehome parks

$25.00 plus $3.00/space after four spaces

 

     All rental units, throughout the city, under a single ownership shall be computed on a flat fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the first four units and three dollars ($3.00) per unit for any additional units. The ownership of separate apartment or rental complexes shall not be administered as branch establishments.

     I.      Business Not Specified. For carrying on or conducting any business of any kind not otherwise specifically licensed or exempted by other provisions of this chapter, the tax thereon shall be computed in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

     J.      The rate of tax set forth in this section (as increased annually pursuant to Ordinance No. 511) shall be automatically increased each year by a percentage which shall be equal to the percentage increase of the Consumer Price Index for all Urban Wage Earners (CPIU) as shall be reflected in the most recent report for the Los Angeles-Anaheim-Riverside Consolidated Metropolitan Statistical Area using December 1996 as the base year; provided, however, that in no event shall the increase in the rate of tax exceed five percent in any one year. The annual rate increase shall be calculated by dividing the consumer price index for December of each current year by the base year with the resulting figure representing the percentage increase for the tax due the following July.

     K.    The finance officer shall prepare a schedule setting forth the rates of tax to be charged in accordance with subsection J of this section. (Ord. 601 § 1, 1996; Ord. 551 §§ 1—3, 1992; Ord. 511 §§ 5—8, 1988; Ord. 367 § 1, 1977; Ord. 354 § 35, 1977)

 

5.04.160 Part-time employees.
     Computation for Part-Time Employees. For the purposes of computing the license fee under subsection A of Section 5.04.150, part-time employees shall each be counted as one-half an employee and under subsection B of Section 5.04.150, one-half of the stated fee shall be charged for each part-time employee. (Ord. 354 § 36, 1977)

 

5.04.170 Display of license.
     A.    Posting of License. Any licensee engaged in business at a fixed place of business shall keep the license issued posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is conducted.

     B.     Carrying of License. Any person engaged in business in the city but not operating from a fixed place of business shall keep the business license issued to him upon his person at all times while engaged in such business.

     C.     Affixing of License Stickers, Tags, Plates or Decals. Whenever identifying stickers, tags, plates or decals have been issued for each vehicle, device, machine or other piece of equipment included in the measure of a license tax, the person to whom such stickers, tags, plates or decals have been issued shall keep firmly affixed upon each vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment the identifying sticker, tag, plate or decal which has been issued therefor at such locations as are designated by the license collector. Such sticker, tag, plate or decal shall not be removed from any vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment kept in use, during the period for which the sticker, tag, plate or decal is issued. No person shall fail to affix as required herein any identifying sticker, tag, plate or decal to the vehicle, device, machine or piece of equipment, for which it has been issued at the location designated by the license collector, or to give away, sell or transfer such identifying sticker, tag, plate or decal to another person, or to permit its use by another person.

     D.    Showing of License to Authorized Officer. Any licensee having a license under the provisions of this chapter shall produce and exhibit the same whenever requested to do so by any police officer, or by any officer authorized to issue and inspect licenses or to collect license taxes. (Ord. 354 § 13, 1977)

 

5.04.180 Duplicate license.
     A duplicate business license may be issued by the license collector to replace any license previously issued which has been lost or destroyed, upon the applicant filing an affidavit attesting to such fact, and at the time of filing such affidavit paying to the license collector a duplicate license fee as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 661 § 1, 2002; Ord. 511 § 7, 1988; Ord. 354 § 14, 1977)

 

5.04.190 Transfer of license.
     A.    Change of Owner. The license collector may, upon receipt of a transfer fee established by resolution of the city council, authorize the transfer or assignment of a business license to any other person by issuing a transfer business license, when it appears to his or her satisfaction that the original applicant for such license has sold or otherwise disposed of his or her interest in the trade, calling, profession, occupation or business for which such license was issued, and that the transferee or assignee thereof has complied with all other provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Changed Location. Where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee shall, upon application therefor and paying a fee as established by resolution of the city council, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under said license at some other location to which the business is to be moved, subject to approval as necessary by other departments as outlined in Section 5.04.090. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 661 § 2, 2002; Ord. 511 § 8, 1988; Ord. 354 § 15, 1977)

 

Article IV. Exemptions
5.04.200 Businesses exempt by state or federal law.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed or construed as applying to any person managing or carrying on, or engaging in, any business or occupation exempt from taxation by municipal corporations under the laws and constitution of the state, and the laws and constitution of the United States. (Ord. 354 § 24, 1977)

 

5.04.210 Interstate commerce.
     A.    Affidavit. No business license required by the city for the practice, transaction or carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business shall be presumed to apply to any part of such practice, transaction or carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business which is a part of interstate commerce; or in which such practice, transaction or carrying on of any profession, trade, calling, occupation or business is conducted as an agency or department of the United States government for which such government has failed to make provision allowing states and municipalities to so tax. In order that necessary information may be available to determine whether it is entitled to exemption on grounds of being engaged in interstate commerce, such person shall file with the license collector an affidavit of exemption, upon a form to be furnished by the license collector, in which the following information shall be disclosed:

 

     The name and location of the company or firm for which the orders are to be solicited or secured; the name of the nearest local or state manager, if any, and his or her address; the kind of goods, wares or merchandise to be delivered; the place from which the same are to be shipped or forwarded; the method of soliciting or taking orders; the location of any warehouse, factory or plant within the state; the method of delivery; the name and location of the residence of the applicant; a copy of the order blank, the contract form or other papers used by the applicant in taking orders; a late photograph of the applicant; and any other facts necessary to establish such claim of exemption.

     B.     Exempt License Permit. If the license collector is satisfied from the foregoing that the applicant is entitled to exemption because he is in good faith engaged in interstate commerce, he shall issue an exempt business license permit for the current quarter.

     C.     Restrictions as to Use of Exempt License Permit. The business solicitation activities of such person shall be confined to business establishments only within the city except that such person may call upon private residences, provided he has been requested or invited so to do by the owner or occupant of said private residence, the request or invitation having been obtained or received from the owner or occupant by any legitimate means other than direct door-to-door personal contact. (Ord. 354 § 25, 1977)

 

5.04.220 Disabled ex-service men.
     A.    Every honorable discharged or honorably released soldier, sailor or Marine of the United States who has served in any Indian War, the Spanish American War, Philippine Insurrection or in the Chinese Relief Expedition, in World I, World War II, the Korean Campaign or Vietnam, who is physically unable to obtain a livelihood by manual labor, and who shall be qualified elector of the state, shall have the right to distribute circulars and to hawk, peddle and vend any goods, wares or merchandise owned by him, except spirituous, malt, vinous or other intoxicating liquor, without payment of any business license tax whatsoever; provided, that no such exempt business license shall be issued without first being approved by the city council, and before any such license shall be approved by the city council for issuance by the license collector, the following requirements shall be complied with by every applicant for such exempt license:

     1.     Every applicant shall furnish a certificate of physical disability executed by a qualified surgeon of the U.S. Navy, Air Force, Army or Marines, and a certificate of honorable discharge from the U.S. Navy, Air Force, Army or Marines, and a written recommendation from a representative of the local post of the American Legion and the Veterans of Foreign Wars, or the Veterans Service Officer of the county.

     2.     Every applicant shall furnish two identification photographs, one to be attached to the license issued to the applicant and the other to be attached to the copy retained by the license collector. The applicant shall also sign both copies of such license at the time of the issuance thereof.

     3.     Every applicant shall be fingerprinted by the police department for identity purposes before any license is issued.

     B.     An exempt business license under the provisions of this section, when issued is subject to the following conditions:

     1.     It is not transferable and is for the exclusive use of the licensee named.

     2.     Applicant’s identification photograph shall be attached to the license at all times, and failure to comply herewith is grounds for revocation of the license and for refusing its renewal and the issuance of a new license thereafter.

     3.     Should a business license be found in the possession of one other than the licensee named, it shall be surrendered up to the license collector and canceled, and neither the licensee named nor the holder thereof shall thereafter be entitled to hold a business license under the provisions of this section.

     4.     The licensee named shall identify him or herself by his or her signature whenever required to do so by a police officer, license inspector or license collector of the city.

     5.     Whenever the licensee uses a wagon, cart, dray, basket or other vehicle or receptacle for the vending of any such goods, wares or merchandise, then the business license shall be carried in a license holder attached to such vehicle or receptacle, and any business license issued under the provisions of this section shall expire thirty (30) days from and after the date of issuance and a new business license thereafter shall be issued pursuant to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 354 § 26, 1977)

 

5.04.230 Commercial travelers.
     The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a business license tax by a commercial traveler or drummer whose business is limited to taking orders for future delivery of goods, wares and merchandise sold in this state at wholesale, and who deals directly with established places of business in the city. (Ord. 354 § 27, 1977)

 

5.04.240 City concessionaires.
     No person who has entered into and holds an agreement with the city for the operation of a concession upon city property, and for which a rental is paid to the city, shall be required to obtain a business license under the terms of this chapter. (Ord. 354 § 28, 1977)

 

5.04.250 Minimum income.
     Any resident of the city who conducts a minor business activity, which is not in violation of zoning or other laws, and whose average gross receipts from such business activity does not exceed one thousand eight hundred dollars ($1800.00) per year and such business is operated by the proprietor and has no employees shall be exempt from payment of a license tax; provided, that this exemption shall not apply to any person who, after having received fifteen (15) days’ written notice of demand therefor from the license collector, shall fail to provide proof satisfactory and a sworn statement to the license collector of having earned less than that amount. (Ord. 354 § 29, 1977)

 

5.04.260 Minors.
     The payment of business license tax shall not be required by a natural person, seventeen (17) years of age or under, solely because he engages in the business of lawn mowing, yard or custodial maintenance work; provided he has no employees working for him. (Ord. 354 § 30, 1977)

 

5.04.270 Charitable, religious and nonprofit activities.
     A.    Nonprofit Activity. The provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed or construed to require the payment of a license tax to conduct, manage or carry on any business, occupation or activities, or require the payment of any business license tax from any institution or organization so conducted, managed or carried on, wholly for the benefit of charity purposes or from which profit is not derived, whether directly or indirectly, by any person.

     The applicant shall include with the application a copy of its tax-exempt status letter pursuant to Section 170(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code.

     A nonprofit organization is one in which all of the personal property and assets of the organization, or any of the proceeds of said assets, cannot be distributed to the members of the organization. The organization should have, if a corporation in its articles, or if unincorporated, in its by-laws, provisions substantially as follows in order to qualify as a nonprofit organization:

 

       In the event of the dissolution of this organization, or in the event it shall cease to carry out the objectives and purposes of the organization, all the personal property and assets of the organization shall go to and be distributed to such nonprofit charitable corporation or corporations as may be selected by the Board of Directors of this organization, so that the personal property and assets of this organization shall, in such event, be used for and devoted to the purpose of carrying on a nonprofit charitable organization or the proceeds of any of said assets or property, in the event of dissolution thereof, go or be distributed to members, either for the reimbursement of any fund subscribed, donated or contributed by such members, or for any other purpose.

     B.     Entertainment Proceeds Retained Locally. No business license tax shall be required for the conducting of any entertainment, concert, rummage sale, exhibition or lecture on scientific, historical, literary or religious or moral subjects whenever the receipts of such entertainment, concert, rummage sale, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated to any school, or to any religious or benevolent purposes within the city.

     C.     Receipts to Organization. No business license tax shall be required for the conducting of any entertainment, dance, concert, rummage sale, exhibition or lecture by a religious, charitable, fraternal, educational, military, state, county or municipal organization or association, whenever the receipts of any such entertainment, dance, concert, rummage sale, exhibition or lecture are to be appropriated for the purpose and objects for which such association or organization was formed and from which profit is not derived, either directly or indirectly, by any person.

     D.    Permit. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed or construed to exempt any such association or organization from complying with the provisions of Chapter 5.50 regarding the activities of peddling, canvassing and soliciting. (Ord. 695 § 2, 2006; Ord. 354 § 31, 1977)

 

Article V. Enforcement—Penalties—Appeals
5.04.290 Enforcement authority.
     A.    License Collector. The city clerk, or his designee, shall be the license collector. It shall be the duty of the license collector to issue a business license to every person required to pay a business license tax under this chapter; to investigate the applicant’s trade, calling, profession, occupation or business and to determine the class to which it belongs. No business license shall be knowingly issued for any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business which is prohibited by this chapter or any other ordinance of the city. The license collector shall not issue a business license for any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business until receiving the approval, if required, of the departments, or city council to which the application may have been referred, indicating clearance on such matters as, but not limited to, zoning regulations, building and fire codes, certificate of occupancy, food handling permit and such other matters requiring compliance with applicable regulations and ordinances. The license collector shall have the power, for a good cause shown, to extend the time for filing any required sworn statement or application for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days, and in such case to waive any penalty that would otherwise have accrued; and shall have the power to compromise any claim up to the amount of license tax due. The license collector may make rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary or desirable to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Report of Collections. The license collector shall cause periodic collection reports to be made to the city clerk, indicating the amount of business licenses taxes collected under the provisions of this chapter. The report shall set forth the amount of business license taxes collected and attributed to the activities of the license inspector by citation and personal contract.

     C.     License Inspector. The city clerk shall appoint a license inspector who shall be a deputy under the direction of the city clerk.

     D.    Duties and Powers. The license collector and all police officers of the city are appointed as license inspectors and are authorized to investigate all places of business and all persons engaged in or carrying on any business in the city, and shall have and exercise the following powers and duties:

     1.     To enter free of charge, at a reasonable time, any place of business for which a business license is required under the provisions of this chapter, to require exhibition of such license for the current term, by any person in charge of such place of business, and if such person shall then and there fail to exhibit such license upon demand, then the person carrying on or engaging in such business shall be liable to the penalty provided for the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter;

     2.     To cause the arrest of person violating the provisions of this chapter;

     3.     To cause citations or complaints to be issued against all persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter.

     E.     License Inspector—Additional Power. The license inspector, in the discharge and performance of his duties under this chapter, shall have and exercise the power to inspect the current payroll records of any person when such information is necessary to determine whether any employees are working for wages or may be performing contracting or subcontracting work. Such persons shall be able to furnish conclusive proof that they are receiving a specific wage, that proper federal income tax, Social Security and unemployment deductions are being withheld from their wages, and that they are not engaged unlawfully in contracting or subcontracting work without a city business license. (Ord. 354 § 11, 1977)

 

5.04.300 Failure to obtain license—Penalty.
     Any person who shall commence, transact, engage or carry on any trade, calling, profession, occupation or business within the city without first having procured a business license from the city to do so, shall be assessed a penalty of ten percent of the license fee for each month that such license fee has not been paid to a maximum of doubling the original license fee. In the event that such license is to be issued for a period shorter than one year, such as, daily, weekly or monthly, then such ten-percent penalty shall be assessed for each such period during which the license should have been in effect. (Ord. 354 § 5, 1977)

 

5.04.310 Tax and penalty as debt to city.
     The amount of any business license tax and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city and any person carrying on any business without having first procured a business license from the city to do so shall be subject to an action in the name of the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of business license tax and penalties imposed on such business. (Ord. 354 § 8, 1977)

 

5.04.320 Violation—Misdemeanor— Penalty.
     Violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a misdemeanor, and upon conviction, shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the county jail for a period not to exceed six months. The criminal prosecution of any person for engaging in any business without first obtaining a business license to conduct such business shall not relieve such person from paying the business license tax to conduct such business, nor shall the payment of any business license tax prevent a criminal prosecution for the violation of any of the provisions of chapter. All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 354 § 9, 1977)

 

5.04.330 Unpaid taxes as bar to further licenses.
     No business license for any succeeding, current or unexpired license period shall knowingly be issued to any person who, at the time of making applications for any business license, is indebted to the city for any unpaid balance. (Ord. 354 § 10, 1977)

 

5.04.340 Penalty for delinquent payment of license fee.
     A.    Delinquency. There shall be added, to all business license taxes becoming delinquent as provided in this chapter, a penalty of ten percent, or a sum of five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, on the first day of each calendar month after the due date thereof; provided, that the amount thereby added shall in no event exceed one hundred (100) percent of the business license tax due during any single year.

     B.     License Void Thirty (30) Days after Becoming Delinquent. The current business license shall become void thirty (30) days after becoming delinquent and no business license shall be issued by the license collector until the delinquent license tax, and the penalties added thereto have been paid in full. (Ord. 354 § 17, 1977)

 

5.04.350 Suspension and revocation of license.
     A.    Violation of Building Codes. When a business violates building codes, the licensee’s business license may be suspended by the license collector for not more than five days based upon a recommendation from the building department. The license may be suspended for a longer period of time upon the conclusion of hearing conducted before the city manager.

     B.     Other Revocations. Upon written statement by the city manager filed with the city council alleging that a business license is being used in contravention of the city code, a city ordinance, or any federal or state law, the city council shall fix a date for a hearing of the statement. The city council shall cause written notice of the time and place of the hearing to be served on the person to whom the license has been issued, or to the manager or any other person named on the license. Service of this notice shall be accomplished by either serving such person personally at least ten days before the hearing or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, Los Alamitos, California. The postage shall be prepaid and the notice shall be sent by either certified or registered mail addressed to such person and address as it appears on the license at least ten days before the hearing date. The licensee shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence on his behalf.

     If after such hearing the city council finds that the licensee is operating the subject business in:

     1.     Contravention of the city code, this chapter or state or federal law; or

     2.     That the business has become dangerous to or adversely affects the public health, safety of welfare; or

     3.     That the business has been conducted in such a disorderly manner that the peace of the surrounding area is being unreasonably disturbed; or

     4.     That any person operating a business within the city is unfit to operate same; or

     5.     That the purpose for which the license has been issued is being abused to the detriment of the public; or

     6.     That license is being used for a purpose not stated in the license application;

then the city council may order the license to be suspended or revoked. Any person having his license suspended shall not engage in such business until the violations found by the city council are fully remedied to the satisfaction of the city council. The application of any person for a license, after having had a license revoked pursuant to the provisions of this section, must be approved by the city council. (Ord. 354 § 19, 1977)

 

5.04.360 Appeals and hearing.
     Any person who shall deem him or herself aggrieved by any decision of the license collector or license inspector, regarding the issuance or refusal to issue a license under this chapter, or suspension of such license by the city building official may appeal to the city council by filing notice of appeal with the city clerk. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and a place for hearing such appeal. The city clerk shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it upon him personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office at Los Alamitos, California, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at the address stated in the application. Such notice shall be served or deposited in the mail at least ten days prior to the hearing. At such hearing the applicant shall be given an opportunity to be heard and to present evidence on his behalf. At the conclusion of the hearing, or any continuation thereof, the city council shall make written findings and conclusions setting forth the basis for its discretion. (Ord. 354 § 20, 1977)

Chapter 5.08 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE SALES
5.08.010 Alcoholic beverages warning signs.
     A.    Legislative Purpose. The Surgeon General of the United States has recommended that women who are pregnant, or considering pregnancy, be advised not to drink alcoholic beverages, and to be aware of the alcoholic content in anything they eat because alcohol consumption during pregnancy, especially in the early months, can harm the fetus. In order to serve the public health, safety and welfare, the purpose of this chapter is to educate the public by requiring that warning signs be placed at all locations where alcoholic beverages are sold to the public.

     B.     Definitions. The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

     “Alcoholic beverages” includes, without limitation, beer, malt liquors, wine and distilled spirits.

     “Health department” means the Orange County health care agency.

     “Health officer” means the county health officer or his or her deputy.

     C.     Duty to Post Signs. Any person or entity who owns, operates, manages, leases or rents a premises offering wine, beer, distilled spirits, malt liquors or other alcoholic beverages for sale, or who dispenses such beverages for consideration to the public, shall cause signs to be posted in compliance with the following:

     1.     For alcoholic beverages intended for consumption off the premises where sold or distributed at least one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read either at the retail point of sale or each point of display. Signs or notices placed at the point of display shall be placed no more than ten feet from any display of any alcoholic beverage container in a manner associating the sign or notice with the display.

     2.     For alcoholic beverages provided for consumption on the premises at tables served by food or beverage persons at least one notice or sign shall be placed so as to assure that it is readable and likely to be read by the public being served on the premises, or a notice or sign shall be conspicuously displayed at each of the tables.

     3.     For alcohol sold or distributed through over the counter service at lest one notice or sign shall be placed in the retail establishment so that it is readable and likely to be read from all counter locations available to the public.

     4.     Any sign required to be posted or displayed pursuant to this section shall bear the following warning message:

 

       WARNING: Drinking distilled spirits, beer, coolers, wine and other alcoholic beverages may increase cancer risk, and during pregnancy can cause birth defects.

 

     D.    Language. In the event that twenty-five (25) percent or more of the public patronizing premises offering for sale or dispensing, for consideration, wine, beer or other alcoholic beverages uses a language other than English as a primary language, any sign or notice required under subsection C of this section shall be worded in both English and the primary language or languages involved.

     E.     Enforcement. The Orange County health officer shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this chapter. The health department shall have the authority to adopt reasonable rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter, including rules and regulations for alternative signs and placement of required signs.

     F.     Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction shall be punished by fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per day.

     G.    Sign Availability. Warning signs may be obtained, free of charge, from the Orange County health department. Vendors of alcoholic beverages may also prepare and post signs of their own making meeting the requirements of this section at their expense. In no event shall the language of the warning sign be altered from that specified in subsection (C)(4) of this section. (Ord. 521 § 1, 1990; Ord. 516 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 5.12 AMBULANCE SERVICES
5.12.010 Intent and purpose.
     It is the intent of this chapter to establish general operating procedures and standards for medical transportation services operating within the city in both emergency and other situations, to provide a fair and impartial means of allowing responsible private operators to provide such services in the public interest, and to provide a means for the designation of exclusive operating areas. This chapter is modeled after Division 9, Article I of Title 4 of the Codified Ordinances of the County of Orange (County Model Ambulance Ordinance No. 3517; OCC §4-9-1). (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.020 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following terms are defined:

     “Advanced life support service” (“ALS”) and “basic life support service” (“BLS”) mean the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Ambulance” means a motor vehicle, helicopter, or similar vehicle, specifically constructed, modified, equipped, or arranged and operated for the purpose of transporting patients requiring immediate or ongoing medical services excluding the transportation of such persons to or from locations not providing services as defined in this chapter.

     “Ambulance service” means the activity, business or service, for hire, profit, or otherwise, of transporting one or more persons by ambulance; provided, however, ambulance service shall not include the transportation by ambulance by an employer of his or her own employees in an ambulance owned and operated by the employer solely for this purpose.

     “Ambulance service operator” means any person who operates or owns an ambulance service.

     “Attendant” means a trained, qualified individual who, regardless of whether he or she also serves as driver, is responsible for the care of patients.

     “County” means the county of Orange, state of California.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, California.

     “Department” means the emergency medical services agency of the county of Orange or the health care agency of the county of Orange, or as otherwise designated by the Orange County board of supervisors.

     “Dispatcher” means an individual employed by an ambulance service operator responsible for sending an ambulance to provide ambulance service to a patient.

     “Driver” means an attendant who drives or pilots an ambulance.

     “Emergency” means sudden, unforeseen event giving rise to a need for ambulance service with basic or advanced life support services and is a condition in which an individual has a need for immediate medical attention, or where the potential for such need is perceived by emergency medical personnel or a public safety agency.

     “Exclusive Operating Area” (“EOA”) means the same as defined in Section 1797.85 of the Health and Safety Code, and which is established pursuant to Section 1797.224 of the Health and Safety Code.

     “Emergency service” means ambulance service performed in response to an emergency.

     “Fire chief” means the fire chief of the Orange County fire authority.

     “Health officer” means the Orange County health officer or other official designated by the board of supervisors of Orange County to perform the health officer’s functions under this chapter.

     “Licensee” means an ambulance service operator which has been granted a license under this chapter to provide ambulance service.

     “Medical services” means services provided by health care professionals licensed pursuant to the California Business and Professions Code or as specified by regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     “Paramedic” means the same as defined in the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Patient” means a wounded, injured, sick, invalid, or otherwise incapacitated person.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, association, or other group or combination acting as a unit.

     “Physician” means a medical doctor or osteopath holding the appropriate license or certificate to practice as such within the state of California pursuant to the Business and Professions Code.

     “Public safety agency” means any public law enforcement agency, fire protection agency, or forest ranger operating in the county. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.030 License required.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to be an ambulance service operator, or to act in such a capacity either directly or indirectly, within the city without possession of a license issued pursuant to this chapter. A license may specify the specific geographical area within the city in which it is valid; provided, however, with respect to EOAs, reference to the EOA by a specific number or similar identification shall be sufficient description of geographic limitation. A license shall be valid for not more than one calendar year or the expiration of the calendar year in which it was issued, whichever is shorter.

     B.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to:

     1.     Ambulances operated at the request of a public safety agency during any “state of war emergency,” “state of emergency,” or “local emergency,” as defined in the Government Code.

     2.     Ambulance service transporting a patient from a location outside of the city regardless of destination.

     3.     Ambulance service transporting a patient by a fixed-wing airplane. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.040 Transfer and term of license.
     No license issued pursuant to this chapter can be transferred by operation of law or otherwise. The following shall be considered transfers for purposes of this section:

     A.    Any change in the business structure of a licensee, including, but not limited to, changes from or to:

     1.     A sole proprietorship;

     2.     A partnership, including any change in the partners; and

     3.     A corporation, including any change in the shareholders, whether by operation of law or otherwise.

     B.     Bankruptcy, an assignment for the benefit of creditors, or the appointment of a receiver.

     C.     A sale or transfer of over ten percent of the assets of a licensee.

     A licensee may apply to the health officer for an amendment to the terms of the license, which request shall be processed in the same manner as an original application. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, licenses may be suspended, revoked, or terminated prior to the expiration date, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.050 License applications.
     A.    Each application for a license shall be accompanied by an application fee, if any, set by the Orange County board of supervisors, and be made upon forms prescribed by the health officer.

     B.     Each applicant shall submit the following:

     1.     The names and addresses of the applicant(s) and the owner(s) of the ambulance(s) and the business and any interest therein;

     2.     The applicant’s training and experience in the transportation and care of patients;

     3.     The names under which the applicant has engaged, does engage, and proposes to engage in ambulance service;

     4.     A description of each ambulance including the make, model, year of manufacture, vehicle identification number, current state license number, the length of time the vehicle has been in use, and the color scheme, insignia, name, monogram and other distinguishing characteristics of the vehicles, a description of the company’s program for maintenance of the vehicle, and a description of the vehicle’s radio(s);

     5.     Proof that the applicant has obtained all licenses and permits required by state or local law or regulation for the type of ambulance service proposed, excluding only a license to provide the service for which application is made;

     6.     The names and qualifications of each attendant, driver, or dispatcher employed, or to be employed, in providing ambulance service;

     7.     Proof that the applicant possesses and maintains currently valid California Highway Patrol inspection reports for each vehicle listed in the application;

     8.     A description of the applicant company’s training and orientation programs for attendants, drivers, and dispatchers;

     9.     Evidence of such financial responsibility and insurance coverage as may be required by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted in accordance with this chapter;

     10.   Identification of the geographical area to be served by the applicant, if required by the department;

     11.   As to new applications or transfers as specified in Section 5.12.040 of this chapter, a fingerprint receipt for each principal of the applicant, issued by the Orange County sheriff-coroner indicating each principal of the applicant has undergone a complete criminal history check, followed by a report from the Orange County sheriff-coroner showing no conviction of crimes which would be violations of the provisions of Section 5.12.070(D)(2), (3), (4), (5), (6) or (7);

     12.   A list of all substations or offices where equipment and personnel are, or will be based, including hours of operation; and

     13.   A description of whether the service proposed by the applicant will include basic life support services or advanced life support service, and, if so:

     a.     The number of basic life support service or advanced life support service units to be deployed on each shift;

     b.     The emergency response area(s) to receive basic life support service or advanced life support service; and

     c.     The provisions, if any, for continuing education of attendants.

     14.   Such other information as the health officer may require in regulations adopted pursuant to this chapter.

     C.     Renewal applications shall be submitted in the same form and require the same materials as original applications, except the requirement of Section 5.12.050(B)(11). (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.060 Investigations.
     Upon receipt of a completed application and the required fee, if any, the health officer shall make, or cause to be made, such investigation as the health officer deems necessary to determine if:

     A.    The applicant is a responsible and proper person to conduct, operate, or engage in the provision of ambulance services;

     B.     The applicant meets the requirements of this chapter and of other applicable laws, ordinances, or regulations. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.070 Issuance or denial of license.
     A.    The health officer shall issue a license to an applicant if the health officer, after completing any investigation required pursuant to this chapter, determines all requirements of this chapter have been met and the license fee, if any, set by the Orange County board of supervisors, has been paid.

     B.     In the event of denial, the applicant shall be informed by the health officer in writing of the reasons therefor.

     C.     The licensee shall obtain and keep in force during the term of a license comprehensive automobile liability insurance and professional liability insurance issued by a company authorized to do business in the state of California, acceptable to the health officer, insuring the owner against loss by reason of injury or damage that may result to persons or property from negligent operation or defective construction of such ambulance, or from violation of this chapter or any other law of the state of California, or the United States. Said comprehensive automobile liability policy shall be in the sum of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for combined single limit, bodily injury and property damage. Said professional liability insurance shall be in the sum of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) per person and one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) annual aggregate. Workers’ compensation insurance shall be carried covering all employees of the license holder. Before the health officer shall issue a license, copies of the policies, or certificates evidencing such policies, shall be filed with the health officer. All policies shall contain a provision requiring a thirty (30) day notice to be given to the department prior to cancellation, modification, or reduction in limits. The amount of comprehensive automobile liability insurance shall be subject to review and adjustment by the health officer pursuant to regulations adopted under this chapter. In the use of helicopters, the equivalent insurance requirements shall apply.

     D.    Grounds for denial of a license application shall be:

     1.     Failure to meet the requirements of any provision of this chapter;

     2.     Violation by any principal of an applicant of Penal Code Section 290;

     3.     Use of narcotics or other controlled substances;

     4.     Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime relating to the use, sale, possession, or transportation of narcotics, or other controlled substances;

     5.     Habitual or excessive use of intoxicating beverages;

     6.     Conviction during the preceding seven years of any crime punishable as a felony in the state of California;

     7.     Conviction of any crime involving moral turpitude, including, but not limited to, fraud or intentional dishonesty for personal gain.

     E.     In determining the effect of any criminal acts on the issuance or denial of a license, the health officer shall consider whether the criminal acts are related to the activities of an ambulance service and shall evaluate the rehabilitation of the person(s) involved. The health officer shall not consider crimes of which the applicant is, or was, accused but not convicted. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.080 License suspension or revocation.
     A.    The health officer may suspend or revoke a license for failure by the licensee to comply with, and maintain compliance with, or for violation of, any applicable provision, standard, or requirement of state law or regulation or this chapter, or of any regulations promulgated hereunder. Suspension of a license is not a condition precedent to revocation of a license.

     B.     Before issuing a suspension or revocation, the health officer shall give written notice to the licensee. Said notice shall:

     1.     Specify the reason(s) for which the proposed action is to be taken;

     2.     Set a hearing for not more than fifteen (15) days nor less than seven days after the date of the notice;

     3.     Specify the date, time, and place of the hearing; and

     4.     Be served on the licensee either by delivery to its principal place of business or to its designated agent for service of such notices, if any.

     C.     If the licensee, subsequent to service of a suspension or revocation notice under this section, remedies some or all of the conditions to which the notice refers, the health officer may rescind the suspension or revocation at any time.

     D.    At the hearing, the health officer has the burden of proof and may present evidence as to why such action should be taken and to answer the evidence presented by the licensee.

     E.     The health officer may reduce the period of time for hearing under a suspension or revocation notice to no less than twenty-four (24) hours when the health officer makes written preliminary findings that such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare. When, as a result of such an emergency proceedings, a license is suspended or revoked, the licensee may request an additional hearing at which the licensee will have the burden of establishing renewed compliance justifying reinstatement of the license. Such additional hearing will be commenced within five days of the licensee’s request. The request for, and the scheduling of, an additional hearing shall not stay operation of the suspension or revocation order.

     F.     Hearings conducted pursuant to this section shall be conducted before a hearing officer designated by the department. At the conclusion of said hearing, the hearing officer shall expeditiously prepare a written summary of the evidence and proposed findings and conclusions for consideration by the health care agency director.

     G.    The health care agency director shall issue a written decision within thirty (30) days after receiving the hearing officer’s findings and conclusions. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.090 Appeal to Orange County board of supervisors.
     In the event of denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, the applicant or licensee shall have the right to request a hearing before the Orange County board of supervisors, which hearing shall be requested and conducted in the manner specified in Section 5-2-19 of the Codified Ordinances of Orange County. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.100 Notification.
     The licensee shall notify the health officer within twenty-four (24) hours after any change in ownership or management of the licensee, or any interruption of service of more than twenty-four (24) hours duration, or any substantial change in staffing or equipment. For purposes of this section, the term “substantial change” shall be as defined by regulation adopted pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.110 Personnel standards.
     A.    A licensee shall only employ personnel performing tasks described in this chapter who comply with the requirements of this section.

     B.     Attendants shall be at least eighteen (18) years of age and trained and competent in the proper use of all equipment, and shall hold current Emergency Medical Technician-1A (“EMT -1A”), or state educational equivalent, certification in compliance with all state laws, rules, and regulations. Additionally, each attendant shall hold a license from the health officer indicating compliance with this section. Applications for such licenses shall be in a form required by the health officer and shall be accompanied by the fee, if any, established therefor. All applicants for licenses as an attendant shall be subject to the same criminal history review as required for principals of ambulance companies pursuant to this chapter no less than once every four years. Certificates may be denied, suspended, or revoked in the same form and manner as that specified for ambulance service licensees in this chapter. Licenses shall be valid for two years from the date of issuance or certification as an Emergency Medical Technician-1A, whichever is less. Renewal of a license shall be in the same manner as issuance of a new license.

     C.     Each licensee shall have at least one dispatcher. Emergency ambulance service licensees shall have a dispatcher on a twenty-four (24) hour-per-day basis and shall adequately train the dispatcher to radio operation and protocols and to the emergency response area(s) served before said dispatcher begins dispatching emergency calls. For purposes of this section, “adequate” training of a dispatcher shall be that which meets state standards, if any, or county requirements.

     D.    Ambulance drivers shall, in addition to the requirements of this chapter for attendants, maintain an appropriate license issued by the California Department of Motor Vehicles and, if applicable, the Federal Aviation Administration. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.120 Rates.
     No licensee shall charge more than the maximum BLS rates approved by the Orange County board of supervisors. No licensee shall charge more than the maximum ALS rates approved by the Orange County board of supervisors or the Orange County fire authority. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.130 Selection of ambulance service licensees for exclusive operating areas.
     A.    The Orange County fire authority shall administer the competitive process, on behalf of the local EMS agency, for the award of EOA contracts within the city. The Orange County fire authority shall select and shall enter into contracts with licensees for the provision of ambulance service in response to emergencies in each EOA, unless the city has provided written notification to the Orange County fire authority of its intention to retain licensee selection and contracting authority for itself. Such contracts shall provide for one primary contractor per EOA, with such other back-up service by other emergency ambulance service providers as deemed necessary by the fire chief. In awarding these contracts, the Orange County fire authority, or city if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority, shall consider the comparative value of competing proposals in the same fashion as would be the case were the county evaluating proposals from prospective service providers for other governmental activities, including consideration of:

     1.     The quality of service to be provided;

     2.     The level of service to be provided;

     3.     The rates charged for services to be provided; and

 

     4.     The cost, if any, to the awarding agency.

     B.     The fire chief shall administer the contracts for ambulance service awarded by the Orange County fire authority, or by the city if applicable, under this section. The fire chief shall also prepare and keep current EOA lists specifying contract providers for each EOA. The fire chief shall include on the list for each EOA the provider which has entered into an ambulance service agreement with the Orange County fire authority, or the city if applicable, as the primary contractor as well as the emergency ambulance service provider(s) who will provide back-up emergency ambulance service for that area.

     C.     In the event no proposals acceptable to the Orange County fire authority, or to the city if it elects to retain licensee selection and contracting authority under the provisions of this section, are received for one or more EOAs, the Orange County fire authority, or the city if applicable, shall designate one or more licensees to provide emergency ambulance services for the EOA. From the date of such designation until a regular emergency ambulance service agreement is signed for the affected area(s), provision of emergency ambulance service shall be an express condition of the license and unreasonable or unjustified refusal of such calls shall be a violation of this chapter.

     D.    No person shall provide ambulance service in response to, or as a result of, an emergency, unless that person is a licensee specified in each instance by a physician or public safety agency. A licensee thus specified by a physician need not be a contractor selected pursuant to this section. Any ambulance service operator receiving a request for emergency ambulance service from other than a public safety agency shall immediately, by telephone, notify a public safety agency designated by regulation of the request.

     No licensee responding to an emergency shall transport a patient unless:

     1.     A paramedic is present at the location of the patient;

     2.     A physician is present at the location of the patient and directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic; or

     3.     A safety qualified employee of the Orange County fire authority, or an appropriate employee of a public safety agency designated by regulation, directs transportation in the absence of a paramedic.

     Unless otherwise directed by a physician present at the location of the patient, a licensee shall transport a patient pursuant to regulations adopted under Section 5.12.140 of this chapter. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.140 Rules and regulations.
     A.    As to all sections of this chapter except Section 5.12.130, the health officer shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, proposed rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County emergency medical care committee for comment.

     B.     As to Section 5.12.130 of this chapter, the fire chief shall make such rules and regulations and as may be necessary to implement this chapter. Prior to adoption, the fire chief’s rules and regulations shall be submitted to the Orange County emergency medical care committee for comment.

     C.     The health officer or the fire chief or respective designee(s) may inspect the records, facilities, transportation units, equipment, and method of operating of each licensee whenever necessary and, by the health officer, at least annually. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.150 Complaints.
     The department, the city, any user, subscriber, public safety agency or consumer who believes, or has reason to believe, that an individual has been required to pay an excessive charge for services, received inadequate services, or services provided were not in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, may file a written complaint with the department and the fire chief setting forth such allegations. The department and fire chief shall notify the ambulance service operator of such complaint. The ambulance service operator shall file a written response within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notification. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.160 Variances.
     As to all but Section 5.12.130 of this chapter, the health officer may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to Section 5.12.130 of this chapter, the fire chief may grant variances from the terms of this chapter if he or she finds such action is necessary to protect the public health, safety, or welfare. As to the health officer, such variances may include the issuance of a temporary license. No temporary license shall exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days in duration. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

 

5.12.170 Violations—Penalty.
     Violation of any provision of this chapter by an ambulance service operator shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 680 § 1, 2004)

Chapter 5.16 BINGO
5.16.010 Bingo defined.
     As used in this chapter, “bingo” means a game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked of covered by the player on a tangible card in the player’s possession and that conform to numbers or symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller, as further defined in Penal Code Section 326.5(o), as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.020 Organizations eligible to conduct bingo games.
     Only organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701l, and 23701w of the California Revenue and Taxation Code and mobilehome park associations and senior citizens organizations and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct bingo games in the city under the provisions of Section 326.5 of the California Penal Code and the provisions of this chapter, provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.025 Annual license.
     A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance until the following June 30th, at which time the license shall expire. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014)

 

5.16.030 License application.
     Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such annual license to conduct bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided by the city clerk. The issuing authority shall be the city manager. No license shall be issued or become effective until at least thirty (30) days after the filing date of such application. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.040 License application—Restrictions.
     No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.16.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.050 Contents of application.
     The application for an annual license shall contain the following:

     A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.16.020;

     B.     The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the applicant corporation, association or other entity;

     C.     The particular property within the city including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place and the date the property was first occupied. The applicant may also be required to submit documentation which establishes the nature of such ownership or leasehold interest;

     D.    Proposed day of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games. (See Section 5.16.180);

     E.     A schedule of the games proposed;

     F.     A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any such provisions;

     G.    The signatures of the applicant shall be preceded by a declaration under penalty of perjury that the contents of the application are true and correct;

     H.    The annual license fee established by resolution of the city council shall accompany the application, one-half of which will be refunded if the license is not issued; there shall be no proration of the license fee;

     I.      The applicant shall also submit with its application a certificate or determination of exemption issued by the state of California Franchise Tax Board; or, in the case of a mobilehome park association or senior citizen organization, a copy of its Articles of Incorporation, Charter or Articles of Association certified by an officer of the organization as having been duly adopted by the organization, which Charter or Articles shall include a specific statement that all proceeds from the operation of bingo games shall be used only for charitable purposes except as permitted by Section 326.5(k)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of California Penal Code;

     J.      An acknowledgment that the applicant understands the financial record submittals required by Section 5.16.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.060 Investigation of applicant.
     Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the city clerk shall refer the same to interested departments of the city including, but not limited to, the city manager, director of public services, city attorney, police department and the fire department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true, whether the applicant qualifies under this chapter and applicable state law, and whether the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy, zoning and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.070 Contents of license.
     Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:

     A.    The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;

     B.     The address where bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

     C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which bingo games are to be conducted;

     D.    The date of the expiration of such license; which shall be one year from the date of issuance;

     E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.080 Suspension of license—Revocation.
     A.    Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or that the license was issued as a result of misrepresentation by the applicant, the city manager shall have the authority to temporarily revoke the license in writing and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. The administrative remedies set forth in this section shall thereafter be followed and shall be the exclusive remedies.

     B.     The order issued under subsection A of this section shall include notification to the licensee that it shall have ten days from the date of such order to request in writing a hearing before the city manager to determine whether such license shall be permanently revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city manager within the ten-day period, shall result in a permanent revocation of the license.

     C.     Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been temporarily revoked under subsection A of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be permanently revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten days after receipt of such request at which hearing the licensee may appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be permanently revoked. No license shall be permanently revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

     D.    Any organization whose license is permanently revoked by the city manager under this section may appeal such permanent revocation to the city council by filing a written request therefor with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the decision of the city manager. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request, unless otherwise mutually agreed, and the appellant shall be given written notice of the time and date of such appeal hearing within the same time and in the same manner set forth in subsection C of this section.

     E.     Any person who conducts or continues to conduct a bingo game after any temporary or permanent revocation of the license shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.090 Bingo game prizes—Maximum amount.
     The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any bingo games shall not exceed five hundred fifty dollars ($550.00) in cash or kind, or both, for each separate game which is held. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.100 Proceeds and profits—Separate accounts—Records submittal.
     A.    With respect to organizations exempt from payment of the bank and corporation tax by Section 23701d of the Revenue and Taxation Code, all profits derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Such profits shall be used only for charitable purposes.

     B.     With respect to other organizations authorized to conduct bingo games pursuant to this section, all proceeds derived from a bingo game shall be kept in a special fund or account and shall not be commingled with any other fund or account. Proceeds are the receipts of bingo games conducted by organizations not within subsection A of this section. Such proceeds shall be used only for charitable purposes, except as follows:

     1.     Such proceeds may be used for prizes;

     2.     A portion of such proceeds, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the proceeds before the deduction for prizes, or two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) per month, whichever is less, may be used for rental of property, overhead, including the purchase of bingo equipment, and administrative expenses, security equipment and security personnel;

     3.     Such proceeds may be used to pay license fees.

     C.     The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, provision, supervision and any other phase of bingo games which are authorized by this chapter.

     D.    True and correct copies of such records shall be submitted to the city manager annually except that on the last day of the seventh month after the first license has been issued, such records shall be submitted covering the period from the issuance date to the last day of the sixth month following issuance; each set of annual records shall be submitted no later than the last day of the month next succeeding the expiration date of the license and shall cover the entire license period except that the first annual records shall cover the period commencing with the closing date of the last records submitted and end with the expiration date of the license. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall also have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.110 Financial interest in licensee only.
     No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such bingo game. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.120 Exclusive operation by licensee.
     A bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization. Such members shall not receive or pay a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This chapter does not preclude the employment of security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting the game. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.130 Bingo games open to public.
     All bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.140 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
     Notwithstanding that bingo games are open to the public, attendance at any bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and department of public services of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations. Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.150 Bingo games to be conducted only on licensee’s property.
     A licensee shall conduct a bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization, and which property is used by such organization for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. In the event the described property ceases to be used as an office and as a place for performance of the purposes for which the licensee is organized, the license shall have no further force or effect. A new license may be obtained by an eligible organization, upon application under this chapter, when it again owns or leases property used by it for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the organization is organized. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.160 Minors not to participate.
     No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.170 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
     No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game or be allowed to remain on the licensed premises while such games are being conducted. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.180 Hours and days of operation.
     Bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter, provided that appropriate notice is given. This limitation is cumulative with, and not in addition to, time allotted for remote caller bingo under Chapter 5.18. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 505, 1988; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.190 Participant must be present.
     No person shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.200 Receipt of profit by a person—Misdemeanor.
     Any person who pays or receives a profit, wage or salary from any bingo game authorized under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid from the revenues of bingo games as provided in Section 5.16.100. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.210 City may enjoin violation.
     The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.5 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

 

5.16.220 Notice of application for license to surrounding property.
     At the time the city manager receives an application for a license under this chapter, he or she shall promptly notify the occupants and owners of all property as listed on the latest assessment roll, located within three hundred (300) feet of the property where the applicant proposes to conduct the bingo games. Such notice shall include a description of the applicant’s proposed schedule including number of days when games are to be conducted, the hours thereof, the maximum number of persons the facility will permit and the address where comments will be received. The city manager shall give due consideration to such comments and include such measures on the license as he or she deems necessary to preserve the peace, tranquility and safety of the area surrounding the location. Any applicant aggrieved by such measures may appeal to the city council by written notice to the city clerk within twenty (20) days of the city manager’s action and the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate of such measures. (Ord. 14-06 § 1, 2014; Ord. 454 § 1, 1983; Ord. 365 § 1, 1977)

Chapter 5.18 REMOTE CALLER BINGO
5.18.005 Remote caller bingo authorization.
     A.    This chapter is adopted pursuant to Section 19 of Article IV of the California Constitution, as implemented by Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code.

     B.     Remote caller bingo may be lawfully played in the city of Los Alamitos pursuant to the provisions of Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, and this chapter, and not otherwise. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.010 Remote caller bingo defined.
     As used in this chapter, “remote caller bingo” means a game of bingo as defined in Section 5.16.010 in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location to multiple locations owned, leased, or rented by that organization, as further defined by Penal Code Section 326.3(u)(1) as the same may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.020 Organizations eligible to conduct remote caller bingo games.
     A.    Only organizations exempted from the payment of the bank and corporation tax by Sections 23701a, 23701b, 23701d, 23701e, 23701f, 23701g, 23701k, 23701l, and 23701w of the California Revenue and Taxation Code, mobilehome park associations, senior citizens organizations, and charitable organizations affiliated with a school district are eligible to apply to the city for a license to conduct remote caller bingo games in the city, provided that the receipts of such games are used only for charitable purposes.

     B.     The organization conducting the game must have been incorporated or in existence for at least three years and the operation of bingo may not be the primary purpose for which the organization is organized.

 

     C.     The organization conducting the game shall have a bingo license issued to it pursuant to Chapter 5.16 of this code. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.025 Annual license.
     A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance for a period of one year. A new license shall only be obtained upon filing a new application and payment of the license fee. The fact that a license has been issued to an applicant creates no vested right on the part of the licensee to continue to offer remote caller bingo for play. The city council of Los Alamitos expressly reserves the right to amend or repeal this chapter at any time. If this chapter is repealed, all licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall cease to be effective for any purpose upon the effective date of the repealing ordinance. (Ord. 16-01 § 1, 2016; Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.030 License application.
     A.    Eligible organizations desiring to obtain such annual license to conduct remote caller bingo games in the city shall file an application in writing therefor in the office of the city clerk on a form to be provided by the city clerk.

     B.     The issuing authority shall be the city manager.

     C.     No license shall be issued until the city manager has verified the facts stated in the application and determined that the applicant is qualified. In no event shall the license be issued or effective until at least thirty (30) days after the filing date of such application. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.040 License application—Restrictions.
     No license shall be issued to any organization unless such applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.18.020 and its application conforms to the requirements, terms and conditions of this chapter. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.050 Contents of application.
     The application for an annual license shall contain the following:

     A.    The name of the applicant organization and a statement that applicant is an eligible organization under Section 5.18.020;

     B.     The name and signature of at least two officers, including the presiding officer, of the applicant corporation, association or other entity;

     C.     The particular property within the city including the street number, owned or leased by the applicant, used by such applicant for an office or for performance of the purposes for which the applicant is organized, on which property bingo games will be conducted, together with the occupancy capacity of such place and the date the property was first occupied. The applicant may also be required to submit documentation which establishes the nature of such ownership or leasehold interest;

     D.    Proposed days of week and hours of day for conduct of bingo games (see Section 5.18.180);

     E.     A schedule of the games proposed;

     F.     A statement that the applicant agrees to conduct remote caller bingo games in strict accordance with the provisions of Section 326.3 of the Penal Code and this chapter as they be amended from time to time, and agrees that the license to conduct remote caller bingo games may be revoked by the city manager upon violation of any such provisions;

     G.    The signatures of the applicant shall be preceded by a declaration under penalty of perjury that the contents of the application are true and correct;

     H.    The annual, non-refundable, license fee established by resolution of the city council shall accompany the application; there shall be no proration of the fee;

     I.      The applicant shall also submit with its application a certificate or determination of exemption issued by the State of California Franchise Tax Board stating that the organization is exempt from paying taxes imposed under the Corporation Tax Law pursuant to one of the Revenue and Taxation Code sections listed in Section 5.18.020. In lieu of a certificate, the license official may refer to the Franchise Tax Board’s website to verify that the organization is exempt from the payment of taxes under the Corporation Tax Law. In the case of a mobilehome park association or senior citizen organization, a copy of its Articles of Incorporation, Charter or Articles of Association certified by an officer of the organization as having been duly adopted by the organization, which Charter or Articles shall include a specific statement that all proceeds from the operation of bingo games shall be used only for charitable purposes except as permitted by Section 326.5(k)(1), (2), (3) and (4) of the California Penal Code;

     J.      An acknowledgment that the applicant understands the financial record submittals required by Section 5.18.100 of this chapter. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.060 Investigation of applicant.
     Upon receipt of the completed application and the fee, the city clerk shall refer the same to interested departments of the city including, but not limited to, the city manager, director of public services, city attorney, police department and the fire department for investigation as to whether or not all the statements in the application are true, whether the applicant qualifies under this chapter and applicable state law, and whether the property of the applicant qualifies and the extent to which it qualifies, as property on which bingo games may lawfully be conducted as to fire, occupancy, zoning and other applicable restrictions. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.070 Contents of license.
     Upon being satisfied that the applicant is fully qualified under law to conduct bingo games in the city, the city manager shall issue a license to the applicant, which shall contain the following information:

     A.    The name and nature of the organization to whom the license is issued;

     B.     The address where the remote caller bingo games are authorized to be conducted;

     C.     The occupancy capacity of the room in which remote caller bingo games are to be conducted;

     D.    The date of the expiration of such license, which shall be one year from the date of issuance;

     E.     Such other information as may be necessary or desirable for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 16-01 § 2, 2016; Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.075 Conditions of license.
     A.    Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the conditions contained in Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code, whether such provisions are contained in this chapter or not, and each licensee shall comply with the requirements of those provisions.

     B.     The licensed organization is responsible for ensuring that the conditions of this chapter and Sections 326.3 and 326.4 of the Penal Code are complied with by the organization and its officers and members. A violation of any one or more of those conditions or provisions shall constitute cause for the revocation of the organization’s license by the city manager. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.080 Suspension of license—Revocation.
     A.    Whenever it appears to the city manager that the licensee is conducting a bingo game in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter or that the license was issued as a result of misrepresentation by the applicant, the city manager shall have the authority to temporarily revoke the license in writing and order the licensee to immediately cease and desist any further operation of any bingo game. The administrative remedies set forth in this section shall thereafter be followed and shall be the exclusive remedies.

     B.     The order issued under subsection A of this section shall include notification to the licensee that it shall have ten (10) days from the date of such order to request in writing a hearing before the city manager to determine whether such license shall be permanently revoked. Failure to request, in writing, such hearing before the city manager within the ten (10) day period, shall result in a permanent revocation of the license.

 

     C.     Upon such request by the licensee, whose license has been temporarily revoked under subsection A of this section, for a hearing to determine whether such license shall be permanently revoked, the city manager shall provide such hearing within ten (10) days after receipt of such request at which hearing the licensee may appear before the city manager for the purpose of presenting evidence why the license should not be permanently revoked. No license shall be permanently revoked under this section unless notice of the time and place of such hearing shall have first been given at least five days before the hearing thereof by depositing in the United States mail a notice directed to the suspended licensee at the address given in the application. The notice shall set forth a summary of the grounds advanced as the basis of the suspension and revocation.

     D.    Any organization whose license is permanently revoked by the city manager under this section may appeal such permanent revocation to the city council by filing a written request therefor with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the decision of the city manager. The appeal shall be heard by the city council within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request, unless otherwise mutually agreed, and the appellant shall be given written notice of the time and date of such appeal hearing within the same time and in the same manner set forth in subsection C of this section.

     E.     Any person who conducts or continues to conduct a bingo game after any temporary or permanent revocation of the license shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in jail for a period not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.090 Bingo game prizes—Maximum amount.
     The total value of prizes awarded during the conduct of any remote caller bingo game shall not exceed thirty-seven (37) percent of the gross receipts for that game as calculated by Section 326.3(p) of the Penal Code. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.100 Overhead costs and records.
     A.    Overhead costs shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of gross receipts as specified in Section 326.3(m) of the Penal Code.

     B.     The licensee shall keep full and accurate records of the income and expenses received and disbursed in connection with its operation, conduct, provision, supervision and any other phase of remote caller bingo games which are authorized by this chapter for a period of five years.

     C.     True and correct copies of such records shall be submitted to the city manager annually except that on the last day of the seventh month after the first license has been issued, such records shall be submitted covering the period from the issuance date to the last day of the sixth month following issuance; each set of annual records shall be submitted no later than the last day of the month next succeeding the expiration date of the license and shall cover the entire license period except that the first annual records shall cover the period commencing with the closing date of the last records submitted and end with the expiration date of the license. The city, by and through its authorized officers, shall also have the right to examine and audit such record at any reasonable time and licensee shall fully cooperate with the city by making such record available. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.110 Financial interest in licensee only.
     No individual, corporation, partnership or other legal entity except the licensee shall hold a financial interest in the conduct of such remote caller bingo game. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.120 Exclusive operation by licensee.
     A remote caller bingo game shall be operated and staffed only by members of the licensee organization and such members shall not receive a profit, wage, or salary from any remote caller bingo game. Only the licensee shall operate such game, or participate in the promotion, supervision or any other phase of such game. This chapter section does not preclude the employment of administrative, managerial, technical, financial, or security personnel who are not members of the authorized organization at such bingo game by the organization conducting the game as authorized by Section 326.3 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.130 Remote caller bingo games open to public.
     All remote caller bingo games shall be open to the public, not just to the members of the licensee organization. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.140 Attendance limited to occupancy capacity.
     A.    Notwithstanding that remote caller bingo games are open to the public and state law authorizes up to seven hundred fifty (750) players at one location, attendance at any remote caller bingo game shall be limited to the occupancy capacity of the room in which such game is conducted as determined by the fire department and department of public services of the city in accordance with applicable laws and regulations.

     B.     In no event may more than seven hundred fifty (750) players participate in a remote caller bingo game in a single location, even if there is occupancy capacity, unless a state of emergency has been declared and the other conditions of Section 326.3(j)(3) of the Penal Code have been met.

     C.     Licensee shall not reserve seats or space for any person. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.150 Bingo games to be conducted only on licensee’s property.
     A licensee shall conduct a remote caller bingo game only on property owned or leased by it, or property whose use is donated to the organization; such use need not be exclusive. The license issued under this chapter shall authorize the holder thereof to conduct bingo games only on such property, the address of which is stated in the application. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.160 Minors not to participate.
     No person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed to participate in any bingo game. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.170 Intoxicated persons not to participate.
     No person who is obviously intoxicated shall be allowed to participate in a bingo game or be allowed to remain on the licensed premises while such games are being conducted. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.180 Limits on operation/notice.
     A.    Remote caller bingo games shall not be conducted by any licensee more than two days during any week, except that a licensee may hold one additional game, at its election, in each calendar quarter, provided that appropriate notice is given. This limitation is cumulative with, and not in addition to, time allotted for bingo under Chapter 5.16.

     B.     For each participating remote caller bingo site, a licensee shall provide the Los Alamitos police department with at least thirty (30) days’ advance written notice of its intent to conduct a remote caller bingo game in accordance with the provisions of Section 326.3(j)(4) of the Penal Code. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.190 Participant must be present.
     No person shall be allowed to participate in a remote caller bingo game unless the person is physically present at the time and place in which the remote caller bingo game is being conducted. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.200 Receipt of profit by a person—Misdemeanor.
     Any person who pays or receives a profit, wage or salary from any remote caller bingo game authorized under this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction is punishable by a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00), which fine shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. Administrative, managerial, technical, financial and security personnel employed by the organization conducting the bingo game may be paid reasonable fees for services rendered from the revenues of bingo games as provided for in Penal Code Section 326.3(d), except that fees paid under those agreements shall not be determined as a percentage of receipts or other revenues from, or be dependent on the outcome of, the game. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.210 City may enjoin violation.
     The city may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to enjoin a violation of Section 326.3 of the Penal Code or of this chapter. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

 

5.18.220 Notice of application for license to surrounding property.
     At the time the city manager receives an application for a license under this chapter, he or she shall promptly notify the occupants and owners of all property as listed on the latest assessment roll, located within three hundred (300) feet of the property where the applicant proposes to conduct the remote caller bingo games. Such notice shall include a description of the applicant’s proposed schedule including number of days when games are to be conducted, the hours thereof, the maximum number of persons the facility will permit and the address where comments will be received. The city manager shall give due consideration to such comments and include such measures on the license as he or she deems necessary to preserve the peace, tranquility and safety of the area surrounding the location. Any applicant aggrieved by such measures may appeal to the city council by written notice to the city clerk within twenty (20) days of the city manager’s action and the city council may take such action as it deems appropriate of such measures. (Ord. 14-06 § 2, 2014)

Chapter 5.20 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISES
5.20.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number:

     “Cable television system,” “CATV,” “CTV,” and “broadband two-way communications system,” for the purpose of this chapter, are terms describing a system employing antennae, microwave, wires, waveguides, coaxial cables or other conductors, equipment or facilities, designed, constructed or used for the purpose of:

     1.     Collecting and amplifying local and distant broadcast television or radio signals and distributing and transmitting them;

     2.     Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals;

     3.     Transmitting television pictures, film and video-tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers;

     4.     Transmitting or receiving two-way signals or transmissions;

     5.     Transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice and audio-visual: provided, however, that any of the services, permitted hereunder to be performed, as described above, shall be those performed by the grantee for subscribers, as herein defined, in the operation of a cable television or CATV system franchised by the city and not otherwise.

     “Chief administrative officer” means the city manager, city administrator or other designation of the city’s chief executive officer, or any designee thereof.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or re-incorporated form.

     “Council” means the governing body of the city or any future board constituting the legislative body of the city.

     “Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of a franchise, privilege, permit, license or otherwise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization, in whatever form granted, shall not mean and include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city as required by other ordinances and laws of this city.

     “Grantee” means the person, firm or corporation granted a franchise by the council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee or assignee of such person, firm or corporation.

     “Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross revenues received by the grantee from all sources of operation of the cable television system within the city limits of grantor including any installation charges and any interest on deposits, but shall exclude any deposits and any sales, excise or other taxes, or other payments collected for a direct pass-through to local, state or federal government.

     “Person” means any natural person and all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, clubs, business or common law trusts, and societies.

     “Property of grantee” means all property owned, installed or used within the city by a grantee in the conduct of a cable television system business under the authority of a franchise granted pursuant to this chapter.

     “Special service area” means an area(s) of the city designated by the council, if it so elects, in the franchise agreement, where the franchisee may charge different rates, or provide different service(s), than in the remainder of the city.

     “Street” means the surface, the air space above the surface and the area below the surface of any public street, other public right-of-way or public place, including public utility easements.

 

     “Subscriber” or “user” means any person or entity receiving for any purpose any service of the grantee’s cable television system including, but not limited to, the conventional cable television system service of retransmission of television broadcast, radio signals, grantee’s original cablecasting, and the local government, education and public access channels; and other services, such as leasing of channels, data and facsimile transmission, pay television and police, fire and similar public service communications. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.020 Franchise to install and operate.
     A.    A nonexclusive franchise to install, construct, operate and maintain a cable television system on streets within all or a specific portion of the city may be granted by the council to any person, whether operating under an existing franchise, who or which offers to furnish and provide such system under and pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter.

     No provision of this chapter may be deemed or construed as to require the granting of a franchise when in the opinion of the council it is in the public interest to restrict the number of grantees to one or more.

     B.     When and in the event that the grantee of any franchise granted hereunder uses in his cable television system distribution channels furnished to the grantee by a telephone company pursuant to tariff or contract on file with a regulatory body having jurisdiction and the grantee makes no use of the streets independent of such telephone company-furnished facilities, the grantee shall be required to comply with all of the provisions hereof as a “licensee” and in such event whenever the term “grantee” is used herein it shall be deemed to mean and include “licensee.” (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.030 Cable television service.
     A.    Basic Service. The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder shall:

     1.     Be operationally capable of relaying to subscriber terminals those television and radio broadcast signals for the carriage of which the grantee is now or hereafter authorized by the Federal Communications Commission;

     2.     Be constructed two-way operational from the date of system initiation;

     3.     Distribute color television signals which it receives in color;

     4.     Provide a local telephone directory listing and toll-free telephone service maintained on a seven-day, twenty-four (24) hour basis for the receipt of consumer complaints and requests for repairs or adjustments;

     5.     Provide a community service channel program, as defined by Government Code Section 53066.1, as amended, plus any additional requirements which the council may, from time to time, impose; and

     6.     Provide, at a minimum, a fully equipped permanent studio within the city limits, for public and municipal use, plus such other mobile and portable studios as are, from time to time, necessary.

     B.     Nonbasic Services. The cable television system permitted to be installed and operated hereunder, may also engage in the business of:

     1.     Transmitting original cablecast programming not received through television broadcast signals;

     2.     Transmitting television pictures, film and video tape programs, not received through broadcast television signals, whether or not encoded or processed to permit reception by only selected receivers or subscribers;

     3.     Transmitting and receiving all other signals: digital, voice and audio-visual.

     C.     Subscriber Complaints. In addition to other service regulations adopted by the council, and excepting circumstances beyond grantee’s control such as acts of God, riots and civil disturbances, and in providing the foregoing services, the grantee shall:

     1.     Limit system failures to minimum time duration by locating and correcting malfunctioning promptly, but in no event longer than twenty-four (24) hours after occurrence, irrespective of holidays or other nonbusiness hours.

     2.     Upon complaint by a subscriber, make a demonstration satisfactory to the chief administrative officer that a signal is being delivered which is of sufficient strength and quality to meet the standards set forth in the regulations of the Federal Communications Commission;

     3.     Render efficient service, making repairs promptly and interrupting service only for good cause and for the shortest time possible. Planned interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice given to subscribers twenty-four (24) hours in advance and shall occur during periods of minimum use of the system;

     4.     Maintain an office in the city, which office shall be open during all the usual business hours, with its telephone number listed in directories of the telephone company serving the city, and be so operated that complaints and requests for repairs or adjustment may be received at any time, day or night, seven days a week, or provide a local telephone directory listing and toll-free telephone service maintained on a seven-day, twenty-four (24) hour basis for the receipt of consumer complaints;

     5.     Maintain a written record, or log, listing date of customer complaints, identifying the subscriber and describing the nature of the complaint, and when and what action was taken by grantee in response thereto; the record shall be kept at grantee’s local office, for a period of five years from the date of complaint, and shall be available for inspection during regular business hours without further notice or demand; by the chief administrative officer.

     D.    Municipal Service.

     1.     With respect to the local government channel, the grantee shall provide, at the request of the chief administrative officer, use of grantee’s studio, equipment and technical services for production of live and video-tape municipal programs, subject to scheduling requirements of the grantee.

     2.     With respect to the basic television services, the grantee shall provide all subscriber services, and a tie-in connection, without cost, when the system possesses such facilities and as designated by the council, subject to the requirements of federal law to:

     a.     Public schools and community colleges within the city; and

     b.     Buildings owned and controlled by the city, used for public purposes and not for residential use (fire and police stations excepted).

     E.     Compatibility and Connectibility.

     1.     It is the desire of the city that all cable television systems franchised hereunder shall, insofar as financially and technically possible, be compatible with another and with systems adjacent to the city.

     2.     Whenever it is financially and technically feasible, the grantee shall so construct, operate and modify the system so as to tie the same into all other systems within and adjacent to the city.

     F.     Uses Permitted. Any franchise granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall authorize and permit the grantee to engage in the business of operating and providing a cable television system in the city, and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct, maintain and retain in, on, over, under, upon, across and along any street, such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults, manholes, amplifiers, and appliances, attachments and other property as may be necessary and appurtenant to the cable television system; and, in addition, so to use, operate and provide similar facilities or properties rented or leased from other persons, firms or corporations, including but not limited to any public utility or other grantee franchised or permitted to do business in the city. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.040 Franchise payments.
     A.    In consideration of the granting and exercise of a franchise to use the streets, as herein defined, for the operation of a cable television system, any grantee shall pay to the city, during the life of the franchise, five percent of the franchisee’s gross revenues per year from all cable services in the community except that, to the extent that the Federal Communications Commission, in its Rules and Regulations, at some time in the future allows a city to raise the franchise fee the city shall have the right and power to negotiate with grantee to do so.

     B.     The percentage payments shall be made in the manner, and at times directed in the franchise or in a council resolution fixing franchise fees and adopting rules for service and rate regulation.

     C.     No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the city may have for further or additional sums payable under this chapter or for the performance of any other obligation hereunder.

     D.    In the event that the above payment is not received by the city within the specified time, grantee shall pay to the city liquidated damages of two percent per month on the unpaid balance in addition thereto. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 424 § 1, 1981; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.050 Franchise term—Duration and termination.
     A.    The franchise granted by the council under this chapter shall be for a maximum term of fifteen (15) years from the date of its acceptance by the grantee. The city shall have the option of granting a renewal for an additional term of no more than ten years or denying a renewal and initiating a process seeking a new grantee.

     B.     In addition to the penalties for delays in construction, grantor reserves the right to impose the following penalties in the event grantee violates any other material provision of the franchise, provided that grantee has not commenced corrective action within thirty (30) days of service of written notice by certified mail to, or personal service on, the general manager of grantee. Imposition of penalties shall be subject to provisions of Section 5.20.260 (J). Where possible, all penalties assessed shall be made to reflect the actual loss or damage incurred. Grantor may:

     1.     Impose a financial penalty from the security deposit established herein, not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day or per incident, for grantee’s individual wilful and/or repeated violation of the franchise or failure to take corrective action with respect to a violation of any provision of the franchise; or

     2.     Require grantee to correct or otherwise remedy the violation prior to any rate increase for basic CATV service becoming effective.

     In the event the stated violation is not reasonably curable within sixty (60) days, the franchise will not be terminated or revoked or a penalty imposed pursuant to this section if the grantee provides, within the sixty (60) days, a plan, satisfactory to the grantor, to remedy the violation and continues to demonstrate good faith in seeking to correct the violation.

     In determining which remedy or remedies for grantee’s violation are appropriate, grantor shall take into consideration the nature of the violation, the person or persons bearing the impact of the violation, the nature of the remedy required in order to further prevent such violations, the actual costs associated with the violation and such other matters as the grantor may deem appropriate.

     Within ten days after receipt of a written notice of a violation from grantor, grantee may request a hearing before the city manager or other person designated by the city council. Such a proceeding shall afford full due process of law and shall be held within thirty (30) days of the receipt of the request therefor.

     C.     Except as provided for in Section 5.20.240 in the event of any holding over after expiration of any franchise granted hereunder without the prior consent of the city expressed by resolution the grantee shall pay to the city reasonable compensation and damages, of not less than one hundred (100) percent of its gross revenue attributable to operations in the city during the period. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 424 § 1, 1981; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.060 Franchise applications.
     A.    Applications for a franchise to construct, operate and maintain a cable television system in the city may be solicited by the city at any time, and may request such application information as considered appropriate by the city. In the event unsolicited applications are submitted to the city, they shall be filed with the city clerk and shall contain or be accompanied by the following:

     1.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

     2.     A detailed statement of the corporate or other business entity organization of the applicant, including but not limited to, the following and to whatever extent required by the city:

     a.     The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, directors and associates of the applicant;

     b.     The names, residence and business addresses of all officers, persons and entities having, controlling, or being entitled to have control of five percent or more of the ownership of the applicant and the respective ownership share of each such person or entity,

     c.     The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of the applicant, namely, any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in whole or in part or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the applicant, and a statement describing the nature of any such parent or subsidiary business entity, including but not limited to cable television systems owned or controlled by the applicant, its parent and subsidiary and the areas served thereby,

     d.     A detailed description of all previous experience of the applicant in providing cable television system service and in related or similar fields,

     e.     A detailed and complete financial statement of the applicant, prepared by an independent certified public accountant, for the fiscal year next preceding the date of the application hereunder, or a letter or other acceptable evidence in writing from a recognized lending institution or funding source, addressed to both the applicant and the council, setting forth the basis for a study performed by such lending institution or funding source, and a clear statement of its intent as a lending institution or funding source to provide whatever capital shall be required by the applicant to construct and operate the proposed system in the city, or a statement from a certified public accountant, certifying that the applicant has available sufficient free, net and uncommitted cash resources to construct and operate the proposed system in this city,

     f.      A statement identifying, by place and date, any other cable television franchise(s) awarded to the applicant, its parent or subsidiary; the status of such franchise(s) with respect to completion thereof; the total cost of completion of such system(s); and the amount of applicant’s and its parent’s or subsidiary’s resources committed to the completion thereof;

     3.     A detailed description of the proposed plan of operation of the applicant which shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     a.     A detailed map indicating all areas proposed to be served, and a proposed time schedule for the installation of all equipment necessary to become operational throughout the entire area to be served,

     b.     A statement or schedule setting forth all proposed classifications of rates and charges to be made against subscribers and all rates and charges as to each of the classifications, including installation charges and service charges,

     c.     A detailed, informative and referenced statement describing the actual equipment and operational standards proposed by the applicant and that such standards of operations are in compliance with those contained in Title 47, Subpart K (Section 76.601 et seq.), of the Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission,

     d.     A copy of the form of any agreement, undertaking or other instrument proposed to be entered into between the applicant and any subscriber,

     e.     A detailed statement setting forth in its entirety any and all agreements and undertakings, whether formal or informal, written, oral or implied, existing or proposed to exist between the applicant and any person, firm or corporation which materially relate or pertain to or depend upon the application and the granting of the franchise;

     4.     A copy of any agreement covering the franchise area, if existing between the applicant and any public utility subject to regulation by the California Public Utilities Commission providing for the use of any facilities of the public utility, including but not limited to poles, lines or conduits;

 

     5.     Any other details, statements, information or references pertinent to the subject matter of such application which shall be required or requested by the council, or by any provision of any other ordinance of the city (and of its Charter);

     6.     An application fee established by resolution of the city council, which shall be in the form of cash, certified or cashier’s check, or money order, to pay the costs of studying, investigating and otherwise processing such application, and which shall be in consideration thereof and not returnable or refundable in whole or in part, except to the extent that such fee exceeds the actual costs incurred by the city in studying, investigating and otherwise processing the application; provided, that any applicant who shall deliver to the city clerk a written withdrawal of or cancellation of any application hereunder, not later than the seventh day next following the day such application is received by the city clerk, shall be entitled to have returned and refunded the paid fee, less any actual costs or expenses incurred by the city by reason of such application.

     B.     The council may, by advertisement or any other means, solicit and call for applications for cable television system franchises, and may determine and fix any date upon or after which the same shall be received by the city, or the date before which the same must be received, or the date after which the same shall not be received, and may make any other determinations and specify any other times, terms, conditions or limitations respecting the soliciting, calling for, making and receiving of such applications.

     C.     Upon receipt of any application for franchise, the council shall refer the same to a CATV committee, appointed by the council, who shall prepare a report and make their recommendations respecting such application, and cause the same to be completed and filed with the council.

     D.    If the council shall determine to further consider the application, it shall pass a resolution setting a public hearing for the consideration of competing applications; fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest thereof or objections may file written protests and/or appear before the council and be heard, and directing the city clerk to publish the resolution at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city.

     E.     In making any determination hereunder as to any application for a new franchise, or renewal thereof, the council may give due consideration to the quality of the service proposed, rates to subscriber, income to the city, experience, character, background and financial responsibility of any applicant, and its management and owners, technical and performance quality of equipment, willingness and ability to meet construction and physical requirements, and to abide by policy conditions, franchise limitations and requirements, and any other considerations deemed pertinent by the council for safeguarding the interests of the city and the public.

     F.     At the time set for the hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed to hear all written protests. Thereafter, the council shall make one of the following determinations:

     1.     That such application(s) be denied, which determination shall be final and conclusive; or

     2.     That such franchise be granted and the terms and conditions thereof.

     G.    The council may reject any and all applications and may, if it so desires, request new and/or additional proposals.

     H.    The council may at any time demand and applicant(s) shall provide such supplementary, additional or other information as the council may deem reasonably necessary to determine whether the requested franchise should be granted.

     I.      Any grantee, upon effective date of its franchise, shall be required to reimburse city for its estimated engineering, administrative, publication and legal expenses incurred in connection with the processing, evaluation and preparation of documents relating to such franchise, as such shall be established in the franchise agreement. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 424 § 1, 1981; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.070 Deposits.
     A.    Security Deposit. Within thirty (30) days after the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall deliver to grantor an irrevocable and unconditioned letter of credit in form and substance acceptable to grantor, from a bank approved by grantor in the amount of one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00). The letter shall be reduced in amount to twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) upon completion of system construction and shall be maintained in this amount throughout the term of the franchise.

     B.     Hold Harmless. The grantee on behalf of itself, its successors and assigns, shall defend, indemnify and hold harmless the grantor, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees, and each of them, against and from any and all claims, demands, actions, suits, liabilities and judgments of every kind and nature and regardless of the merits of the same, arising out of or related to the exercise or enjoyment of the CATV franchise granted pursuant to this chapter including costs of investigations, attorney’s fees and court costs in the defense of any actions to the extent that such claims or demands are alleged to be the result of any error, omission, intentional act or negligent act of grantee or any persons employed by grantee, even if that grantee employee is in error or by misinformation alleged to be a grantor employee. Grantee shall hold grantor free and harmless from any liability to any of grantee’s employees arising out of or in connection with a work-related injury where such injury occurred as a result of grantor’s active conduct or negligence and city’s passive conduct or negligence.

     C.     Liability Insurance and Indemnification. Upon the effective date of the franchise, grantee shall furnish proof that a satisfactory liability insurance policy is in force, in the minimum amounts of:

 

$100,000/$500,000

Worker’s compensation

$2,000,000

General and owners liability

$500,000/$1,500,000

Property damage

$1,000,000/$2,000,000

Motor vehicle

100% builder’s risk, fire and extended coverage

 

     The liability insurance policy, which shall include the city, as additionally named insured, shall be maintained throughout the duration of this franchise, with a copy filed with grantor. The adequacy of the coverage shall be a topic for periodic review every three years. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982)

 

5.20.080 Acceptance of the franchise.
     A.    No franchise granted under this chapter shall become effective for any purpose unless and until written acceptance thereof shall have been filed with the city clerk. Written acceptance, which shall be in the form and substance approved by the city attorney, shall also be and operate as an acceptance of each and every term and condition and limitation contained in this chapter, or in such franchise, or otherwise specified as herein provided.

     B.     The written acceptance shall be filed by the grantee not later than 12:01 p.m. of the fortieth day next following the effective date of the grant of the franchise of the city council.

     C.     In default of the filing of such written acceptance as herein required, the grantee shall be deemed to have rejected and repudiated the franchise. Thereafter, the acceptance of the grantee shall not be received nor filed by the city clerk. The grantee shall have no rights, remedies or redress in the franchise, unless and until the council, by resolution, shall determine that such acceptance be received or filed, and then upon such terms and conditions as the council may impose.

     D.    Any case, and in any instance, all rights, remedies and redress which may or shall be available to the city, shall at all times be available to the city, and shall be preserved and maintained and shall continuously exist in and to the city, and shall not be in any manner or means modified, abridged, altered, restricted or impaired by agreement or otherwise.

 

     E.     Any franchise granted and accepted under this chapter shall be in lieu of any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by the grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable television systems in the city. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.090 Franchise limitations.
     A.    Every franchise granted under this chapter shall be nonexclusive.

     B.     No privilege or exemption shall be granted or conferred by any franchise granted under this chapter except those specifically prescribed herein.

     C.     Any privilege claimed under any such franchise by the grantee in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy to the streets or other public property.

     D.    Any such franchise shall be a privilege to be held in personal trust by the original grantee. It cannot in any event be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by voluntary sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without prior consent of the council expressed by resolution, and then only under such conditions as may therein be prescribed. Any such transfer or assignment shall be made only by an instrument in writing, such as a bill of sale, or similar document, a duly executed copy of which shall be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty (30) days after any such transfer or assignment. The consent of the council may not be unreasonably refused; provided, however, the proposed assignee must show responsibility as determined by the council utilizing the factors specified in Section 5.20.060 (B), and must agree to comply with all provisions of this chapter; and provided, further, that no such consent shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or other hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an indebtedness, except that when such hypothecation shall exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the market value of the property used by the franchisee in the conduct of the cable television system, prior consent of the council shall be required for such transfer. Such consent shall not be withheld unreasonably.

     In the event that grantee is a corporation, prior approval of the city council, expressed by resolution, shall be required where there is an actual change in control or where ownership of more than twenty-five (25) percent of the voting stock of grantee is acquired by a person or group of persons acting in concert, none of whom already own fifty (50) percent or more of the voting stock, singly or collectively. Any such acquisition occurring without prior approval of the city council shall constitute a failure to comply with a provision of this chapter within the meaning of Section 5.20.050 (B) of this chapter.

     E.     Time shall be of the essence of any such franchise granted hereunder. The grantee shall not be relieved of his obligation to comply promptly with any of the provisions of this chapter by any failure of the city to enforce prompt compliance.

     F.     Any right or power in, or duty impressed upon, any officer, employee, department or board of the city shall be subject to transfer by the city to any other officer, employee, department or board of the city.

     G.    The grantee shall have no recourse whatsoever against the city for any loss, cost, expense or damage arising out of any provision or requirement of this chapter or of any franchise issued hereunder or because of its enforcement, except where such loss, cost, expense or damage results from wilful or wanton conduct on the part of the city, its agents or employees.

     H.    The grantee shall be subject to all requirements of the city laws, rules, regulations and specifications heretofore or hereafter enacted or established.

     I.      Any such franchise granted shall not relieve the grantee of any obligations involved in obtaining pole or conduit space from any department of the city, utility company, or from others maintaining utilities in streets.

     J.      Any franchise granted hereunder, shall be in lieu or any and all other rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities owned, possessed, controlled or exercisable by grantee, or any successor to any interest of grantee, of or pertaining to the construction, operation or maintenance of any cable television system in the city; and the acceptance of any franchise hereunder shall operate, as between grantee and the city, as an abandonment of any and all of such rights, privileges, powers, immunities and authorities within the city, to the effect that, as between grantee and the city, and all construction, operation and maintenance by any grantee of any cable television system in the city shall be, and shall be deemed and construed in all instances and respects to be, under and pursuant to such franchise, and not hereunder or pursuant to any other right, privilege, power, immunity or authority whatsoever. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.100 Rights reserved to the city.
     The city reserves the power to adopt and enforce requirements and regulations on any and all of the following matters, if an when deemed necessary and proper in the public interest by the city council and consistent with Rules and Regulations of the Federal Communications Commission and laws of the state of California. Adoption of the same shall be considered in regulating grantee’s service rates pursuant to the franchise agreement.

     A.    Procedures for the periodic fixing of reasonable rates and service charges to be charged to subscribers by grantee, and provisions for the enforcement thereof;

     B.     Operational standards pertaining to the quality of audio-visual reception by subscribers;

     C.     Requirements for carriage of specified television signals, radio signals and supplementary signal carriage services;

     D.    Requirements for the provision of equipment and channels for local production and presentation of cablecast programs, and regulations pertaining thereto;

     E.     Requirements and regulations pertaining to minimum service requirements and fair business practices by the grantee;

     F.     Public safety requirements pertaining to the installation and use of all CATV equipment;

     G.    Procedures for the investigation and resolution of all complaints by subscribers regarding grantee’s CATV operations, including implementation thereof by designated city officers, employees or agents;

     H.    Public access channels, equipment and facilities;

     I.      There is reserved to the city every right and power which is required to be herein reserved or provided by any law and the grantee, by its acceptance of the franchise, agrees to be bound thereby and to comply with any action or requirements of the city in its exercise of such rights or power, heretofore or hereafter enacted or established;

     J.      Neither the granting of any franchise nor any provision hereof shall constitute a waiver or bar to the exercise of any governmental right or power of the city;

     K.    The council may do all things which are necessary and convenient in the exercise of its jurisdiction under this chapter and may determine any question of fact which may arise during the existence of any franchise granted hereunder. The chief administrative officer, with the approval of the city attorney, is authorized and empowered to adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or charge arising from the operations of any grantee under this chapter, either on behalf of the city, the grantee or any subscriber, in the best interest of the public. Either the grantee or any member of the public who may be dissatisfied with the decision of the chief administrative officer may appeal the matter to the council for hearing and determination. The council may accept, reject or modify the decision of the chief administrative officer, and the council may adjust, settle or compromise any controversy or cancel any charge arising from the operations of the grantee or from any provision of this chapter.

     L.     In the event that the Federal Communications Commission elects to deregulate any area of cable communication over which it currently exercises jurisdiction, or grant authority to municipalities to regulate in these areas, the city shall have the right to negotiate with the grantee to incorporate in franchise agreement rules or regulations adopted pursuant to these powers. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.110 Council may adopt rules and regulations.
     A.    Standards of Operation.

     1.     Prior to receiving any applications for franchises, the council may adopt rules, regulations and standards governing the operation of cable television systems in the city. Such rules, regulations and standards shall apply to and shall govern the operations of the grantee of any franchise hereunder, and are expressly declared a part of any franchise hereunder.

     2.     Rules, regulations and standards not adopted prior to receiving any application for a franchise shall be adopted by the council at the first regular meeting of the council next following the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, by resolution which shall become effective upon adoption and shall be applicable to any application for a franchise previously received.

     3.     The standards adopted pursuant to these procedures shall be exclusively in those areas not either expressly or impliedly preempted by the Federal Communications Commission at the time of adoption.

     4.     The council may at any time adopt new rules or regulations or standards, or may amend, modify, delete or otherwise change its respective rules or regulations or standards previously adopted, in the following manner: The council shall pass its resolution of intention stating or describing the rules or regulations or standards to be adopted, amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed, and fixing and setting forth a day, hour and place certain when and where any persons having any interest therein or objection thereto may appear before the council and be heard. Such resolution shall direct the city clerk to publish the same at least once within ten days of the passage thereof in a newspaper of general circulation within the city, and to mail a copy of the same to any grantee or applicant for a franchise, not more than thirty (30) days nor less than fifteen (15) days prior to the time fixed for hearing thereon.

     At the time set for such hearing, or at any adjournment thereof, the council shall proceed to hear and pass upon such comments as may be presented. Thereafter the council, by its resolution, may adopt, amend, modify, delete or otherwise change its respective rules, regulations and standards. Such determination by the council shall be final and conclusive. The rules and regulations, as amended, modified, deleted or otherwise changed by the council shall become effective upon the tenth day following the adoption of such resolution, unless a longer period shall be otherwise provided in such resolution.

     B.     Rates. Unless and until the city council adopts an ordinance establishing procedures for the periodic fixing of reasonable rates pursuant to Section 5.20.100 for the entire city or parts thereof, the following limitations shall apply to the rates charged to subscribers by grantee:

     Initial Rates and Charges. Grantees initial rates and charges shall not exceed those listed in any franchise agreement entered into pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.120 Permits and construction.
     A.    Within thirty (30) days after acceptance of any franchise, the grantee shall proceed with due diligence to obtain all necessary permits and authorizations which are required in the conduct of its business including, but not limited to, any utility joint use attachment agreements, microwave carrier licenses and any other permits, licenses and authorizations to be granted by duly constituted regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over the operation of the cable television systems, or associated microwave transmission facilities.

     In connection therewith, copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the grantee to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting grantee’s cable television operations, shall also be submitted simultaneously to the chief administrative officer.

     B.     Grantee shall utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities whenever possible, and shall not construct or install any new, different or additional poles, conduits or other facilities whether on public property or on privately owned property unless and until first securing the written approval of the chief administrative officer.

     Whenever grantee shall not utilize existing poles, conduits and other facilities, or whenever existing conduits and other facilities shall be located beneath the surface of the streets, or whenever the city shall undertake a program designed to cause all conduits and other facilities to be located beneath the surface of the streets in any area or throughout the city, in the exercise of its police power or pursuant to the terms hereof, upon reasonable notice to grantee, any such conduits or other facilities of grantee shall be constructed, installed, placed or replaced beneath the surface of the streets. Any construction, installation, placement, replacement or changes which may be so required shall be made at the expense of grantee, whose costs shall be determined as in the case of public utilities.

     C.     The city shall have the right, free of charge, to make additional use, for any public or municipal purpose, whether governmental or proprietary, of any poles, conduits or other similar facilities erected, controlled or maintained exclusively by or for grantee in any street, provided such use by city does not interfere with the use by grantee.

     D.    In those areas of the city where the transmission or distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone, communication and electric services are underground or hereafter are placed underground, the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of his transmission and distribution facilities underground. The term “underground” includes a partial underground system; provided, that upon obtaining the written approval of the chief administrative officer, amplifiers in the grantee’s transmission and distribution lines may be placed in appropriate housings upon the surface of the ground.

     E.     The grantee at his expense shall protect, support, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove any property of grantee when, in the opinion of the chief administrative officer the same is required by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, freeway or street construction, change or establishment of street grade, installation of sewers, drains, waterpipes, power line, signal line, transportation facilities, tracks or any other types of structure or improvements or governmental agencies whether acting in a governmental or a proprietary capacity, or any other structure or public improvement, including, but not limited to, movement of buildings, urban renewal and redevelopment, and any general program under which the city shall undertake to cause all such properties to be located beneath the surface of the ground. The grantee shall in all cases have the privilege, subject to the corresponding obligations, to abandon any property of grantee in place, as herein provided. Nothing hereunder shall be deemed a taking of the property of grantee, and grantee shall be entitled to no surcharge by reason of anything hereunder.

     F.     Upon the failure, refusal or neglect of grantee to cause any work or other act required by law or hereunder to be properly completed in, on, over or under any street within any time prescribed therefor, or upon notice given, where no time is prescribed, the chief administrative officer may cause such work or other act to be completed in whole or in part, and upon so doing shall submit to grantee an itemized statement of the costs thereof. The grantee shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of such statement, pay to the city the entire amount thereof.

     G.    In the event that:

     1.     The use of any part of the system of grantee is discontinued for any reason for a continuous period of thirty (30) days, without prior written notice to and approval by the city; or

     2.     Any part of such system has been installed in any street or other area without complying with the requirements hereof; or

     3.     Any franchise shall be terminated, canceled or shall expire;

then the grantee shall, at the option of the city, and at the expense of grantee and at no expense to the city, and upon demand of the city, promptly remove from any streets or other area all property of grantee, and grantee shall promptly restore the street or other area from which such property has been removed to such condition as the chief administrative officer shall approve.

     The council may, upon written application therefor by grantee, approve the abandonment of any of such property in place by grantee and under such terms and conditions as the council may prescribe. Upon abandonment of any such property in place, grantee shall cause to be executed, acknowledged and delivered to the city such instruments as the city attorney shall prescribe and approve, transferring and conveying the ownership of such property to the city. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.130 Inspection of property and records.
     A.    At all reasonable times upon twenty-four (24) hours notice, the grantee shall permit any duly authorized representative of the city to examine all property of the grantee, together with any appurtenant property of the grantee situated within or without the city, and to examine and transcribe any and all maps and other records kept or maintained by the grantee or under its control which deal with the operations, affairs, transactions or property of the grantee with respect to its franchise. If any such maps or records are not kept in the city, or upon reasonable request made available in the city, and if the council shall determine that an examination thereof is necessary or appropriate, then all travel and maintenance necessarily incurred in making such examination shall be paid by the grantee.

     B.     The grantee shall prepare and furnish to the city manager and the city clerk at the times and in the form prescribed by either of the officers, such reports with respect to its operations, affairs, transactions or property, as may be reasonably necessary or appropriate to the performance of any of the rights, functions or duties of the city or any of its officers in connection with the franchise.

     C.     The grantee shall at all times make and keep in the city full and complete plans and records showing the exact location of all CATV system equipment installed or in use in streets and other public places in the city.

     D.    The grantee shall file with the city manager, on or before the last day in March of each year, a current map or set of maps drawn to scale, showing all CATV system equipment installed and in place in streets and other public places of the city. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.140 Right to purchase system.
     The grantor may in any lawful manner and upon the payment of a fair valuation lawfully ascertain, purchase, condemn, acquire, take over and hold the property and plant of the grantee in whole or in part; if such purchase or taking over be upon revocation of the franchise or if the expiration of the term of the franchise such valuation shall not include any sum for the value of the franchise or grant under which such plant and property are being operated. (Ord. 424 § 1, 1981; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.150 Right of intervention.
     Either party to this agreement may intervene in any suit or proceeding in which the other is a party, provided that the intervening party’s interests are not adequately represented by the existing parties, and provided further, that the disposition of each suit or proceeding without the intervening party’s participation may, as a practical matter, impair or impede its ability to protect those interests. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982)

 

5.20.160 Effect of annexations.
     A.    In the event any new territory shall be annexed to the city which is contiguous to only one franchise area in the city, such new territory shall become, by operation of law, a part of such franchise area immediately upon the effective date of such annexation.

     B.     In the event any new territory shall become annexed to the city which is contiguous to more than one franchise area in the city or is not contiguous to any franchise area, then the council shall determine at a public hearing, which grantee or grantees, if any, shall serve such new territory.

     C.     In the event any portion of the unincorporated territory covered by an existing franchise or license granted by the county of Orange is annexed to the city prior to the time that the grantee of such county franchise or license has commenced installation of a CATV system within said territory, all rights acquired by the grantee under its county franchise or license shall terminate by operation of law as of the date on which the annexation to the city becomes effective.

     D.    In the event any portion of unincorporated territory covered by an existing franchise or license granted by the county of Orange is annexed to the city after the grantee thereof has commenced or completed construction and installation of a CATV system within the territory; the rights reserved under such franchise or license to the county of Orange or to any officer thereof, shall inure to the benefit of the city and all regulatory provisions of this chapter and any other rules and regulations applicable to CATV systems operating within the city, whether then in effect or subsequently adopted, shall be applicable to and binding upon the grantee. In addition, the grantee shall be obligated to pay annually to the city, the percentage of the gross receipts established by the county of Orange in the franchise or license which are derived from its operations within the annexed territory for five years or upon termination of the franchise, whichever is of the shorter time duration, at which time the council may establish the percentage of gross receipts to be paid to the city. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.170 Safety requirements.
     A.    The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices for preventing failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injuries or nuisances to the public.

     B.     The grantee shall install and maintain its wires, cables, fixtures and other equipment in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Code, as it now exists or hereafter may be amended and in such manner that they will not interfere with any installations of the city or of a public utility serving the city.

     C.     All structures and all lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys and public ways or places of the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe, suitable, substantial condition, and in good order and repair.

     D.    The grantee shall strictly adhere to all building and zoning codes currently or hereafter in force. The grantee shall arrange its lines, cables and other appurtenances on both public and private property, in such a manner as to cause no unreasonable interference with the use of said public or private property by any person. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.180 Removal of facilities upon request.
     Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the grantee shall promptly remove all its facilities and equipment from the premises of such subscriber upon his request. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.190 Repair of streets and public ways.
     Any and all streets and public ways which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, operation, maintenance or reconstruction of the cable television system, shall be promptly repaired by the grantee, at its expense, to the satisfaction of the grantor. A public works permit shall be obtained by grantee prior to commencement of such work. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.200 Erection of poles.
     The grantee is expected to make use of existing aerial poles. However, the grantee shall have the right to erect poles if written permission is obtained from the grantor. Except as may be permitted, the grantee shall lease pole space from existing owners for all construction. The grantor shall utilize its best efforts to assist in arriving at equitable rental agreement. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.210 Services generally.
     Services shall be offered to all city residents in accordance with the provisions of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.220 Special service areas.
     As defined in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall be permitted to change higher installation fees for areas of low housing density, commercial areas and/or underground utility areas that require exceptionally high construction costs.

     Upon petition by the grantee, the council may defer or indefinitely suspend any expansion into such a special service area after a showing by grantee that such expansion would cause unreasonable financial hardship to grantee. The adequacy of such a showing shall be determined and weighed against the public interest in system expansion by the council after a public hearing. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.230 Receivership.
     Upon the foreclosure or other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the CATV system, or upon the termination of any lease covering all or a substantial part of the CATV system, the grantee shall notify the city clerk of such fact, and such notification shall be treated as a notification that a change in control of the grantee has taken place and the provisions of this chapter governing the consent of the council to such change in control of the grantee shall apply.

     The grantor shall have the right to revoke the franchise one hundred and twenty (120) days after the appointment of a receiver, or trustee, to take over and conduct the business of the grantee, whether in receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have been vacated prior to the expiration of the one hundred and twenty (120) days, or unless:

     A.    Within one hundred and twenty (120) days after his election or appointment, such receiver or trustee shall have fully complied with all the provisions of the franchise and remedied all defaults thereunder; and

     B.     Such receiver or trustee, within one hundred and twenty (120) days, shall have executed an agreement, duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the premises, whereby such receiver or trustee assumes and agrees to be bound by each and every provision of the franchise. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.240 Continuity of service mandatory.
     It shall be the right of all subscribers to receive all available services insofar as their financial and other obligations to the grantee are honored. In the event that the grantee elects to overbuild, rebuild, modify or sell the system, or the grantor revokes or fails to renew the franchise, the grantee shall do everything reasonable in its power to ensure that all subscribers receive continuous, uninterrupted service regardless of the circumstances during the lifetime of the franchise. In the event of purchase by the grantor, or a change of grantee, the current grantee shall cooperate with the grantor to operate the system for a reasonable temporary period, in maintaining continuity of service to all subscribers. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.250 Financial disclosure of independent consultant.
     A.    Any individual, partnership or corporation employed by the city for the purposes of advising the city, its council, commissions, city manager or staff, on matters relating to cable television, or reviewing and evaluating, or assisting the city in reviewing and evaluating, proposals for the construction and operation of a cable television system(s), or regulating, or assisting the city in regulating, a cable television system, shall, as a term condition of their employment, file within ten days of the date of employment with the city clerk a statement containing:

     1.     A listing and description of any financial and/or ownership held by the consultant in any cable television company, any subsidiary or affiliate of any cable television company, any company which is a supplier or customer of any cable television company, or in other company which owns stock or has any interest in any of those types of companies which are described in this section. If the consultant is a partnership, the financial and/or ownership interests in cable television companies affiliates, subsidiaries, suppliers and customers of any partner must be disclosed. If the consultant is a corporation, the financial and/or ownership interests in cable television companies, affiliates, subsidiaries, suppliers and customers of any shareholder, officer or directors must be disclosed;

     2.     A listing and description of any cable television company, affiliate, subsidiary, supplier or customer which the consultant has represented, on a compensated or noncompensated basis, within the last fifteen (15) years.

     B.     The statement filed pursuant to this section shall be a public document open to inspection by any person. Failure to file statement, or the inclusion of a material misrepresentation or omission within the statement, shall constitute grounds for the city’s termination of the employment contract. This provision shall not apply to individuals who are subject to the reporting requirements of the Political Reform Act of 1974 (California Government Code Sections 81008 et seq.) under the local conflict of interest code if the disclosures required by the code are substantially similar to those of this section. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.260 Miscellaneous provisions.
     A.    A franchise granted to provide service within the city may authorize and permit the grantee to solicit, sell, distribute and make a charge to subscribers within the city for connection to the cable television system of grantee, and shall also authorize and permit the grantee to traverse any portion of the city in order to provide service outside the city.

     B.     A franchise, easement, license or other permit granted to anyone other than the grantee to traverse any portion of the city in order to provide service outside the city shall not authorize nor permit the person to solicit, sell, distribute or make any charge to subscribers within the city nor to render any service or connect any subscriber within the city to the cable television service system of grantee.

     C.     Grantee shall be subject to all provisions of the other ordinances, rules, regulations and specifications of the city heretofore or hereafter adopted, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to works and activities in, on, over, under and about streets.

     Any privilege claimed under any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter in any street or other public property shall be subordinate to any prior lawful occupancy of the streets or other public property.

     Grantee also shall be subject to the provisions of general laws of the state of California, or as hereafter amended, when applicable to the exercise of any privilege contained in any franchise granted under this chapter, including, but not limited to, those pertaining to works and activities in and about state highways.

     D.    Grantee shall be prohibited from directly or indirectly doing any of the following:

     1.     Engaging in the business of selling at retail, leasing, renting, repairing or servicing of television sets or radios;

     2.     Except as provided for in franchise agreement, imposing a fee or charge for any service or repair to subscriber-owned receiving devices except for the connection of its service or for the determination by grantee of the quality of its signal to the recipients thereof;

     3.     Soliciting, referring or causing or permitting the solicitation or referral of any subscriber to persons engaged in any business herein prohibited to be engaged in by grantee;

     4.     The grantee shall not sell or otherwise make available lists of the names and addresses of subscribers or any list which identifies by name, subscriber viewing habits or personalized data pertaining to a subscriber’s use of any of grantee’s service without express consent of the subscriber to which the personalized data pertains. For purposes of this section “personalized data” means the name and address of an individual subscriber directly associated with data obtained on his or her use of specified services provided by or through the grantee. Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent, as a normal incident of commercial enterprise, the sale or availability of nonpersonalized or aggregated data which is nonpersonalized data as defined herein.

     E.     If the Federal Communications Commission or the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of any franchise granted under this chapter, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt or preclude the exercise of like jurisdiction by the city, the jurisdiction of the city shall cease and no longer exist.

     F.     When not otherwise prescribed herein, all matters herein required to be filed with the city shall be filed with the city clerk.

     G.    No person, firm or corporation within the service area of the grantee, and where trunk lines are in place, shall be refused service; provided, however, that the grantee shall not be required to provide service to any subscriber who does not pay the applicable connection fee or service charge.

     H.    The form of the grantee’s contract with the subscriber shall also be subject to approval of the city.

     I.      Grantee may be required, at the option of the city, to purchase from the city any cable television system purchased through a negotiated sale or taken through eminent domain by the city at a price equal to the city’s total cost, including attorneys’ and appraisers’ fees and other costs of negotiation and/or litigation. Grantee shall be required to operate the system as part of its systems, without interruption of service, subject to the terms and conditions of grantee’s franchise and this chapter.

     J.      In the event grantee’s performance of any of the terms, conditions, obligations or requirements of the franchise is prevented or impaired due to any cause beyond its reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable, such inability to perform shall be deemed to be excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. Such causes beyond grantee’s reasonable control or not reasonably foreseeable shall include but shall not be limited to acts of God, civil emergencies and labor unrest or strikes. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.270 Equal opportunity employment and affirmative action plan.
     A.    In the carrying out of the construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, the grantee shall not discriminate against any employee or applicant for employment because of race, creed, color, sex, national origin or sex orientation.

     B.     The grantee shall take affirmative action to ensure that applicants are employed, and that employees are treated during employment, without regard to their race, creed, color, sex, national origin or sex orientation. Such action shall include, but not be limited to, the following: employment, upgrading, demotion or transfer, recruitment or recruitment advertising, layoff or termination, rates of pay or other forms of compensation, and selection of training, including apprenticeship.

     C.     The grantee shall post in conspicuous places, available to employees and applicants for employment, notices setting forth the provisions of this nondiscrimination clause.

     D.    The grantee shall, in all solicitations, or advertisements for employees placed by or on behalf of the grantee, state that all qualified applicants shall receive consideration for employment without regard to race, creed, color, sex, national origin or sex orientation.

     E.     The grantee shall incorporate the foregoing requirements in all of its contracts for work relative to construction, maintenance and operation of the cable television system, other than contracts for standard commercial supplies or raw materials, and shall require all of its contractors for such work to incorporate such requirements in all subcontracts for such work. (Ord. 417, 1981)

 

5.20.280 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    From and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to construct, install or maintain within any public street in the city, or within any other public property of the city, or within any privately owned area within the city which has not yet become a public street but is designated or delineated as a proposed public street on any tentative subdivision map approved by the city, any equipment or facilities for distributing any television signals or radio signals through a cable television, unless a franchise authorizing such use of such street or property or area has first been obtained pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and unless such franchise is in full force and effect.

     B.     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to make or use any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of a franchised cable television system within this city for the purpose of enabling him or herself or others to receive or use any television signal, radio signal, picture, program or sound, without payment to the owner of the system.

     C.     It is unlawful for any person, without the consent of the owner, to wilfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used for distribution of television signals, radio signals, pictures, programs or sound.

     The franchisee or licensee shall provide written notice to each subscriber at intervals of not more than one year, of the sanctions provided in this section and of the procedure for reporting and resolving subscriber complaints, including the subscriber’s right to complain in writing to the franchisor of the franchisee’s failure to resolve a service complaint which is preventable and reasonably within the franchisee’s or licensee’s control. The proper address of the franchisor or licensor to which complaints may be directed shall be included in such notice. (Ord. 430 § 1, 1982; Ord. 417, 1981)

Chapter 5.24 FOOD HANDLING BUSINESS
Article I. General Provisions
5.24.010 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below; provided, however, those definitions shall also include any amendments or changes made to referenced sections to the California Health and Safety Code after January 1, 1991:

     “Certified farmers market” is as defined in Section 27512 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Commissary” is as defined in Section 27513 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Food establishment” is defined in Section 27520 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Food facility” is defined in Section 27521 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Food processing establishment” is as defined in Section 28280.1 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Health department or department” means the Orange County health care agency.

     “Health officer” means the county health officer or his or her deputy.

     “Inspector” means an environmental health specialist, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 517, employed by the health department, or the health officer or any deputy health officer authorized to inspect premises or equipment for the enforcement of this article.

     “Mobile food preparation unit” is as defined in Section 27526 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Open-air barbecue facility” is as defined in Section 27528.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Person” is as defined in Section 27530 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Premises” includes land, buildings, vehicles and ships and other vessels wherein food is handled, stored, distributed, prepared, processed, served or sold, and also equipment installed or used in food establishments or food facilities or on such premises.

     “Produce stand” is as defined in Section 27533 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Receipt” means a county public health services receipt.

     “Restricted food service transient occupancy establishment” is as defined in Section 27535.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Satellite food distribution facility” is as defined in Section 27536.5 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Temporary food facility” is as defined in Section 27538 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Vehicle” is as defined in Section 27540 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Vending machine” is as defined in Section 27541 of the California Health and Safety Code.

     “Vending machine business” means the business of selling food or beverages by means of a vending machine, regardless of the number of locations at which the vending machines are located. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.020 Permit required—Conditions and terms.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to operate any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment, or any other food handling business governed by this article, without first applying for and receiving a food vending permit issued by the health department under the provisions of this article.

     B.     Every applicant for a food vending permit shall file with the health department a written application which shall state the name and address of the applicant, the character and location of the activity for which a permit is required under this article and such other information as the health department may require. Applicants for a permit to operate a mobile food preparation unit shall, in addition, provide a list of three service stops which shall include the address or exact location and time of stop.

     C.     A permit may be issued when investigation has determined that the proposed facility and its method of operation will conform to all applicable laws and regulations. A permit, once issued, is nontransferable. A permit shall be valid only for the person, location, type of food sales, or distribution activity approved and, unless suspended or revoked, for the time period indicated on the permit.

     D.    Any permit may be suspended or revoked for a violation of any applicable provision of law or regulation. Any food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment or any other food handling business governed by this article, for which the permit has been suspended or revoked shall close and remain closed until the permit has been reinstated or until a new permit has been issued.

     E.     Permits may be granted at any time during the year. A permit shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises or vehicle for which it is issued. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.030 Construction, conversion and alteration.
     A person proposing to build or remodel a food facility, vending machine business, food processing establishment or any other food handling business governed by this article, shall submit three copies of the complete plans and specifications to the department for review and approval pursuant to the applicable requirements of the California Health and Safety Code. The health officer may thereafter issue a certificate stating what modifications, if any, are required for compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.040 Suspension of permits.
     A permit issued under this article or its predecessor may be suspended or revoked under the procedures set forth in this article for any of the following reasons:

     A.    Violation of state law;

     B.     Violation of this article;

     C.     Violation of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant to this article; or

     D.    Upon recommendation by the health officer. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.050 Notice of violation.
     When any laws, this article, or rules and regulations have been violated, an inspector may serve written notice thereof entitled “Notice of Violation,” specifying:

     A.    The acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged;

     B.     The provision or provisions violated thereby;

     C.     The corrective steps required;

     D.    The date by which all such corrections must be completed, allowing a reasonable period therefor;

     E.     That the permittee has a right to a hearing upon request or that a mandatory hearing has been scheduled;

     F.     That if no hearing is requested or the permittee fails to appear at the scheduled hearing and if the health department does not receive notice that all such corrections have been made before nine a.m. of the date specified under subsection D of this section, the permit will be subject to suspension or revocation from that time until all violations have been corrected. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.060 Hearing.
     The hearing shall be held by the health officer or his or her duly authorized representative who is a qualified environmental health specialist as defined in Section 517 of the Health and Safety Code and registered as provided in Section 529 thereof, but shall not be the inspector who reported the violations or inspected any corrective measures taken.

     A.    The permit holder shall have the right to a hearing, if requested, on all violations listed in the notice. A written request for a hearing shall be made by the permittee within fifteen (15) calendar days after receipt of the notice. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days after the notice shall be deemed a waiver of the right to a hearing. When circumstances warrant, the hearing officer may order a hearing at any reasonable time within this fifteen (15) day period to expedite the permit suspension or revocation process.

     The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of the request for a hearing. Upon written request of the permittee, the hearing officer may postpone any hearing date, if circumstances warrant such action.

     B.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall issue a written notice of decision to the permittee within five working days following the hearing. In the event of a suspension or revocation, the notice shall specify the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, and shall state the terms of the suspension, or if the permit has been revoked.

     The health officer may, after providing opportunity for a hearing, modify, suspend or revoke a permit for serious or repeated violations of any requirements of the applicable laws, rules and regulations. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.070 Mobile food preparation units.
     In addition to all other applicable provisions of the Health and Safety Code and of this article, mobile food preparations units shall comply with the following requirements:

     A.    Compressors, auxiliary engines, generators, batteries, battery charges, gas fueled water heaters and similar equipment shall be installed so as to be accessible only from the outside of the unit.

     B.     All equipment installed in any part of the unit shall be secured so as to prevent movement during transit and to prevent detachment in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn.

     C.     All equipment installed within the interior of a unit, including the interiors of cabinets or compartments, shall be constructed so as to be free of sharp or jagged edges.

     D.    All utensils shall be stored so as to prevent their being hurled about in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn. A safety knife holder shall be provided to avoid loose storage of knives in cabinets, boxes or slots along counter aisles. Knife holders shall be designed to be easily cleaned and be manufactured of materials approved by the health officer.

     E.     Ceiling light fixtures shall be recessed or flush mounted and sealed and shall be equipped with safety covers approved by the health officer. The minimum clearance from the floor to the light fixture shall be at least one hundred eighty-eight (188) centimeters (seventy-six (76) inches) or the fixture shall be installed out of the traffic aisle or work area.

     F.     High voltage (110 — 120 V) electrical wiring shall be properly installed in electrical conduit with all splices or connections being made within junction, outlet or switch as to prevent the use of extension cords exceeding one hundred eighty-three (183) centimeters (six feet). Outside electrical connection receptacles shall be of weather proof design with cover.

     G.    Attached, firmly anchored seats with backrests, equipped with seat belts, shall be provided for all occupants. If a jump seat in the aisle way is utilized, it shall fold in a manner that will clear the aisle way when not in use and be held with a self-latching mechanism. Seats and backrests shall be at least thirty-five and five tenths (35.5) centimeters by thirty-five and five tenths (35.5) centimeters (fourteen (14) inches by fourteen (14) inches) in size. All occupants shall be seated, shall wear seat belts and shall not cook or prepare food while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter three requirements shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

     H.    A first aide kit approved by the health officer shall be provided and located in a convenient area in an enclosed case.

     I.      All pressure cylinders shall be securely fastened to a rigid structure of the unit. All liquid petroleum gas (LPG) equipment shall be installed as follows:

     1.     The LP gas tanks and relief valves shall be ASME approved for intended use.

     2.     Tanks shall be securely fastened and located where they will normally not be subject to damage. They may be in a body compartment or underneath the body. The tank fittings must not protrude beyond the body.

     3.     Tanks and regulators shall be separated from any open flame by a vapor-type partition.

     4.     When tanks are installed in a body compartment, the partition shall be sealed off from the rest of the body with no openings to the interior except for the tubing. The following additional requirements shall be met:

     a.     All tank valves and fittings shall be readily accessible from the outside of the unit.

     b.     The tank safety relief valve shall be vented to the outside and directed downward.

     c.     The filling shall be done through an outside door to the compartment.

     d.     The compartment shall be vented to the exterior of the unit so as to prevent an accumulation of gas.

     5.     Tubing that passes through partitions shall be protected by grommets made of rubber or other approved materials.

     6.     Tubing exposed to friction shall be protected against chaffing.

     7.     Expansion and contraction bends shall be made in the tubing between the tank and the appliance.

     8.     ASME-approved LP gas tubing or standard weight pipe shall be used throughout.

     9.     Protective thread shall be installed on fill-line check valves.

     10.   Every appliance fueled by LP gas shall be equipped with a pilot light attachment and provided with an ASME-approved device which will automatically shut off all gas to the appliance if the pilot light should be extinguished.

     J.      A minimum 5 B.C.-rated portable fire extinguisher (UL or State Fire Marshal approved design) shall be installed in plain sight within easy reach immediately inside the front drivers door. The extinguisher shall be replaced or recharged after each use. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.080 Mobile food preparation units operating in multi-locations— Additional requirements.
     In addition to the requirements specified in Section 5.24.070, mobile food preparation units which operate in more than one location in any calendar day, shall comply with the following additional requirements:

     A.    Coffee urn shall be installed in a compartment that will prevent excessive spillage of coffee in the interior of the unit in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn, or as an alternative to this requirement, coffee urns shall be equipped with positive closing lids as well as perforated metal protective sleeves on the glass liquid level sight gauges.

     B.     Deep fat fryers are prohibited, unless equipped with positive closing lids to contain the fat and to prevent splashing or excessive spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure build up which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be kept closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

     C.     Water bath or steam food insert tables shall be provided with baffles to prevent surging in transit. All such tables, as well as dry heat units, their insert food containers and similar equipment that contain hot liquids or hot food shall have positive closing lids to contain all such liquids or foods and to prevent splashing or spillage in transit or in the event of a sudden stop, collision or overturn of the unit. Such lids shall be designed and constructed so as to prevent pressure build up which could result in an explosion. All lids shall be positively closed while the unit is in motion. Signs setting forth the latter requirement shall be posted in both English and Spanish.

     D.    An alternate means of exit in the side opposite the main exit door, or the roof, or the rear of the unit, with unobstructed passage of sixty-one (61) centimeters by ninety-two (92) centimeters (twenty-four (24) inches by thirty-six (36) inches) minimum to the outside, shall be provided. The interior latching mechanism shall be operable by hand without special tools or keys. The exit shall be labeled “safety exit” in contrasting colors with at least two and fifty-four one-hundredths centimeters (one inch) high letters. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.090 Suspension for refusal of entry.
     It shall be a violation of this article for any person to deny or hinder entry by any inspector for the purpose of inspecting any of the premises described in Section 5.24.020, or any portion thereof; and in such event the inspector may forthwith suspend the food vending permit issued for the premises. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.100 Summary suspension.
     A.    If any immediate danger to the public health or safety is found, unless the danger is immediately corrected, an inspector may temporarily suspend the permit and order the premises immediately closed. “Immediate danger to the public health or safety” means any condition, based upon inspection findings or other evidence, that can cause food infection, food intoxication, disease transmission or hazardous condition, including, but not limited to, unsafe food temperature, sewage contamination, nonpotable water supply or an employee who is a carrier of a communicable disease.

     B.     Whenever a permit is suspended as the result of an immediate danger to the public health or safety, the inspector shall issue to the permittee setting forth the acts or omissions with which the permittee is charged, specifying the pertinent code section, and informing the permittee of the right to a hearing.

     C.     Any time within fifteen (15) calendar days after service of a notice pursuant to subsection B of this section, the permittee may request in writing a hearing before a hearing officer to show cause why the permit suspension is not warranted. The hearing shall be held within fifteen (15) calendar days of the receipt of a request for a hearing. A failure to request a hearing within fifteen (15) calendar days shall be deemed a waiver of the right to such hearing. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.110 Supervision of closing down premises.
     When a permit is suspended hereunder, or when any premises governed hereby shall have been closed for business and left in an unsanitary condition, the health department shall have the power to enter to ensure that the premises are closed down in a manner which will not endanger the public health. If the permittee or his or her employee in charge cannot be found, or is unwilling or unable to remedy the condition of the premises, the owner of the premises shall be notified of the unsanitary conditions and shall be required to take such remedial action as may be necessary to obviate such condition. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.120 Enforcement and administration.
     The health officer may adopt and enforce rules and regulations necessary to administer this article including, but not limited to, regulations pertaining to:

     A.    Forms for applications, permits and notices;

     B.     Forms and procedures for hearings upon granting, denying, suspending, revoking or reinstating permits;

     C.     Inspection of premises and reporting thereon. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.130 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.140 Exemption.
     This article shall not apply to any matter to which it concerns to the extent that the regulation of such matter is preempted by state law. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

Article II. Health Service Fees
5.24.150 Purpose and authority.
     The purpose of this article is to establish fees sufficient to meet the reasonable expenses of the health officer in enforcing state statutes, orders, quarantines and rules and regulations of the state offices and departments relating to public health, which expenses are found not to be met by the fees prescribed by the state. The authority for this article is found in Section 510 of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.160 Applicability.
     This article shall be enforceable in the territory in which the health officer enforces any state statute, order, quarantine or rule or regulation of any state office or department relating to public health. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.170 Separate activities—Separate receipt required.
     If a person shall conduct more than one of the activities for which a receipt is required, he or she must obtain a separate receipt for each activity, except as otherwise provided herein. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.180 Applications for receipt.
     Applications for a receipt shall be filed with the health department on a form to be provided by that department. The applications shall be accompanied by payment of the required fee. An applicant or recipient of a receipt shall provide the health officer with any information requested by him or her. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.190 Enforcement and administration.
     The health officer shall administer this article and may issue regulations and prepare application and identification forms pertaining thereto. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.200 Fees.
     The county may, by annual board resolution, adopt health service fees to be paid by the proprietor or operator of the food facility. Such fees are to be paid directly to the county health officer and retained by the county as reimbursement for the services related to this chapter. (Ord. 556, 1992)

 

5.24.210 Violation—Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person to conduct any activity enumerated in this article without a valid receipt. (Ord. 556, 1992)

Chapter 5.28 FORTUNETELLING AND SIMILAR PRACTICES
5.28.010 License fee required.
     Every natural person who engages in, practices or professes to practice, within the city, the business or art of astrology, phrenology, life reading, fortunetelling, cartomancy, clairvoyance, crystal gazing, hypnotism, mediumship, mesmerism, oriental mysteries, palmistry, spirits, etherealization, numerology, physiognomy, seership, prophecy, augury, divination, magic, necromancy, reading of tarot or similar cards, or use of other similar occult powers for any form of compensation, shall pay the sum of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the first year of operation and two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) per year thereafter. (Ord. 529, 1990; Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.020 License required.
     No person shall commence, engage in or advertise that he or she will engage in any business or activity specified in Section 5.28.010 without first having procured a license as required by the licensing provisions of this chapter or without complying with any and all regulations of such business or activity contained in this chapter or any ordinance of the city. Each person who engages in any of the activities specified in Section 5.28.010 shall procure a license in the manner prescribed in this chapter, regardless of whether or not such person is practicing such activity on behalf of or in conjunction with any corporation, partnership, organization or any other person or persons. The advertisement, commencement or practice of any activity mentioned herein, without first having procured such license when required to do so or without complying with any and all laws of this city, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter for each and every day such business or activity is so advertised or practiced. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.030 License application.
     Every person desiring to practice a profession, art or business specified in Section 5.28.010 shall submit an application to the city manager. The applicant shall provide the following:

     A.    Name and address of the applicant;

     B.     Address of the proposed location for the conduct of the proposed profession, art or business;

     C.     Record of conviction for violations of the law, excluding minor traffic violations;

     D.    Two copies of a photograph, one inch by one inch in size, taken within six months of the application;

     E.     Fingerprints of the applicant on a form approved by the police department;

     F.     Address, including city and state, and approximate dates when the applicant practiced a similar business, either alone or in conjunction with others;

     G.    Such other and further information as the city manager may find necessary. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.040 Application review—Investigation.
     The city manager shall make, or cause to be made, an investigation of each application in order to verify the facts contained in the application. After conducting the investigation, the city manager shall approve the issuance of the license if it is found that:

     A.    All the information contained in the application is true; and

     B.     The applicant has not previously engaged in any fraudulent activity or has not been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.050 License denial—Written notice required.
     In the event the city manager denies a permit to any applicant, the city manager shall give the applicant written notice of the denial, in person or by registered mail, stating the reasons or by registered mail, stating the reasons for such denial. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.060 License denial—Appeal.
     Any applicant may file an appeal to the city council with the city clerk from a decision of the city manager denying a license application without fifteen (15) days after notice of such decision is given.

     A.    Contents of Notice of Appeal. Any such appeal shall be in writing and shall specify:

     1.     The name and address of appellant;

     2.     The matter being appealed;

     3.     A statement of the ground of appeal.

     B.     Hearing on Appeal. The city council shall hold a hearing in the manner provided herein on any appeal duly filed pursuant to the provisions of this section. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the appellant not less than ten days before such hearings either by registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the appellant at the address stated in the notice of appeal or as filed with or known to the city clerk, or in the manner required for the service of summons in civil actions. At the time of the hearing, the council shall hear and consider any relevant evidence. At such hearing, the appellant shall be given an opportunity to appear either personally or by counsel and to be heard and to call witnesses on his or her behalf. The council may place any witness, including the appellant, under oath. The hearing may be continued from time to time as determined necessary by the council or upon request of the appellant upon good cause being shown therefor, in the discretion of the city council.

     C.     Decision. At the close of the hearing or at any time within thirty (30) days thereafter, the city council shall determine whether to grant or deny the appeal and may impose any conditions it deems necessary. The decision of the city council shall be final.

     D.    Notice of Decision. Unless the council publicly announces its decision at the close of the hearing, it shall, within thirty days thereafter, cause notice of its decision to be given. Such notice shall be given either by personal delivery thereof to the appellant or to an employee of such appellant at the address set forth in the notice of appeal, providing such appellant is absent from the place of business, or by depositing such notice in the United States Mail in a sealed envelope, first class registered or certified mail, postage prepaid, return receipt requested, addressed to the appellant at the address or to such other address of the appellant as may be filed with or known to the city clerk. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed at the time of deposit in a facility of the United States Post Office Department. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.070 Terms and renewal of license.
     Any license issued pursuant to this section shall be valid for a period of one year unless revoked by the city manager. Upon the expiration of such license and written request by the applicant, the city manager shall renew the license within ten days of such request if the factual information upon which the original application was granted remains unchanged and there has been no violation of this chapter. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

 

5.28.080 Bond requirement.
     The applicant shall post with the city manager a surety bond in the principal sum amount of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) to be executed as surety by a good and sufficient corporate surety authorized to do a surety business in the state of California and as a principal by the applicant. The form of the bond shall have been approved by the city attorney and shall have been given to insure good-faith and fair dealing on the part of the applicant and as a guarantee of indemnity for any and all loss, damage, theft or other unfair dealings suffered by any patron of the applicant within the city during the term of the permit. Only one bond shall be required if the fortunetelling establishment and the fortuneteller applicant are the same person. No bond is required of a fortuneteller employee. (Ord. 478 § 2, 1985)

Chapter 5.32 MASSAGE
Article I. General Provisions
5.32.000 Findings and purpose.
     The city council finds and declares as follows:

     A.    The permit requirements and restrictions imposed by this chapter are reasonably necessary to protect the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city, while recognizing massage as a legitimate business interest that provides benefits to its patrons in a therapeutic setting.

     B.     This chapter is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the State Constitution, California Government Code Sections 37100, 51030 et seq., California Business and Professions Code Sections 4600 through 4620 and Section 16000 and Section 13 of the Chiropractic Act (initiative measure approved by the electors November 7, 1922, as amended) and AB 1147 (2014).

     C.     There is a significant risk of injury to massage clients by persons improperly trained and/or educated in providing massage services, and this chapter provides reasonable safeguards against injury and economic loss.

     D.    There is opportunity for acts of prostitution, lewdness, and other unlawful sexual activity to occur in massage establishments, as well as problems relating to human trafficking in massage establishments. The establishment of reasonable standards for issuance of permits and restrictions on operations would serve to reduce the risk of illegal activity and would thereby benefit the public health.

     E.     The provisions of this chapter are intended to enhance the efficient processing of permits for massage establishments, owners and managers and the ongoing regulation of those permittees and certificate holders by the city of Los Alamitos. The provisions of this chapter in no way limit the authority of the city to inspect massage establishments or conduct investigations to ensure permittees are complying with applicable rules and regulations.

     F.     The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to stop the practice of businesses quickly changing ownership in name upon the discovery of criminal activity by the city.

     G.    The restrictions and requirements contained in this chapter are intended to be in addition to the requirement of a valid business license issued pursuant to Title 5 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code as well as any conditions imposed pursuant to a conditional use permit.

     H.    The regulations and restrictions contained in this chapter are intended to discourage massage establishments from degenerating into houses of prostitution, and the means utilized in this chapter bear a reasonable and rational relationship to the goals sought to be achieved within the confines allowed by state law.

     I.      The provisions of this chapter are not intended to be exclusive and compliance therewith shall not excuse noncompliance with any state or local laws or regulations that are uniformly applied to other professional or personal service businesses.

     J.      The California Massage Therapy Council (“CAMTC”) can better, and more efficiently, regulate massage technicians in order to best protect the public and it is in the public interest to require that all persons providing massage in the city have a certificate from the CAMTC. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings set forth in this section, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended:

     A.    “California Massage Therapy Council” or “CAMTC” means the nonprofit organization created to regulate and issue massage practitioner and therapist certificates pursuant to California Business and Professions Code Section 4600 et seq.

     B.     “CAMTC certificate” means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certificate issued by the CAMTC.

     C.     “Certificate of operation” means the certificate issued by the community development director entitling a business to be operated as a massage establishment.

     D.    “Chief of police” means the chief of police of the city of Los Alamitos, or designee.

     E.     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     F.     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos, or designee.

     G.    “Community development director” means the community development director of the city of Los Alamitos, or designee.

     H.    “Compensation” means the payment, loan, advance, donation, contribution, deposit, exchange, or gift of money or anything of value.

     I.      “Conviction,” or “convicted” means a conviction following a guilty plea, nolo contendere plea, or judgment or verdict where the time for appeal has elapsed or conviction has been affirmed on appeal, irrespective of an order granting probation following that conviction, suspending the imposition of sentence, or of a subsequent order under Section 1203.4 of the California Penal Code allowing the applicant to withdraw his or her plea of guilty or nolo contendere and to enter a plea of not guilty, or dismissing the accusation or information.

     J.      “Employee” means any person, other than a massage practitioner, massage therapist, or operator, who renders any service, with or without compensation, to the operator or agent of an operator of a massage establishment relating to the day-to-day operation of the massage establishment whether as an employee or independent contractor.

     K.    “Main entry door” means a door from the outside of the establishment leading into the reception area.

     L.     “Manager” means the person(s) designated by the owner of the massage establishment to act as the representative and agent of the owner in managing day-to-day operations with corresponding responsibilities. Evidence of management includes, but is not limited to, the ability of the individual to direct or hire and dismiss employees, control hours of operation, create policy or rules or purchase supplies, and ensure that the massage establishment complies with the requirements of this code and of other laws. A manager may also be an owner. A manager must have a valid operator permit.

     M.    “Massage” means any method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial, health, hygienic, or relaxation purpose. “Massage” includes, but is not limited to, treatment by means of manual pressure, acupressure, friction, stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating, with or without the aid of or by means of any mechanical, electronic, or electrical apparatus or appliance, and with or without rubbing alcohol, liniments, aromatics, antiseptics, oils, powders, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations. Massage specifically includes the application of any of these methods to the scalp, neck, or feet of any individual. (Some persons practicing massage may be exempt from all or parts of the permit requirements; please consult Section 5.32.020.)

     N.    “Massage establishment” means any enterprise or establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts, carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted, or carried on, any of the activities set forth in the definition of massage in this section.

     O.    “Massage practitioner” means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

     P.     “Massage technician” means a massage practitioner or massage therapist certified by CAMTC.

     Q.    “Massage therapist” means a person who is certified as such by the CAMTC in accordance with the Massage Therapy Act.

     R.     “Operator” means all persons who own or manage a massage establishment.

     S.     “Operator permit” means the permit issued by chief of police allowing a person to own or manage a massage establishment.

     T.     “Out-call massage” means any business or enterprise that engages in or performs massage for any form of consideration or in exchange for anything of value whatsoever at a location other than a massage establishment.

     U.    “Owner” means all of the following:

     1.     The sole proprietor of a massage establishment, i.e., where the owner is the only person performing massage at that establishment;

     2.     In the case of a general business, each owner of the business;

     3.     In the case of a corporation, each stockholder holding more than ten (10) percent of the corporation and each officer and director of the corporation;

     4.     In the case of a partnership, each partner, excluding limited partners owning less than ten (10) percent of the partnership, and where a partner is a corporation, the provisions pertaining to a corporate applicant in subsection (R)(3) apply.

     V.    “Patron” means an individual on the premises of a massage establishment for the purpose of utilizing the services of a massage establishment, a parent or guardian accompanying a minor receiving the services of a massage establishment, or a person helping an elderly or infirm person receiving the services of a massage establishment.

     W.    “Permit” means an operator permit or certificate of operation.

     X.    “Permittee” means any person who has obtained a certificate of operation or operator permit from the city.

     Y.    “Person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct” means a person who:

     1.     Within ten (10) years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten (10) years preceding the date of the revocation notice has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

     a.     A violation of any provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290, or

     b.     Conduct in violation of Penal Code Sections 266h, 266i, 314, 315, 316, 318, 653.22, 653.23, or subsections (a), (b) or (d) of Section 647, or

     c.     An attempt to commit or conspiracy to commit any of the above mentioned offenses, or

     d.     When the prosecution accepted a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to a charge of a violation of Penal Code Section 415, 602 or any lesser included or related offense, in satisfaction of, or as a substitute for, any of the previously listed crimes, or

     e.     Any crime committed while engaged in the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage, or

     f.      A violation of Health and Safety Code Section 11550 or any offense involving the illegal sale, distribution or possession of a controlled substance specified in Health and Safety Code Section 11054, 11055, 11056, 11057 or 11058, or

     g.     Any offense under a statute of any state or ordinance of any city or county, which is the equivalent of any of the aforementioned offenses, including Business and Professions Code Section 4609(a);

     2.     Within ten (10) years preceding the date of the filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within ten (10) years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has had any massage establishment, operator, technician, practitioner, therapist or trainee certificate, license or permit issued by any state, local agency or other licensing authority, including the CAMTC: denied, revoked or suspended for any reason other than lack of sufficient education; or has had to surrender such a certificate, license or permit as a result of pending criminal charges or administrative proceedings for suspension or revocation of any such certificate, license or permit; or

     3.     Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice has been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any of the following:

     a.     Any crime, other than an infraction or those listed above, involving dishonesty, fraud, or deceit, with the intent to substantially benefit him or herself or another, or substantially injure another, or

     b.     Any crime, other than an infraction or crimes relating to those offenses listed above, where the crime or act is substantially related to the management or ownership of a massage establishment or the practice of massage, including a violation of the Massage Therapy Act; or

     4.     Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the Penal Code as the same may be amended from time to time, or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California; or

     5.     Has been found to be maintaining a nuisance in connection with the same or similar type of business; or

     6.     Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question, or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has engaged in the exposing of specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person to view, or in touching the specified anatomical areas of oneself or of another person, while providing massage services or while within view of a patron of the massage establishment; or

     7.     Within five years preceding the date of filing of the application in question, or, in the case of revocation proceedings, within five years preceding the date of the revocation notice, has been the owner, manager, or other similar position, in an establishment where there is substantial evidence that disqualifying conduct described above has occurred by others on the premises, regardless of whether there was a conviction of such persons; or

     8.     Disqualifying conduct does not include the failure to obtain a certificate of operation or operator permit without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required, provided that the business and/or person cease operations immediately upon notification.

     Z.     “Proof of bona fide employment” means proof of an employer–employee relationship between the operator of the massage establishment and any person working at the massage establishment. Satisfactory proof of bona fide employment must be shown by written payroll documentation evidencing the employer’s compliance with California Employment Development Department (EDD) requirements for the withholding of California income tax, unemployment insurance contributions and disability contributions from the employee and written payroll documentation of the employer’s compliance with Internal Revenue Service (IRS) requirements for the withholding of federal income taxes, Social Security (FICA) and Medicare contributions from the employee. Such written documentation can include, but is not limited to, W-2 wage and tax statements.

     AA.  “Reception area” means an area immediately inside the main entry door of the massage establishment dedicated to the reception and waiting of patrons and visitors of the massage establishment and which is not a massage room or otherwise used for the provision of massage services.

     BB.  “Residence address” means the actual physical home address and shall not include a P.O. box, mailbox service, or other similar location.

     CC.  “Sole provider” means a massage business where the owner owns one hundred (100) percent of the business, is the only person who provides massage services for compensation for that business pursuant to a valid and active certificate, and has no other employees or independent contractors.

     DD.  “Specified anatomical areas” means any of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic area, buttocks, anus, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae, without a health care referral and written consent of the patron.

     EE.   “Visitor” means a nonemployee who has entered the massage establishment for purposes other than receiving services. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.020 Exemptions.
     A.    Complete Exemption. The requirements of this chapter shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to:

     1.     Any physician, surgeon, chiropractor, acupuncturist, osteopath, or physical therapist licensed to practice such profession in the state of California, within the scope of their license.

     2.     Any registered nurse or licensed vocational nurse, licensed to practice under the laws of the state of California, who is an employee of and working under the on-site direction of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, duly licensed to practice their respective professions in this state.

     a.     Any other person providing massage services that is employed by a physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist, shall be required to have a valid CAMTC certificate, as well as work under the adequate supervision of such physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath, or physical therapist as required by state law or regulation. If no specific law or regulation applies, adequate supervision shall have the same meaning as set forth in 16 California Code of Regulations Section 312.

     b.     If a duly licensed acupuncturist wishes to provide massage therapy services to his or her clients by an individual(s) other than his or herself, said individual(s) must have a valid CAMTC certificate and the office of the acupuncturist shall be subject to all the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other applicable provisions of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

     3.     Any person licensed to practice any healing art under the provisions of Division 2 (commencing with Section 500) of the Business and Professions Code when engaging in such practice within the scope of such license.

     4.     State licensed hospitals, nursing homes, sanatoriums, or other health care facilities duly licensed by the state of California, and the employees of such facilities while working on the premises of such state licensed facilities.

     5.     Accredited high schools, junior colleges, and colleges or universities whose coaches and trainers are acting within the scope of their employment.

     6.     Barbers, beauticians, or manicurists who are duly licensed by the state of California pursuant to the Barbering and Cosmetology Act set forth in Business and Professions Code Section 7300 et seq., as the same may be amended from time to time, while engaging in practices within the scope of such license, except that this exemption applies solely for the massaging of the neck, face, and/or scalp of the customer or client of said barber or beautician or, in the case of a licensed manicurist, the massaging of the forearms, hands, calves, and/or feet at a state licensed facility. However, if a state licensed establishment also has a certificate of operation from the city to operate as a massage establishment, the business must also comply with all provisions of this chapter.

     7.     Schools of cosmetology or barbering which comply with the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7362 et seq., when instructors are acting within the scope of their employment or when students are working as unpaid externs pursuant to the requirements of Business and Professions Code Section 7395.1.

     8.     Any other business or professions exempt by state law.

     B.     Partial Exemption. Businesses that provide massage that: (1) do not involve disrobing; and (2) are administered in an open room which is open to public view from the entrance of the establishment shall only have to follow the specific listed requirements:

     1.     Massage services must be performed by the holder of a valid CAMTC certificate.

     2.     The business shall comply with the following provisions of this chapter:

     a.     Section 5.32.110(A)(1) relating to hours;

     b.     Section 5.32.110(C) relating to instruments, equipment and personnel;

     c.     Section 5.32.110(D)(1) through (D)(3) relating to personnel lists;

     d.     Section 5.32.110(E) relating to prohibited conduct;

     e.     Section 5.32.120(A), (B) and (D) through (H) relating to building and facility requirements; and

     f.      Section 5.32.130 relating to inspections.

     C.     Any person claiming exemption under this section shall furnish satisfactory evidence upon request that he or she is entitled to such exemption, including, proof of bona fide employment, or if applicable, a citation to the particular provision of state law upon which that person relies. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.030 Business license—Other permits required.
     A.    Nothing herein relieves an individual or business from obtaining a city business license, conditional use permit, or other permit if otherwise required by law.

     B.     Any individual applying for a business license as a massage practitioner or a massage therapist shall provide proof of a current CAMTC certificate before being issued a business license. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.035 Floor plans required.
     A.    All massage establishments shall be required to submit a scaled floor plan as part of their application for a certificate of operation as specified in Section 5.32.070(A).

     B.     All businesses that claim a partial exemption from this chapter pursuant to Section 5.32.020(B) shall be required to submit scaled floor plans in order to verify the applicability of the exemption.

     C.     No changes may be made to the approved floor plan without written approval from the community development department, which may require modification of the conditional use permit. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

Article II. Massage Practitioners and Massage Therapists
5.32.040 State certificate required.
     A.    No person shall provide massage services, including out-call massage services, from any location in the city without having been issued a CAMTC certificate, regardless of whether such person has an operator permit or the business has a certificate of operation.

     B.     Any person certified by the state who desires to operate a massage establishment, must obtain an operator permit in accordance with Article III of this chapter.

     C.     No operator of a massage establishment shall hire as an employee or utilize as an independent contractor any person to perform massage unless such person has been issued a massage certificate. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

Article III. Certificates of Operation and Operator Permits
5.32.050 Certificate and permit requirement.
     A.    No person shall own or manage any massage establishment in any location within the city without first having obtained an operator permit.

     B.     No massage establishment shall be allowed to operate within the city unless the business first obtains a certificate of operation. No certificate of operation shall be approved until each operator identified in the application has obtained an operator permit.

     C.     Any person desiring to obtain a certificate of operation and/or an operator permit shall make application in accordance with the provisions of this article, which application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council.

     D.    All applications shall be dated and shall contain the following statements:

     1.     A certification under penalty of perjury that the information contained in the application is true and correct; and

     2.     An authorization for the city, its officers, agents and employees, to seek information and conduct an investigation into the truth of the statements set forth in the application and to ensure continual compliance with all applicable provisions of law.

     E.     The provisions of Sections 5.32.035 and 5.32.110 through 5.32.140 shall apply to any business that operates as a massage establishment, even if such business fails to obtain operator permits or certificates of operation. The city may immediately order a business that fails to have a certificate of operation or a permitted operator to cease operation.

     F.     Within thirty (30) working days following receipt of a completed application, the community development director shall either issue the certificate of operation and the chief of police shall issue an operator permit or mail a written statement of the reasons for denial thereof. Notwithstanding the above, failure of the city to act upon a completed application within the time frame set forth above shall not be deemed approval of the application pursuant to this chapter. Any certificate of operation or permit issued pursuant to this subsection shall be deemed conditional pending the city’s receipt of the California Department of Justice report on the applicant’s fingerprints. If the fingerprint report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial or revocation pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.060 Operator permit.
     A.    Application—Contents. Applicants for operator permits shall submit the following information to the Los Alamitos police department on a form supplied by the department:

     1.     The full true name of the applicant;

     2.     A complete statement listing and explaining any and all aliases and fictitious names used by the applicant within the ten (10) years immediately preceding the application;

     3.     The current residence address and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant;

     4.     A list of all previous residential and business addresses for a minimum of eight years immediately preceding the present address of the applicant and the dates of residence for each address;

     5.     The applicant’s place of birth, and original documentation to verify both the applicant’s identity and employment authorization (if applicable), as listed under 8 USC 1324a(b)(1) and 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1). Documentation to satisfy this requirement may include, but is not limited to, a California driver’s license, California identification card, Social Security card, resident alien (“green”) card, United States passport (unexpired or expired), unexpired foreign passport that contains a temporary I-551 stamp, or an unexpired employment authorization document issued by the United States Government in compliance with 8 CFR 274a.2(b)(1)(v)(A);

     6.     The history of the applicant as to any similar business or occupation within ten (10) years immediately preceding the filing of the application. Such information shall include, but not be limited to, the names and addresses of any other massage establishments or similar businesses the applicant has owned, managed, provided massage services at, or worked at, whether the applicant has had a permit or license to operate, manage, provide massage services at, or work at a massage establishment denied, revoked or suspended in any jurisdiction; the reasons for any such denial, revocation or suspension; and the business, activity or occupation the applicant engaged in subsequent to such denial, revocation or suspension;

     7.     All criminal convictions within the last ten (10) years, excluding minor traffic violations, and the date and place of each such conviction and reason therefor;

     8.     Such other reasonable identification and information as the chief of police may require in order to discover the truth of the matter specified as required to be set forth in the application;

     9.     The applicant shall provide two passport size photographs (two inches by two inches) to the Los Alamitos police department; and

     10.   An acknowledgement that by applying for an operator permit, the applicant understands that they are responsible for all violations of employees or independent contractors that may take place in the massage establishment which they own or manage and that such violations are grounds for revocation of the operator permit.

     B.     Once the information required by subsection A is submitted, the applicant shall have his or her fingerprints taken for a criminal history background (Livescan) check in the manner directed by the Los Alamitos police department.

     C.     The chief of police shall issue the operator permit, unless after investigation he or she makes any of the following findings:

     1.     The applicant has failed to provide information, documentation and assurances required by this chapter or by the chief of police; has failed to reveal any fact material to qualification; or has supplied information that is untrue or misleading as to a material fact pertaining to the qualification criteria; or

     2.     The applicant is a person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

     3.     There is substantial evidence that the applicant has engaged in disqualifying conduct, even if there is no conviction for such conduct; or

     4.     The applicant has violated any provision of this chapter, or any similar ordinance, law, rule, or regulation of any other public agency which regulates the operation of massage establishments; or

     5.     The applicant is not at least eighteen (18) years of age; or

     6.     The applicant is delinquent in paying city fees or penalties owed in relation to any permit issued pursuant to this chapter.

     D.    Permits issued pursuant to this section shall remain in effect, unless revoked, for a period of three years. Applications for the renewal of a permit shall be filed on a form supplied by the city with the chief of police. Temporary permits shall not be issued and expired permits are not valid unless the permittee has a written receipt showing that the renewal application was filed at least thirty (30) days prior to expiration without action having been taken by the chief of police. Renewal applications shall be signed under penalty of perjury and shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee established by resolution of the city council. A permittee shall be required to update the information contained in his or her original permit application and provide any new and/or additional information as may be reasonably required by the chief of police in order to determine whether the permit should be renewed, including all information required by subsection A of this section. Failure to provide this documentation shall be grounds for nonrenewal of the permit.

     E.     If the criminal history background check report demonstrates that the applicant has made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the permit application or in any report or record required to be filed therewith, or discloses any disqualifying conduct, the permit shall be subject to denial.

     F.     Automatic Issuance and Renewal for CAMTC Certificate Holders.

     1.     Any person who holds a valid CAMTC certificate shall only be required to provide the following information on a form that includes the statements set forth in Section 5.32.050(D):

     a.     The full true name of the applicant;

     b.     The current residence and business address and current residence and business telephone number of the applicant; and

     c.     The name and address of the massage establishment for which the operator permit is sought.

     2.     A copy of the applicant’s CAMTC certificate and identification shall be provided with the application, along with a fee in an amount set by resolution of the city council.

     3.     The applicant shall provide photographs as specified above.

     4.     The operator permit shall automatically be issued upon completion of the form and verification of the validity of the CAMTC certificate by the police department. No background check shall be required.

     5.     Renewals shall be required in accordance with subsection D of this section, but such renewals shall be automatic as long as the permittee maintains and provides a copy of his or her valid CAMTC certificate.

     G.    Every person to whom a permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall be issued an identification badge by the Los Alamitos police department which shall contain the person’s name, photograph, expiration date and any other information deemed necessary by the chief of police. The badge shall be worn so as to be readily visible at all times while on the premises of the massage establishment.

     H.    Permits issued pursuant to this chapter may not be assigned or transferred.

     I.      It is the duty of each operator to notify the chief of police whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the operator permit in the first instance. Such notification shall be in writing and made within ten (10) business days of the change on a form provided by the police department.

     J.      Each operator of a massage establishment shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees and independent contractors working on the premises of the business. Failure of the employees or independent contractors to comply with this chapter may result in the revocation of the operator’s permit.

     K.    The operator of the massage establishment is responsible for verifying that all persons hold the appropriate CAMTC certificate as required by this chapter.

     L.     Any requirement of this chapter applying to an operator shall apply to each and every operator of a massage establishment. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.070 Certificate of operation.
     A.    Applications for a certificate of operation shall be filed with the community development department and shall include the information set forth below:

     1.     The full name of the applicant;

     2.     The name under which the business is to be conducted, which name must match the name of the business under which the corresponding business tax certificate is issued under Title 5. No massage establishment business shall operate under any business name or conduct business under any designation not specified in the certificate of operation. If the applicant is a corporation, the name shall be exactly as shown on the articles of incorporation or on a valid DBA (“doing business as”);

     3.     The address of the proposed massage establishment;

     4.     A detailed description of the operation and type of services to be provided by the massage establishment, including other therapies to be provided, and other businesses to be operated on the same premises;

     5.     The full name of each operator of the massage establishment;

     6.     A legal size copy of the floor plan approved as part of the conditional use permit, drawn to scale showing: entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions, including, but not limited to closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and location of massage tables and chairs which is dimensioned in feet and inches and labeled in English;

     7.     The full name, address, and phone number of the legal owner of the property, if other than the applicant on which the massage establishment is to be located, along with a copy of the signed lease and a notarized acknowledgement from the owner of the property that a massage establishment will be located on his or her property; and

     8.     The hours and days of operation.

     B.     The community development director shall issue a certificate of operation upon verification of the following:

     1.     The massage establishment will comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, building, fire, zoning, health and safety regulations, as well as any conditions which have been imposed to comply with such laws; and

     2.     Each person identified as an operator has obtained an operator permit.

     C.     Every massage establishment for which a certificate of operation has been granted pursuant to this chapter shall display the certificate in a conspicuous place so it may be readily seen by persons entering the premises.

     D.    A certificate of operation is not transferable to a separate location of the same business, to a different business at the same location, or to the same business under different ownership at the same location, or the same business under a different name.

     E.     It is the duty of each operator to notify the community development department whenever there is a change in information which was required to be submitted in the application for the certificate of operation in the first instance. Any sale or transfer of any reportable interest of an owner in a massage establishment, which interest would be required to be reported under subsection A of this section in the first instance, shall render the certificate of operation temporarily suspended and subject to revocation in accordance with the provisions of this chapter unless prior to the effective date of such sale or transfer, the new owner applies for and obtains an operator permit.

     F.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, where a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, or a notice of suspension or revocation, has been issued regarding a massage establishment, or the business has otherwise been required to close because of suspension or revocation proceedings against the operator, the community development department shall not process or issue a new application for a certificate of operation for said location unless or until the revocation or suspension proceedings are dismissed or a final determination is made that the current certificate of operation should not be suspended or revoked, or a two year period has passed since the occurrence of the activity which gave rise to the suspension or revocation proceedings or other criminal actions.

     G.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code to the contrary, when a massage establishment has been closed due to criminal activity and such decision is final, no new massage establishment may open in such location and no certificate of operation shall be issued for such location for a period of two years from the date of such final determination. For purposes of this section, closure due to criminal activity includes voluntary closure of the business after there have been arrests at the location or other notices relating to criminal activity or notices relating to suspension or revocation proceedings. This provision is not meant to prohibit the issuance of a certificate of operation to a business which initially failed to obtain a certificate of operation without any prior oral or written notification by the city that such was required.

     H.    Where the applicant for the certificate of operation is not the record owner, as shown on the latest county assessment roll, then upon issuance of the certificate, the city shall send written notice to the property owner advising of the issuance of the certificate and the regulations applicable to the massage establishment and the property pursuant to this chapter; this may be accomplished by including a copy of this chapter with the notice. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.080 Suspension and revocation of permits and certificates.
     A.    Subject to the procedures set forth in this section, the chief of police may suspend or revoke an operator permit or a certificate of operation issued pursuant to this chapter whenever the chief of police determines that any of the following has occurred:

     1.     The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner contrary to the provisions of this code;

     2.     The permittee, or employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which constitutes a public nuisance;

     3.     The permittee, or an employee or independent contractor working on the premises, is conducting operations in a manner which is detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the city or its inhabitants;

     4.     There is substantial evidence of prostitution;

     5.     The permittee, or any employee or independent contractor working on the premises, had engaged in disqualifying conduct; or

     6.     The chief of police makes any of the findings that would have justified denying the application in the first instance.

     B.     If, in the discretion of the chief of police, an alleged violation is minor and capable of correction, then prior to suspension or revocation a written notice shall be given to the permittee of the violation(s) involved to allow a period of time to correct the alleged violation(s), which period shall not exceed five business days, at the end of which period, an inspection shall be conducted to determine whether the alleged violation(s) has been corrected. For purposes of this section, written notice may include either a notice of violation or an administrative citation.

     C.     If the chief of police determines that an alleged violation is not minor or capable of correction, that the violation(s) continues without correction, or that there have been previous violations of this chapter, even if for different reasons, then the chief of police may issue a notice of intent to suspend or revoke, along with an administrative or criminal citation. Examples of a violation which will be determined by the chief of police to be not capable of correction include, but are not limited to, substantial evidence of prostitution activity on the massage establishment’s premises or an immediate threat to public health, safety or welfare.

     D.    Notice of Intent to Suspend or Revoke. A notice of intent to suspend or revoke shall contain a statement of an alleged violation(s) which constitutes the basis for the suspension or revocation, notice of the right of the permittee to respond to the charges, either orally or in writing to the chief of police for a pre-appeal determination, notice of the right to appeal to the city manager, and notice that a failure to respond in the time specified shall constitute a waiver of the right to respond, but not the right to appeal. If an alleged violation is capable of correction, the notice shall also advise the permittee to correct the alleged violation(s) within the time to respond.

     E.     Response to Notice of Intent/Pre-Appeal Determination.

     1.     The time to respond and request a pre-appeal determination shall be five business days from the date of service of the notice, regardless of whether the materials upon which the notice of intent is based are provided to the permittee at that time.

     2.     If there is no response, the permit shall be considered suspended or revoked upon the expiration of time in which to respond and request a pre-appeal hearing.

     3.     If there is a response, the permit shall remain in effect until a determination is made by the chief of police. In no event shall the chief hold a hearing until at least five business days have passed from the time the city provides the materials upon which the notice of intent is issued to the permittee.

     F.     Suspension or Revocation.

     1.     If, after consideration of the permittee’s response, the chief of police determines that the notice of intent to suspend or revoke should be upheld, then the chief of police shall issue a notice of suspension or revocation and serve it upon the permittee as well as any other interested person requesting a copy of the same. Where all massage activity is required to cease, notice shall also be served on the owner of the property if different from the operator or certificate holder. The notice shall include information about the right to appeal.

     a.     Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of a certificate of operation, all massage activity at the massage establishment shall cease and no activity for which the certificate of operation is required shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

     b.     Upon issuance of a notice of suspension or revocation of an operator permit, the operator must cease all work at the massage establishment. If there is no other person who has an operator permit which is not the subject of a suspension or revocation proceeding, then all massage activity at the massage establishment shall also cease and no massage activity shall be conducted while any appeal may be pending.

     G.    Surrender of Certificate of Operation and Permits. Any permittee shall immediately surrender his or her permit or certificate to the chief of police upon its suspension or revocation. The operator shall immediately surrender the certificate of operation upon suspension or revocation of an operator permit if there is no other permitted operator, regardless of whether the certificate of operation is being suspended or revoked. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.090 Appeals.
     A.    Appeals.

     1.     Appeals shall be in writing, shall clearly state the applicable basis for the appeal, and filed with the city clerk within the following time frames:

     a.     Appeals from any decision of the chief of police or community development director under this chapter shall be filed with the city clerk not later than fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of notice of the denial.

     b.     Appeals from a notice of intent to suspend or revoke a permit where no response is filed in accordance with Section 5.32.080(E) shall be filed not later than ten (10) calendar days following the expiration of the response period.

     c.     Appeals from a notice of suspension or revocation issued after a response is filed in accordance with Section 5.32.080(E) shall be filed not later than ten (10) calendar days following the chief’s written decision set forth in a notice of suspension or revocation.

     2.     The city clerk shall not accept an appeal, and no hearing shall be held, unless the appellant has paid a filing fee, in an amount set by resolution of the city council, to defray the cost of such appeal. Any appeal without the timely payment of fees shall be considered to be untimely.

     3.     The scope of the appeal hearing pursuant to this section shall be limited to those issues raised by the appellant in the written appeal, as submitted pursuant to subsection (A)(1) of this section.

     B.     City Manager Action.

     1.     Upon receipt of a timely filed appeal, the city clerk shall set the matter for hearing before the city manager. The hearing shall be held not fewer than ten (10) calendar days nor more than thirty (30) calendar days from the date of the appeal request. The hearing may be continued from time to time upon the mutual consent of the parties. For the purposes of this section, “city manager” may include a hearing officer appointed by the city manager, who shall then act in the city manager’s place.

     2.     The appellant shall be provided with notice of the time and place of the appeal hearing, as well as a copy of all relevant materials at least seven calendar days prior to the hearing.

     3.     At the time of such hearing, the city manager shall review the records and files relating to the decision.

     a.     The city manager shall permit any interested person to present any relevant evidence bearing on the issues involved in the matter.

     b.     In conducting the hearing, technical rules relating to evidence and witnesses shall not apply. Any relevant evidence may be admitted if it is material and if it is evidence customarily relied upon by responsible persons in the conduct of their affairs regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make admission of such evidence improper over objection in civil actions. Hearsay evidence may be admissible if it is the sort upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. The rules of privilege shall be applicable to the extent they are permitted in civil actions. Irrelevant, collateral, and repetitious testimony shall be excluded.

     c.     In determining whether a person should be disqualified for meeting the definition of a “person who has engaged in disqualifying conduct,” the city manager may consider: the nature and severity of the act(s) or crime(s); whether there were any additional subsequent act(s) or crime(s); the number of act(s) or crime(s); and how recent the act(s) or crime(s) were.

     4.     The appellant shall have the burden of proving that he or she meets the requirements for issuing the permit or certificate in the first instance; the city shall have the burden in proving that grounds exist for revoking or failing to renew a permit.

     5.     Based upon the evidence presented at the hearing, the city manager shall determine whether the decision should be affirmed, modified or reversed.

     6.     The city manager’s decision shall be communicated in writing to the appellant within ten (10) working days after the close of the hearing and submission of the matter to the city manager for decision. The city manager’s decision shall state whether the decision is affirmed, modified or reversed and shall state the reasons therefor.

     7.     The decision of the city manager shall include notice that the decision is final and conclusive, that judicial review may be sought therefrom pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, and that any action filed in the Superior Court shall be filed within ninety (90) days following the city manager’s notice pursuant to Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.6. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.100 Notices.
     All notices required to be given pursuant to this chapter shall be served on the responsible party (i.e., permittee, applicant, appellant, or a representative thereof) either by personal delivery or by deposit in the United States mail in a sealed envelope, postage prepaid addressed to such responsible party as the name and address appear in the most recent application on file with the city. Service by mail shall be deemed to have been completed on the date deposited in the mail. Notices shall include information regarding appeal rights and a statement that the failure to file an appeal shall constitute a failure to exhaust administrative remedies. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

Article IV. Operation and Facility Requirements
5.32.110 Operational requirements.
     A.    Hours and Conditions of Operation.

     1.     No massage establishment shall operate nor shall any massage be administered in any massage establishment between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m., regardless of whether compensation is being received for such massage. A massage begun any time before ten p.m. must nevertheless terminate at ten p.m. No after hours use of the massage establishment shall be allowed for any purpose. The hours of operation must be displayed in a conspicuous public place in the lobby within the massage establishment and in any front window clearly visible from outside of the massage establishment. These hours of operation may be modified pursuant to a conditional use permit.

     2.     During hours of operation, no person other than a valid permit holder under this chapter, a massage practitioner, a massage therapist, or a patron shall be allowed beyond the reception area of the massage establishment.

     3.     Patrons and visitors shall only be permitted in the massage establishment during the hours of operation.

     a.     Visitors shall only be permitted in the reception area of the massage establishment.

     b.     Patrons shall only be permitted in massage treatment areas if at least one massage technician is on the premises.

     4.     The massage establishment shall be supervised during all hours of operation by a manager who is one of the operators specified in the permit application. The name and photograph (minimum size of four inches by six inches) of the on-duty manager shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the reception area of the massage establishment at all times that the business is open. This provision shall not apply to sole providers.

     5.     No massage establishment shall be used for residential purposes.

     a.     There shall be no massage tables, cots, or beds in the establishment other than as shown on the approved floor plan.

     b.     Locker facilities shall be provided for all employees and independent contractors and all personal items of the employees and independent contractors shall be kept in the lockers while at the massage establishment.

     c.     Full kitchen facilities shall not be allowed. A sink and a microwave are acceptable. No hot plates, ovens, stoves or other cooking mechanisms shall be allowed.

     6.     No massage establishment shall be located on the premises of an escort service.

     B.     Posting Requirements. In addition to any other requirements for posting set forth in this chapter, the following shall also apply:

     1.     A recognizable and legible sign complying with the requirements of this code shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment.

     2.     Each service offered, the price thereof, and the minimum length of time such service shall be performed shall be posted in English and such other languages as may be convenient to communicate such service, in a conspicuous public location in each massage establishment. No services shall be performed and no sums shall be charged for such services other than those posted. Nothing herein prohibits a voluntary tip from being paid by the patron.

     C.     Instruments, Equipment, and Personnel.

     1.     Disinfecting agents and sterilizing equipment shall be provided for any instruments used in performing acts of massage and said instruments shall be disinfected and sterilized after each use.

     2.     Unless otherwise approved by a conditional use permit, massages shall be administered only on standard or portable massage tables or chairs which are covered with a durable, washable plastic or other acceptable waterproof material. Beds, mattresses, water beds, futons, sofa beds, any type of portable or convertible beds, and foam pads more than four inches thick or with a width of more than four feet shall not be permitted in the establishment.

     3.     No massage technician shall massage the genitals, or anal area of any patron, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above specified areas.

     4.     No massage technician shall massage the breasts of a female patron without the written consent of the person receiving the massage and a referral from a licensed California health care provider, nor shall any operator of a massage establishment allow or permit such a massage to the above-specified area.

     5.     A massage shall not be given and no patron shall be in the presence of any massage establishment staff unless the patron’s genitalia and, if a female patron, the female patron’s breasts, are fully covered by a fully opaque, nontransparent covering.

     6.     Persons providing services in the massage establishment shall not be dressed in attire that is: transparent, see-through, substantially exposes the massage technician’s undergarments, or exposes the massage technician’s breasts, buttocks, or genitals; in a manner which has been deemed by CAMTC to constitute unprofessional attire based on the custom and practice of the profession in California; or in swim attire unless such person is providing a water-based massage modality which has been approved by CAMTC.

     7.     All massage establishments shall be so equipped, maintained and operated as to effectively control the entrance, harborage, and breeding of vermin, including flies. When flies or other vermin are present, effective control measures shall be instituted for their control or elimination.

     8.     Clean and sanitary towels, sheets and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. Heavy white paper may be substituted for sheets; provided, that such paper is used once for each person and then discarded into a sanitary receptacle.

     9.     All massage tables shall be at least two feet away from all walls at all times.

     D.    Personnel Lists.

     1.     Within seven calendar days of receiving a certificate of operation, the operator shall provide the police department with a complete list of all massage technicians who are working or will work, be employed, or provide massage services in the massage establishment along with a copy of their CAMTC certificate and identification card, as well as with the name and residence address of the manager principally in charge of the operation of the massage establishment and of any other manager.

     2.     The operator shall have a continuing obligation to notify the chief of police in writing of any changes in massage technicians and managers within seven calendar days of such change.

     3.     The operator shall maintain copies of each massage technician’s CAMTC certificate and identification card on file on the premises of the massage establishment which shall be available to any individual upon request, including, but not limited to, employees of the city. Additionally, the operator shall be required to file copies of each CAMTC certificate and identification card with the police department within seven days of a massage technician beginning to work at the massage establishment. Information required by this section shall be maintained at the massage establishment for a minimum of two years following the date that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment.

     4.     The operator shall maintain on the premises of the massage establishment a register of all non-state certified persons employed, working or providing other services at the massage establishment. The register shall be maintained for a minimum of two years following the time that the person ceases providing services/employment to the massage establishment. The operator shall make the register immediately available for inspection upon demand of a representative of the police department, any health officer, or any other official charged with enforcement of this chapter. The register shall include, but is not limited to, the following information:

     a.     Name, nicknames and/or aliases;

     b.     Home address and relevant phone number, including, but not limited to, home, cellular and pager numbers;

     c.     Age, date of birth, gender, height, weight, color of hair and eyes;

     d.     The date of employment, and termination, if any;

     e.     The duties of each person; and

     f.      In a separate portion of the register, Social Security numbers, which shall only be available for review by the Los Alamitos police department or other law enforcement personnel, but not health officers or other officials charged with the enforcement of this chapter.

     E.     Prohibited Conduct.

 

     1.     No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, served, or furnished on the premises of any massage establishment without a valid alcoholic beverage license from the state and conditional use permit from the city.

     2.     No storage or sale of condoms or spermicide shall be permitted within the massage establishment.

     3.     No operator shall hire, employ or allow a person to perform massage services unless such person possesses a valid CAMTC certificate. Each operator of a massage establishment shall verify that all persons hold the appropriate state certificate required by this chapter. Nothing herein prevents an operator from hiring, employing, or allowing a person to perform services allowed by such person’s cosmetology or barber license, if the business has a state establishment license in addition to a certificate of operation.

     4.     No person shall use or possess, nor shall there be any storage of, any sexually oriented implements or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed primarily for the stimulation of human genital organs or sadomasochistic activity in any part of a massage establishment.

     5.     No electrical, mechanical or artificial device shall be used by any massage establishment staff for audio and/or video recording or for monitoring the performance of a massage, of the conversation or other sounds in the massage rooms, without the knowledge and written consent of the patron.

     6.     No operator of a massage establishment shall place, publish or distribute or cause to be placed, published or distributed any advertising matter that depicts any portion of the human body that would reasonably suggest to prospective patrons or clients that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required in this chapter, nor shall any massage establishment employ language in the text of any advertising that would reasonably suggest to a prospective patron that any service is available other than those services described in this chapter and posted on the premises as required by this chapter. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.120 Building and facility requirements.
     A.    The building, or unit within the building where the exempt massage establishment is located, shall comply with all applicable building code requirements.

     B.     All massage rooms and dressing rooms shall be screened off by hinged doors that can open inward. Swinging doors that can open inward, draw drapes, curtain enclosures, or accordion-pleated closures in lieu of doors are acceptable on all inner dressing rooms and massage therapy rooms or cubicles.

     C.     Except for bathroom doors and one office door, interior doors may not have locks on them.

     D.    In addition to the minimum lighting required by the provisions of Chapter 15.04 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code, all rooms in which massages are being provided shall be lit with a minimum of one light fixture emitting at least two hundred ten (210) lumens for every one hundred fifty (150) square feet of space during the administration of such services, with the light fixtures being spread throughout the space. No dimmer switches, strobe lights, flashing lights, colored light, or any coverings or other apparatus, other than a lampshade, which changes or darkens the color of the primary light source shall be used in any room in which massage services are being provided.

     E.     Any locker facilities provided for the use of patrons shall be fully secured for the protection of the patron’s valuables and the patron shall be given control of the key or other means of access.

     F.     The walls in all rooms where water or steam baths are given shall have a washable mold-resistant surface.

     G.    All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be built to Building Code standards, in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned and disinfected after each use. Any room in which table showers are used shall be designed and built as a shower facility.

     H.    Where shower facilities, including table showers, are provided, an enclosed changing area, directly adjacent to the shower shall be provided. The changing area shall be designed to allow the patron to exit the shower and enter the changing area without being exposed or visible to any other area of the massage establishment.

     I.      One main entry door that enters into the reception area shall be provided for patron use. All patrons, and any persons other than those providing services at the massage establishment, shall be required to enter and exit through the main entry door of the establishment.

     J.      All exterior doors (except rear exterior doors used only for employee entrance to and exit from the massage establishment) shall remain unlocked during business hours, and the establishment shall comply with the provisions of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code pertaining to the posting of signs stating that doors shall remain unlocked during business hours. Exits for fire safety purposes may be allowed where deemed necessary by the appropriate public safety agency. Notwithstanding the above, the front door may be locked if there is no staff available to assure security for the clients and massage staff who are behind closed doors, provided that the massage establishment is owned by one individual with one or no employees or independent contractors.

     K.    There shall be no buzzer, alarm, or intercom systems.

     L.     No massage business located in a building or structure with exterior windows fronting a public street, highway, walkway, or parking area shall block visibility into the interior reception and waiting area through the use of curtains, closed blinds, tints, or any other material that obstructs or substantially darkens the view into the premises or by signs that cover more than twenty-five (25) percent of any windowpane. The interior of the business shall be plainly visible from the exterior of the business by passing vehicles and pedestrians. Translucent UV films or tints shall be allowed provided they do not violate these provisions and if a sample has been approved through the conditional use permit process or by the community development director.

     M.    A video surveillance system shall be installed that records the front and rear entry doors and such system shall be in operation at all times that the business is open. The video recording shall be kept for a minimum of ten (10) calendar days. Signs shall be posted at the front and rear entrances informing the public that a video surveillance system is in operation at the front and rear doors. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.130 Inspections.
     A.    Representatives of the city’s police department, fire department, community development department, and finance department, and agents for the city from the county health department and representatives of any state or local agencies with regulatory authority over massage establishments shall have the right to enter massage establishments, from time to time, during regular business hours, or at any time that the massage establishment is occupied or open for business, to verify the massage establishment is in compliance with all applicable laws without the need for an inspection or abatement warrant.

     B.     The operator shall cause to be conspicuously posted so that the same may be readily visible to persons in the reception area of the massage establishment, in letters that are a minimum of one inch in height, a notice which provides substantially as follows:

 

THIS MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT AND THE MASSAGE ROOMS DO NOT PROVIDE COMPLETE PRIVACY AND ARE SUBJECT TO INSPECTION BY CITY AND HEALTH OFFICIALS WITHOUT PRIOR NOTICE

     C.     No person shall refuse to permit, cause delay of, or interfere with, a lawful inspection or compliance check of the premises by the officials listed in subsection A of this section at any time. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

 

5.32.140 Violation—Nuisance—Remedy.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person to engage in conduct that violates any provision of this chapter, to engage in conduct which fails to meet the standards set forth in this chapter, or to own, manage, or operate a massage establishment that is not fully in compliance with the operational standards set forth in this chapter.

     B.     Any violation of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor unless, in the sole discretion of the city prosecutor, it is charged as, or reduced to, an infraction. Citations and warning notices may be utilized as determined appropriate to the circumstances by the enforcing personnel.

     C.     In addition to the above, any massage establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and is declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action under this chapter, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law, including any code enforcement procedures established pursuant to the laws of the state of California or the city of Los Alamitos; and may take such other steps and may apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. If an injunction is sought, attorneys’ fees and costs will be assessed at the discretion of the court against the party subject to said injunction.

     D.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each and every day during which such violation is committed or continued.

     E.     Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a public nuisance. (Ord. 15-07 § 1, 2015)

Chapter 5.36 PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
5.36.010 Definitions.
     The following terms as used in this chapter shall have respective meanings as herein set forth unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:

     “Pawnbroker” means any person engaged in conducting, managing or carrying on the business of loaning money, for him or herself or for any other person upon personal property, personal security, pawns or pledges, or the business of purchasing articles of personal property and reselling or agreeing to re-sell such articles to the vendors or their assignees, at prices agreed upon at or before the time of such purchase.

     “Person” includes any person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business trust, corporation or company.

     “Secondhand dealer” means and includes any person, co-partnership, firm, or corporation whose business includes buying, selling, trading, taking in pawn, accepting for sale on consignment, accepting for auctioning, or auctioning secondhand tangible personal property. A secondhand dealer does not include a coin dealer or participants at gun shows or events, as defined in Section 478.100 of Title 27 of the Code of Federal Regulations, or its successor, who are not required to be licensed pursuant to Sections 26700 to 26915, inclusive, of the Penal Code, who are acting in compliance with the requirements of Sections 26500 to 26585, inclusive, and 27545 of the Penal Code, and who are not a gun show trader, as described in Sections 16620 and 26525 of the Penal Code. (Ord. 13-06 § 2, 2013; Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.020 Permit required.
     It is unlawful for a secondhand dealer or pawnbroker as defined in the preceding section of this code, to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 520 § 2, 1989)

 

5.36.030 Permit application.
     Persons applying for permits under this chapter shall file a written, sworn application, signed by the applicant, if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, with the city clerk, showing:

     A.    The name or names of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on in the city; the local address or addresses of such person or persons while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person or persons will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person, firm or corporation for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, under the laws of what state the same is incorporated;

     B.     The fingerprints of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business or in lieu thereof, at least three letters of recommendation from reliable property owners in the county of Orange, certifying as to the applicant’s good character and business responsibility, or other evidence which establishes to the satisfaction of the chief of police the good character and business responsibility of such person or persons;

     C.     The place or places in the city where it is proposed to carry on applicant’s business;

     D.    Whether or not the person or persons having the management or supervision of the applicant’s business have been convicted of crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of such offense, the date and location thereof, and the punishment assessed therefor;

     E.     Credentials from a person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing applicant to act as such representative; and

     F.     Such other reasonable information as to the identity or character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of applicant’s business or the method or the plan of doing such business as the city clerk or chief of police may deem proper to fulfill the purpose of this chapter in the protection of the public good. (Ord. 520 § 2, 1989)

 

5.36.040 Investigation and issuance.
     Upon receipt of the application, the city clerk shall request the chief of police to conduct an investigation and prepare a written report on such person’s or persons’ business responsibility and moral character.

     The application and written report shall be submitted to the city council for consideration by the council at a regular meeting. At least ten (10) days’ notice shall be given to the applicant of the meeting and the applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard at such meeting.

     If the city council finds the applicant’s character and business responsibility are unsatisfactory, or it is found that the operation of the applicant’s business will not comport with the peace, health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the public, or that the applicant has a bad reputation for truth, honesty or integrity, is under the age of eighteen (18) years, has committed an act which would be grounds for discipline under this chapter, or has been refused a permit or had a permit revoked, then the council shall deny the application. If, however, the council finds that the applicant’s business will not adversely affect the peace, health, safety, convenience and general welfare of the public and that the applicant’s character and business responsibility are satisfactory, the permit shall be granted. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.050 Fee and clerk’s duties.
     At the time of submission of application, the applicant shall deposit with the city clerk a fee established by resolution of the city council to defray the costs of processing and investigation by the city.

     The city clerk shall keep a full record in his office of all such permits issued. Each permit shall contain a number of the permit, the date it is issued, the nature of the business authorized to be carried on, the expiration date of the permit, the place where the business may be carried on under the permit, and the name or names of the person or persons authorized to carry on the same. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.060 Transfer not permitted.
     No permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be transferred to any other person. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.070 Duty of police to enforce.
     It shall be the duty of the police officers of the city to examine all places of business and persons in their respective territories subject to the provisions of this chapter, to determine if this chapter has been complied with and to enforce the provisions of this chapter against any person found to be violating the same. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.080 Records.
     The city clerk shall deposit the record or fingerprints of the permittee, together with a permit number, with the chief of police; the chief of police shall report to the city clerk any complaints against any person licensed under the provisions of this chapter and any conviction for violation of this chapter; the city clerk shall keep a record of all such complaints and violations and shall make a report thereof to the city manager. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.090 Revocation of permit.
     A.    The permits issued pursuant to this chapter may be revoked by the city council after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes:

     1.     Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for permit;

     2.     Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares or merchandise;

     3.     Any violation of this chapter;

     4.     Conviction of the permittee of any felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or

     5.     Conducting the business licensed under this chapter in an unlawful manner or in such a manner to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

     B.     Notice of hearing of revocation of a permit shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid to the permittee, at his last known address, at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.100 Expiration of permit.
     All permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the permittee’s business license. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.110 Report required.
     Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall report all personal property which he has purchased, taken in trade, taken in pawn, accepted for sale on consignment, or accepted for auctioning to the chief of police of the city, not later than twelve noon of the date following the acquisition, or on the next succeeding business day. The chief of police is authorized to grant relief from the reporting requirements of this section if he otherwise routinely receives a copy of a report containing the information required in this section made by the permittee to any other governmental agency, whether federal, state or local. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.120 Exceptions from required report.
     The provisions of Section 5.36.110 shall not apply to any secondhand property which has been:

     A.    Acquired in good faith in a transaction involving the stock in trade of another secondhand dealer who previously has made the report or reports required by this chapter of such property included in the transaction and who states in writing that the report or reports so required have been made, and provided the acquiring secondhand dealer submits a copy of such statement to the chief of police. Each of the secondhand dealers involved in the transaction shall retain a copy of the statement referred to in this section for a period of three years as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer;

     B.     Acquired in a nonjudicial sale, transfer, assignment, assignment for the benefit of creditors, or consignment of the assets or stock in trade in bulk, or a substantial part thereof, of an industrial or commercial enterprise for purposes of voluntary dissolution or liquidation of the seller’s business or for the purpose of disposing of an excessive quantity of personal property; or which has been acquired in a nonjudicial sale or transfer from an owner of his or her entire household of personal property, or a substantial part thereof; provided, the secondhand dealer retains in his or her place of business for a period of three years a copy of the bill of sale, receipt, inventory list or other transfer document as a matter of record which shall be made available for inspection by any law enforcement officer; and provided further, that the secondhand dealer notifies the chief of police that exemption from reporting is being claimed under this section. “Industrial or commercial enterprise” and “owner” as used in this section do not include a secondhand dealer;

     C.     Acquired in a sale made by any public officer in his or her official capacity, trustee in bankruptcy, executor, administrator, receiver or public official acting under judicial process or authority, or which has been acquired in a sale made under the execution of, or by virtue of, any process issued by a court, or under the provisions of the Warehouse Receipts Act;

     D.    Acquired in good faith as part or complete payment for other personal property by a person, copartnership, firm or corporation whose principal business is primarily that of selling or trading personal property directly to the consumer; provided, however, that in such transaction no consideration other than stock in trade shall pass from the business enterprise to the person trading or exchanging the used item;

     E.     Acquired as the surplus property of the United States government or of a state, city, county, city and county, municipal corporation, or public district has never thereafter been sold at retail;

     F.     Acquired by gift and the donee, person, firm, partnership or corporation sells the property acquired by gift as a part of the charitable activity carried on by said person, firm, partnership or corporation. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.130 Prescribed forms.
     The chief of police may, upon the taking effect of this chapter, cause to be printed such a number of blank forms as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes of this chapter. Such forms, in addition to any other information relating to the transactions described in Section 5.36.120, which the chief of police may require, may have spaces for writing in the following matters: number of pawn ticket; amount loaned or paid for article; description of articles purchased; description of articles sold; description of articles otherwise dealt with; name and residence of person, firm or corporation from whom purchased; name and place of residence of person, firm or corporation to whom sold; name and place of residence of person, firm or corporation with whom otherwise dealt with; description of person to whom sold or with whom otherwise dealt with; showing true name as nearly as known; age, sex, complexion, color of mustache or beard or both where both are worn; style of dress; height, also the time when the articles were purchased, sold or otherwise dealt with. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.140 Retention of possession of property by dealer for thirty-day period.
     A.    Every secondhand dealer and pawnbroker shall retain in his or her possession for a period of thirty (30) days all personal property reported under the provisions of this chapter. The thirty (30) day holding period with respect to such personal property shall commence with date the report of its acquisition was made to the chief of police by the secondhand dealer or pawnbroker.

     B.     A police officer of the city may require any secondhand dealer or pawnbroker, upon written notice, to hold property which the police officer has reason to believe is stolen for a period not to exceed ninety (90) days from the date of placing such hold. Such property may be released only upon written authorization of a police officer of the city. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.150 Records to be kept.
     Every secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall have a complete record of all personal property pledged to, purchased, received or sold by him which record shall contain all the matters required to be shown in the reports referred to in Section 5.36.110 and of this chapter. Every such record shall be open at all times during business hours to the inspection of any law enforcement officer. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.160 Business hours.
     No secondhand dealer or pawnbroker shall operate such business other than between the hours of eight a.m. and nine p.m. daily and such business shall not be operated on Sundays or holidays. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.170 Age limitation.
     No pawnbroker shall accept property or pledges of property from any person under the age of eighteen (18) years. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.180 Bond.
     Every pawnbroker or secondhand dealer shall file with the city a bond in the sum of five thousand dollars ($5,000.00). The bond shall run to the city and to any person who has a cause of action against a pawnbroker or secondhand dealer licensed hereunder and such bond shall be conditioned that the obligor will faithfully conform to and abide by the provisions of the ordinance and the pawnbroker regulations contained in the Financial Code of the state of California. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

 

5.36.190 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 276 § 1, 1974)

Chapter 5.40 ADULT-ORIENTED BUSINESS LICENSES
5.40.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate adult-oriented businesses to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city. The provisions of this chapter have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. It is recognized that adult-oriented businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is therefore the purpose of this chapter to establish standards for the conduct of adult-oriented businesses which will protect the public health, safety and welfare, preserve locally recognized values of community appearance, minimize the potential for nuisances related to the operation of adult-oriented businesses, and maintain local property values.

     In approving the regulations contained in this chapter, the city council has reviewed detailed studies, reports and letters prepared by other jurisdictions and its own staff with respect to the detrimental social, health and economic effects on persons and properties surrounding adult businesses. These studies included Upland, California (1992); Garden Grove, California (1991); Tucson, Arizona (1990); Seattle, Washington (1989); Austin, Texas (1986); Oklahoma City, Oklahoma (1986); Indianapolis, Indiana (1984); Houston, Texas (1983); Beaumont, Texas (1982); Minneapolis, Minnesota (1980); Phoenix, Arizona (1979); Whittier, California (1978); Amarillo, Texas (1977); Cleveland, Ohio (1977); Los Angeles, California (1977); state of Minnesota, attorney general report (1989); Newport News, Virginia (1996); St. Paul, Minnesota (1987); Corpus Christi, Texas (1995); National Law Center (1995); and Los Alamitos (2003) (collectively “studies”). The studies, a summary of which is found in Exhibit “A” and is available at the city clerk’s office, substantiate the adverse, secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses.

     A.    Based on the foregoing studies and the other evidence presented, the city council finds that:

     1.     Adult-oriented businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates of those areas in which they are located and that surround them.

     2.     Both the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to sensitive land uses and the concentration of adult-oriented businesses tend to result in the blighting and downgrading of the areas in which they are located.

     3.     Unregulated adult-oriented businesses create serious public health concerns and hazards, since the studies and cases demonstrate that such businesses have been linked to the spread of communicable and sexually-transmitted diseases.

     4.     Special regulation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase in the crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for special regulation is based on the recognition that adult-oriented businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity to sensitive uses such as residential zones and uses, parks, schools, churches or day care centers.

     5.     It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the establishment and operation of adult-oriented businesses in a manner that would create such adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry, especially minors, special regulations are necessary.

     6.     The protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare require that certain operational requirements for adult-oriented businesses also be imposed.

     B.     In adopting these regulations, the city council is mindful of legal principles relating to regulation of adult businesses and does not intend to suppress or infringe upon any expressive activities protected by the First Amendments of the United States and California Constitutions, but instead desires to enact reasonable time, place, and manner regulations that address the adverse secondary effects of adult businesses. The city council has considered decisions of the United States Supreme Court regarding adverse secondary effects and the local regulation of adult businesses, including, but not limited to: Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50 (1976) (Reh. denied 429 U.S. 873); Renton v. Playtime Theaters, 475 U.S. 41 (1986) (Reh. denied 475 U.S. 1132); FW/PBS, Inc. v. Dallas, 493 U.S. 215 (1990); Barnes v. Glenn Theater, 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and City of Erie v. Paps A.M. (2000) 529 U.S. (2000 Daily Journal DAR 3255), United States Court of Appeals 9th Circuit decisions, including, but not limited to: Topanga Press, et al. v. City of Los Angeles, 989 F.2d 1524 (1993); Kev. Inc. v. Kitsap County, 793 F.2d 1053 (9th Cir. 1986); Colacurcio v. City of Kent, 163 F.3d 545 (9th Cir. 1998), pet. For cert. Filed (1999); several California cases including but not limited to: Tily B. v. City of Newport Beach, 69 Cal.App.4th 1 (1998); City of National City v. Wiener, 3 Cal.4th 832 (1993); People v. Superior Court (Lucero) 49 Cal.3d 14 (1989); and City of Vallejo v. Adult Books, et al., 167 Cal.App.3d 1169 (1985); and other federal cases including Lakeland Lounge v. City of Jacksonville (5th Cir. 1992) 973 F.2d 1255, Hang On, Inc. v. Arlington (5th Cir. 1995) 65 F.3d 1248, Mitchell v. Commission on Adult Entertainment (3rd Cir. 1993) 10 F.3d 123, International Eateries v. Broward County (11th Cir. 1991) 941 F.2d 1157, and Star Satellite v. City of Biloxi (5th Cir. 1986) 779 F.2d 1074.

     C.     The city council adopts each of the regulations contained in this chapter as a means to reasonably address the adverse secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.012 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning set forth below:

     “Adult-oriented business” means:

     A.    Any business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients.

     In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct or a use which has a majority of its floor area, stock-in-trade, or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be considered. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this section as characterizing an adult-oriented business shall not be considered except where such activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct;

     B.     Includes, but is not limited to, the following:

     1.     Adult Arcade. An “adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     2.     Adult Bookstore, Novelty Store, Video/DVD Store. “Adult bookstore, novelty store, video/dvd store” means an establishment which has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area or revenue derived from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

     a.     Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas;

     b.     Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities; or

     c.     Goods which are replicas of or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas, or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities to cause sexual excitement.

     A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult/video/dvd store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult/video/dvd store so long as one of its principal business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     3.     Adult Cabaret. “Adult cabaret” means a bar, nightclub or similar establishment which features dancers, strippers or similar entertainers who expose specified anatomical areas of their bodies.

     4.     Adult Motel. “Adult motel” means a hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment which:

     a.     Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult type of photographic reproductions; or

     b.     Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time that is less than ten hours; or

     c.     Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to subrent the room for a period of time that is less than ten hours.

     5.     Adult Motion Picture Theater. “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

     6.     Adult Tanning Salon. “Adult tanning salon” or “parlor” means a business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. Adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon or parlor shall also include a business establishment where the employees thereof are nude or expose specified anatomical areas.

     7.     Adult Theater. “Adult theater” means any place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium or structure, partially or entirely used for live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium or structure is used for presenting matter characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein. Such place shall also include an adult theater wherein persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity, on-going performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities, or by specified anatomical areas.

     8.     Employee. “Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of an adult business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is denominated as an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of the adult business. Employee does not include a person exclusively on the premises to conduct repair or maintenance for the premises or equipment on the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises.

     9.     Nude Model Studio. “Nude model studio” means any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under state law to provide art education, while such classroom is being used in a manner consistent with such state license.

     10.   Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall. “Sex supermarket/sex mini-mall” means the establishment or operation of more than one type of adult-oriented business or use as defined in this title within the same building.

     11.   Sexual Encounter Center. “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration:

     a.     Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex, or

     b.     Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude.

     12.   Sexually Oriented Business. “Sexually oriented business” means any business not otherwise defined or provided for herein where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities, or any business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas located, or proposed to be located, within the city.

     “Appeal.” Wherever the reference to an appeal being filed or available to be filed, such right of appeal also means and includes the right to appeal administrative determinations made by the city manager/designee in accordance with the procedures established in this chapter and Chapters 5.42 and 5.44.

     “Couch dance” or “couch dancing” means an employee of an adult-oriented business intentionally touching any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or while simulating any specified sexual activity.

     “Establishment” means and includes any of the following:

     A.    The opening or commencement of any adult-oriented business as a new business;

     B.     The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to any adult-oriented business;

     C.     The addition of any adult-oriented business to any other existing adult-oriented business, with or without expansion of floor area;

     D.    The relocation of any adult-oriented business; or

     E.     The expansion or enlargement of the premises by ten percent or more of the existing floor area.

     “Nudity” or a “state of nudity” means the showing of the human male or female genitals, buttocks, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or the female breast with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the areola.

     “Person” means and includes person(s), firms, corporations, partnerships, associations or any other forms of business organization or group(s).

     “Private viewing area” means an area or areas in an adult-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie or other presentation. No private viewing areas shall be established, maintained or authorized, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls, or other enclosures creating a private viewing area.

     “School” means any public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision thereof or which is licensed by the state to offer pre-school, elementary or secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools.

     “Semi-nude” means the showing of the male genitals or female breast below a horizontal line across the top of the areola at its highest point or the showing of a substantial portion of the male or female buttocks. This definition shall not include any portion of the cleavage of the human female breast, exhibited by a dress, blouse, skirt, leotard, bathing suit or other wearing apparel provided the areola is not exposed in whole or in part.

     “Specific criminal act” also means “specified criminal acts” and includes sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; convictions involving the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. Specified criminal acts excludes those acts which are authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900.

     “Specified anatomical areas” means and includes any of the following human anatomical areas:

     A.    Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae; or

     B.     Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

     “Specified sexual activities” means and includes all of the following:

     A.    The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses or female breasts;

     B.     Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy;

     C.     Human masturbation, actual or simulated;

     D.    The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon him or herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if such person is a female, a breast;

     E.     Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal; or

     F.     Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in subsections (A) through (E) above.

     “Straddle dance” or “straddle dancing” shall have the same meaning as “couch dance” or “couch dancing” as defined in this section. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.014 License required.
     A.    A person commits a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 et seq., of this code, if he or she operates an adult-oriented business within the city without a valid adult-oriented business license issued by the city for the particular type of business.

     B.     An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the city. The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the premises. The application shall include at a minimum the street address of the principal place of business where business records are kept and any location, current or proposed, for the adult-oriented business in the city. Post office boxes or postal annex addresses shall not be sufficient to meet this requirement. Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a “public record” under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established in this chapter which information is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or social security number, and/or personal financial data. The city council, in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth in this chapter, has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a license application made available to any member of the public the information set forth above.

     C.     An adult use planning permit application must also be concurrently filed with the license application. The license application shall contain the same information required of the adult use planning permit. The adult use planning permit application will be processed in accordance with the time limits of Section 17.48.021 and Section 17.48.022 of this code. Before a business regulated by this chapter may commence operation, the applicant must have been issued a valid adult use planning permit or interim adult use planning permit.

     D.    The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in compliance with the law by the city and by the Orange County fire department.

     E.     Any person who wishes to operate an adult-oriented business must sign the application for the license as the applicant.

     F.     The fact that a person possesses any other valid license issued by the city or the county does not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining an adult-oriented business license. A person who operates an adult-oriented business and possesses any other city or county license shall comply with the requirements and provisions of this chapter and all city codes as well as the requirements and provisions of such other license. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.016 Issuance of license.
     A.    Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application.

     B.     The city manager or designee, shall issue or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant within ten days after receipt of a properly completed and executed application and the concurrently filed and completed application for an adult use planning permit, including an interim adult use planning permit which shall be processed pursuant to Section 17.48.021 and Section 17.48.022 of this code. The city manager or designee, shall issue the license unless he or she finds one or more of the following to be true:

     1.     An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;

     2.     An applicant is overdue in payment to the city of fees owed by the applicant in relation to the adult-oriented business which is the subject of the application;

     3.     An applicant has failed to completely fill out the application for the license or has provided materially false information on the application;

     4.     The license fee required by this chapter has not been paid;

     5.     The premises to be used for the adult-oriented business has not been approved by the city and the fire department, as being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances, including the issuance of an adult use planning permit or interim adult use planning permit pursuant to Sections 17.48.021 to 17.48.024 of this code;

     6.     The applicant is operating the adult-oriented business without a license in violation of Section 5.40.014 of this code;

     7.     That an applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which:

     a.     Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering,

     b.     Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering,

     c.     Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; convictions of any such offense occurring within twenty-four (24) months prior to the application;

     8.     The premises contain one or more private viewing areas.

     The city’s decision to grant or deny license shall not be based upon information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900.

     C.     Within ten days of the receipt of a completed application in accordance with the requirements of this section, the city manager or designee shall refer the application to the chief of police for investigation. Such investigation shall include obtaining the information pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code that is required of city employees. In the event the information requested pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code is not available within the ten-day period, the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code, issue a status report on the issuance of the adult-oriented business license, whereupon the city manager or designee, shall issue the same. Should the information obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code vary in a material degree from that set forth by the applicant in the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license in accordance with Sections 5.40.024 and 5.40.026 of this code. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Sections 5.40.024 and 5.40.026 of this code.

     D.    The license shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to whom it is issued, the expiration date, and the address of the adult-oriented business. The license shall be posted in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the adult-oriented business so that it may be easily read at any time.

     E.     The city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license. The decision of the city manager or designee, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the following procedures:

     1.     The appeal shall be submitted to and received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the city, together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the reason for asserting the appeal.

     2.     When a timely appeal is filed, the city council shall hear the matter or appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be such person or body designated by the city council to perform all or a portion of their duties, or may be another official or body from another city or agency, or other person qualified to conduct a review of the matter. The hearing for an appeal shall take place within ten business day of the receipt of the appeal. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

     3.     The city council or hearing officer shall render a written decision on the matter within five days of the close of the hearing on the appeal.

     F.     The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a permit shall be final. If the denial of a permit is affirmed on review by the city council, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.018 Fees.
     The initial application fee, the initial license fee, and the annual renewal fee for an adult-oriented business license shall be set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.020 Inspection.
     An applicant or licensee shall permit representatives of the city, the city’s police department, Orange County department of health services, the Orange County fire department, the city building and safety department, and the community development department to inspect the premises of an adult-oriented business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the provisions of this chapter at any time the premises is open for business, provided reasonable and normal business operations shall not be interfered with and the inspection is conducted in the same manner as an inspection for other businesses. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.022 Expiration and renewal of license.
     Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only by making application upon penalty of perjury that there has been no material change in the business or its operation. Applications for renewal shall be filed at least thirty (30) days before the expiration date; the application for renewal shall not extend the license beyond the expiration date. The city manager or designee shall issue the license or deny the application for renewal within ten days of the receipt of a completed application. If, in reviewing the application for renewal of the license, the city manager or designee, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager or designee, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within the same ten-day period at which time the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The decision of the city manager or designee, to deny renewal of the license shall be subject to appeal to the city council by following the same procedures as set forth in Section 5.40.016(E). (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.024 Suspension and revocation hearings.
     The city manager or designee, the planning commission, or the city council may initiate proceedings to consider the suspension or revocation of an existing adult-oriented business license as may be necessary to assure the preservation of the public health and safety. Such proceedings shall include a hearing wherein the license holder is provided the opportunity to refute any evidence or findings of the city. If the evidence presented at the hearing establishes that one or more of the conditions exist as set forth in Section 5.40.025, then suspension shall be ordered; and, if the conditions set forth in Section 5.40.026 exist, then revocation of the adult-oriented business license shall be ordered. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.025 Suspension.
     An adult-oriented business license shall be suspended if the evidence at the hearing establishes any one or more of the following conditions exist:

     A.    The conduct of the adult-oriented business does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, the city’s fire, building, zoning, or health and safety codes; or the locational criteria or design and performance standards set forth in this title and in Title 17 of this code are violated or not complied with by the adult-oriented business;

     B.     There was not a responsible person over eighteen (18) years of age on the premises to act as a manager at all times during which the adult-oriented business was open;

     C.     The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager knows or should have known that the adult-oriented business has been used as a place where sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, prostitution, assignation or other lewd acts occur or have occurred;

     D.    The licensee, his or her employees, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder or manager with management of day to day operations has violated any provision of this title or this code;

     E.     The licensee or manager has failed to remove all materials harmful to minors, including, but not limited to, wrappers, covers, labels, packaging, bags and magazines that have been discarded upon the grounds within one thousand (1,000) feet of the premises of the adult-oriented business;

     F.     The adult-oriented business is being operated, managed or conducted in violation of any condition of approval or performance standard of the adult-oriented business license, or adult use planning permit, if required;

     G.    The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager refused to allow the lawful inspection of the premises by a city inspector or official, the police department, the Orange County fire department, city code enforcement officer, director of community development, or county health department or any designee thereof;

     H.    The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager knowingly permitted gambling on the premises;

     I.      The manager or person acting in that capacity was found to be intoxicated or under the influence of a controlled substance while on duty at the adult-oriented business;

     J.      The adult-oriented business is operating in violation of the permitted hours of operation;

     K.    The adult-oriented business is operating without a city business license.

     The suspension shall be for a period of up to thirty (30) days or until the violation is corrected, whichever is longer. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.026 Revocation.
     An adult-oriented business license shall be revoked and no new adult-oriented business license may be requested by the licensee for any location within the city or by any other person for that same location within a one-year period following revocation if the evidence presented at the hearing on the revocation of the license establishes that one or more of the following conditions exists:

     A.    The licensee, his or her employee, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder or manager has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material facts in the application for a license or permit, or in any report or record required to be filed with the city’s police department, county health department, or any other city department or office in connection with the operation of the business;

     B.     The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager has been convicted of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction in conjunction with or as a result of the operation of the adult-oriented business;

     C.     The licensee, manager or any employee of the licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this title allows any minor into the establishment, permits the use of the facilities by a minor, and/or sells adult-oriented materials to a minor and/or material harmful to a minor;

     D.    The approved adult-oriented business has been expanded, or partially or wholly converted to another adult-oriented business without the required city approvals and permits;

     E.     There have been two suspensions of an adult-oriented business license within a one-year period;

     F.     The licensee or manager knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements of this title and state and federal law allowed the sale of controlled substances or allowed acts of prostitution on or about the premises;

     G.    The licensee or manager continued to operate the adult-oriented business during a suspension period of the adult-oriented business license;

     H.    The licensee has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which the required time period has not yet elapsed;

     I.      That on two or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person or persons committed an offense, occurring in or on the licensed premises, constituting a specified criminal act for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees of the adult-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;

     J.      The licensee or manager is operating more than one adult-oriented business in the same building;

     K.    The adult-oriented business contains one or more private viewing areas as defined in this chapter;

     L.     The adult-oriented business has failed to provide, inaccurately provided, or failed to keep current the street address of the principal place of business or the location of any adult-oriented business in the city in accordance with Section 5.40.014(B); or

     M.    The licensee, manager or any agent or employee of the licensee or manager of the adult-oriented business knowingly or with reckless disregard of the requirements, violates or permits the violation any of the prohibited conduct described in Section 5.40.034 on three or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, regardless of whether a suspension or suspensions have been issued for such violations. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.028 Appeal.
     A.    The city manager or designee shall conduct all initial hearings concerning the suspension or revocation of licenses. If the city manager or designee, suspends or revokes a license, the city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by both certified mail, return receipt requested, and regular first-class mail, written notice of the action. The decision to suspend or revoke the license shall be effective twenty (20) days after the notice of the decision has been deposited in the U.S. mail.

     B.     An appeal of the decision to suspend or revoke the license may be made in accordance with requirements of Section 5.40.016(E) by filing a notice of the same with the city clerk prior to the date on which the decision becomes effective. A properly filed application for appeal stays the decision to suspend or revoke the license until a decision is rendered on the appeal.

     C.     The appeal proceedings shall be conducted pursuant to Section 5.40.016(E). The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal shall be final. If the denial is affirmed on review by the city council or hearing officer, the permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.030 Transfer of license.
     Any license shall be immediately void if the licensee attempts to transfer the license to another person or location. The attempted transfer of the adult-oriented business license includes the transfer of ownership or control of the adult-oriented business by any of the following:

     A.    The sale, lease or sub-lease of an adult-oriented business;

     B.     The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means; or

     C.     The establishment of a trust, gift or similar legal device which transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.032 Location of adult-oriented businesses.
     The location of an adult-oriented business shall be as specified in Sections 17.48.030 and 17.48.032. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.034 Prohibited conduct at adult-oriented business.
     A.    No person shall operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this code, knowingly, or with reason to know, permitting, suffering or allowing any employee:

     1.     To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     2.     To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;

     3.     To intentionally touch any patron at an adult-oriented business while engaged in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity;

     4.     To voluntarily be within six feet of any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a sexual activity.

     B.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult-oriented business.

     C.     No person at any adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not said business is permitted under this code, shall engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing any specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

     D.    No employee of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any particular day. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

 

5.40.036 Injunction.
     A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business without a valid license or in violation of Section 5.12.032, is subject to a suit for injunction as well as prosecution for criminal violations. (Ord. 670 § 2, 2003; Ord. 588 § 5, 1995)

Chapter 5.42 ADULT-ORIENTED LIVE ENTERTAINER LICENSES
5.42.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Adult-oriented live entertainer” means any person who engages in or performs adult-oriented live entertainment.

     “Adult-oriented live entertainment” means every form of live entertainment, music, band or orchestra, act, play, burlesque, revue, pantomime, scene, song, dance or act participated in by one or more persons and which live entertainment involves the display or simulation of specified sexual activities or the display of specified anatomical areas.

     “Appeal” shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 5.40.012.

     “Couch dance” or “couch dancing” means an adult-oriented live entertainer intentionally touching any patron while engaged in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area as defined in Section 5.40.012 or while simulating any specified sexual activity as defined in Section 5.40.012.

     “Straddle dance” or “straddle dancing” shall have the same meaning as couch dance or couch dancing as defined in this section. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.012 Adult-oriented live entertainment license required.
     Each individual to be employed or who is employed in the capacity as an adult-oriented live entertainer for an adult-oriented business shall be required to obtain an adult-oriented live entertainer license from the city. Each applicant shall pay an adult-oriented live entertainer license fee as set by resolution of the city council. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010, for any person to work as an adult-oriented live entertainer without a license as required by this chapter. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.014 Application form—Contents.
     Before any applicant may be issued an adult-oriented live entertainer license, the applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the city manager or designee, the following information:

     A.    The applicant’s full name and any other names or aliases used by the individual during the last five years;

     B.     Age, date, and place of birth;

     C.     Height, weight, and color of hair and eyes;

     D.    Present business address and telephone number;

     E.     Proposed business address and telephone number;

     F.     Present residence address and telephone number;

     G.    State driver’s license or identification number;

     H.    Social security number;

     I.      Evidence that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;

     J.      A statement describing the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application;

     K.    A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended regarding a business in this state or anywhere else. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application;

     L.     A statement listing all criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been expunged or sealed by court order, or authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900, and the disposition of all arrests of the applicant, individual or other entity subject to disclosure under this chapter, for five years prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, except minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of each conviction or other disposition; identifying the convicting jurisdiction, and sentencing court providing court identifying case numbers or docket numbers; and

     M.    Attached to the application form as provided above, two color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual’s face, and the individual’s fingerprints on a form provided by the entity providing law enforcement services to the city. For persons not residing in the city, the photographs may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Any fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant. The application form shall be signed under penalty of perjury.

     Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a “public record” under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established in this chapter which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or social security number, and/or personal financial data. The city council, in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth in this chapter, has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.016 Referral for investigation—License issuance.
     A.    Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application.

     B.     Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager or designee, shall refer the adult-oriented live entertainer license application to the chief of police for an investigation to be made of such information as is contained on the application. In no event shall the investigation or the decision to grant or deny a license include information authorized or required to be kept confidential in accordance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900. After an investigation, including obtaining the information pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., that is required of employees, the chief of police shall, within ten days of the receipt of the complete application, issue a report on the issuance of the adult-oriented live entertainer license, and the city manager or designee, shall issue such license within the same ten-day period unless one or more of the following findings is true:

     1.     The applicant has knowingly made any false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a license, permit or in any report or record required to be filed with the city or county;

     2.     An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;

     3.     An applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act for which:

     a.     Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering,

     b.     Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; the distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering, or

     c.     Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; conviction of any such offense occurring within twenty-four (24) months prior to application;

     4.     The adult-oriented live entertainer will be performing in a building, structure and location which does not comply with the requirements or meet the standards of the health, zoning, fire and safety laws of the state and ordinances of the city applicable thereto;

     5.     The applicant has had an adult-oriented live entertainer license revoked by the city within two years of the date of the current application;

     6.     The adult-oriented live entertainer license is for a business prohibited by a local or state law, statute, rule or regulation, or prohibited in the particular location by the provisions of this code; or

     7.     The applicant has been refused a license or had a license revoked by this city or any other county or municipality within two years of the date of the current application.

     C.     In the event the information requested pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., is not available within said ten-day period, the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code, issue a report on the issuance of the adult-oriented live entertainer license, whereupon the city manager or designee, shall issue the same. Should the information obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by Section 2.64.130 et seq., shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension on revocation pursuant to Sections 5.42.022, 5.40.024 and 5.40.026.

     D.    The city clerk shall send to the applicant or licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license. The decision of the city manager or designee, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the following procedures:

     1.     The appeal shall be submitted to and received by the city clerk within ten days of the date of such action for which the appeal is made. The appeal must be in writing on forms provided by the city, together with an appeal fee established by resolution of the city council, which may be amended from time to time. All appeals shall set forth the reason for asserting the appeal.

     2.     When a timely appeal is filed, the city council shall hear the matter or appoint a hearing officer to conduct a hearing on the matter. The hearing officer may be such person or body designated by the city council to perform all or a portion of their duties, or may be another official or body from another city or agency, or other person qualified to conduct a review of the matter. The hearing for an appeal shall take place within ten business day of the receipt of the appeal. All parties involved shall have the right to offer testimonial, documentary and tangible evidence bearing on the issues, and may be represented by counsel. Any relevant evidence may be admitted that is the sort of evidence upon which reasonable persons are accustomed to rely in the conduct of serious affairs. Any hearing under this section may be continued for a reasonable time for the convenience of a party or a witness.

     3.     The city council or hearing officer shall render a written decision on the matter within five days of the close of the hearing on the appeal.

     E.     The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a license shall be final. If the denial of a license is affirmed on review by the city council, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5, et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.018 Conduct of adult-oriented live entertainer.
     In addition to the requirements of this title, adult-oriented live entertainment shall be subject to the following regulations:

     A.    No adult-oriented live entertainer shall mingle or fraternize with the patrons on the premises of the adult-oriented business while performing.

     B.     Adult-oriented live entertainers shall be restricted to performing on a raised platform which is at least eighteen (18) inches above the floor level, and a minimum of six feet in distance from the nearest patron or customer. A rail of at least forty-two (42) inches in height shall be installed around the perimeter of the stage.

     C.     No adult-oriented live entertainer shall:

     1.     Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     2.     Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

     3.     Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity while intentionally touching a patron at the adult-oriented business;

     4.     Engage in the display or exposure of any specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than six feet from any patron.

     D.    No employee, regardless of whether or not a license or other permit has been issued for said business under this chapter, shall engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of two a.m. and nine a.m. of any particular day. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.020 Expiration and renewal of license.
     The adult-oriented live entertainer license granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to annual renewal by the city manager or designee, upon the written application of the applicant and a finding by the city manager or designee, and the chief of police that the applicant has not committed any offense or committed any act during the existence of the license which would give grounds to deny the license or refuse the renewal or to revoke the license. If, in reviewing the application for renewal of the license, the city manager or designee, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager or designee, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within ten days of the date on which the renewal application was filed with the city. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The decision of the city manager or designee to deny renewal of the license shall be subject to appeal to the city council by following the procedures as set forth in Section 5.40.016. The renewal of an adult-oriented live entertainer license shall be subject to payment of a fee as set by a resolution of the city council. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

 

5.42.022 Suspension and revocation of license.
     Any license issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked by the city for a violation of the provisions of this chapter or a failure to comply with the provisions hereof. Any proceeding to consider the suspension or revocation of a license shall utilize the procedures to suspend or revoke an adult-oriented business license set forth in Sections 5.40.024 through 5.40.028. (Ord. 670 § 3, 2003; Ord. 588 § 6, 1995)

Chapter 5.44 FIGURE MODEL LICENSES
5.44.010 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

     “Appeal,” as used herein, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 5.40.012.

     “Figure model” means any person, male or female, who models or poses at a nude model studio while nude or semi-nude to be observed, viewed, sketched, painted, drawn, sculpted, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.

     “Nude,” “semi-nude” and “state of nudity,” as used in this chapter, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Sections 5.40.012 and 17.48.018.

     “Nude model studio” shall have the same meaning in this chapter as defined in Sections 5.40.012 and 17.48.012. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.012 License required.
     No person shall engage in, conduct, perform, model or pose as a figure model, or conduct, manage or carry-on any place where such posing or modeling is available or open to the public within the city without first obtaining a figure model license pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and securing the necessary zoning permits and business licenses required by the code. No person shall act as a figure model for a fee or gratuity without a license from the city. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.014 License application—Contents.
     A.    Applications for figure model licenses shall be filed with the city manager on forms supplied by the city, together with a fee established by resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing and investigation. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as set forth below. The city manager may require that the applicant be fingerprinted and photographed.

     B.     Any applicant for a license shall submit the following information:

     1.     The full name and present address of the applicant;

     2.     The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     3.     Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years;

     4.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, and hair;

     5.     Applicant’s business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

     6.     The business license and/or permit license history of the applicant, including whether the applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state. The date of issuance of such license or permit, including whether the license or permit was denied, revoked or suspended shall also be included;

     7.     All criminal convictions, excluding minor traffic violations and those convictions authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900, including date and place of each such conviction and the reason thereof;

     8.     Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek verification of the information contained in the application;

     9.     A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct.

     Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a “public record” under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established in this chapter which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or social security number, and/or personal financial data. The city council, in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth in this chapter, has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.016 Issuance of license—Investigation.
     A.    Upon receipt of a license application, the city manager or designee shall determine whether it is complete and contains all information required by this section within two days of its receipt. If the application is incomplete, the city manager or designee shall deny the application and immediately inform the applicant in writing of the items needed to complete the application.

     B.     Upon receipt of a completed application, the city manager or designee shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether a license should be issued as requested. The chief of police shall, within ten days of the filing of a complete application, recommend that the city manager, or designee thereof, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the information obtained during the investigation, including that obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., whereupon the city manager or designee, shall issue or deny the same. In the event the information requested pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., is not available within said ten-day period, the chief of police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code, recommend issuance of the figure model license. Should the information obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by Section 2.64.130 et seq., shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Sections 5.44.026, 5.40.024 and 5.40.026. In no event shall the decision to grant or deny the license be based on information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900.

     C.     The city manager or designee, shall issue such license within the ten-day period as requested, unless the city manager, or designee thereof, makes any of the following findings:

     1.     The applicant:

     a.     Has been convicted of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h; 266i; 314; 315; 316; 318; subsections (a), (b), and (h), of Penal Code Section 647, or any other provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290;

     b.     Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California;

     c.     Has been convicted of any offense in any other state which is the equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses;

     d.     Has committed an act in another jurisdiction, if done by a licensee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the license;

     e.     Has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the licensee;

     f.      The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the license application process;

     g.     The application does not contain all of the information required;

     h.     The nude model studio where the applicant proposes to use the license does not comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, fire and safety requirements and standards.

     2.     The location of the proposed nude model studio is at a site or location that does not meet the requirements of Section 17.48.032.

     D.    The city clerk shall send to the licensee, by certified mail, return receipt requested, written notice of the action to issue or deny the license. The decision of the city manager or designee, to issue or deny issuance of the license shall be subject to appeal in accordance with the procedures contained in Section 5.40.016.

     E.     The decision of the city council or hearing officer concerning the appeal of a denial of a permit shall be final. If the denial of a permit is affirmed on review by the city council, the applicant or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction as provided by law, pursuant to California Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.5 et seq. The city shall make all reasonable efforts to expedite judicial review in accordance with Code of Civil Procedure Section 1094.8. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.018 Transfer and duration of license.
     A.    No license issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person.

     B.     Figure model licenses shall be issued for the period of twelve (12) months and shall expire twelve (12) months from issuance.

     C.     Renewal application shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the license to prevent a lapse of the license.

     D.    Each applicant for renewal shall file such information as may be required by the city manager to update the information required for his or her original license application. The application for renewal shall include the appropriate filing fees as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.020 Disrobing prohibited.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 for any person operating a nude model studio or any employee thereof, including a figure model, to allow any customer or patron to disrobe while on the premises. A person operating a nude model studio shall cause a sign to be posted in a conspicuous space visible from the main entrance of the establishment, containing the message, with one and one-half inch height and width lettering, which reads:

 

PATRONS ARE PROHIBITED FROM
DISROBING ON PREMISES.

(Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.022 Figure model license.
     No operator of a nude model studio shall employ or utilize the services in any way of a figure model who does not possess a valid license therefor. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.024 Figure model license—Display.
     The license issued pursuant to this chapter for each figure model shall be displayed within an area on the premises open to the public at all times. The identification card issued to a figure model shall be available for display to any police officer or other city officer upon demand. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.026 Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal.
     A.    Violation. The city manager may refuse to renew a license or may revoke or suspend an existing license on the grounds that the applicant or license holder has failed to comply with the license conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If, in reviewing the application for renewal, the city manager or designee, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager or designee, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within ten days from the date on which the complete application was filed with the city. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. If a suspended license lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any such case, the applicant or license holder shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this section.

     B.     Revocation and Suspension.

     1.     The city manager or designee, may revoke or refuse to renew a figure model license if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a license under Sections 5.44.014 and 5.44.016, or upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within one year following a prior suspension under subdivision (2) below.

     2.     The city manager or designee may suspend a figure model license for a period of thirty (30) days for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Notice. When the city manager concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license exist, the city manager shall serve the applicant or license holder, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of the applicant or license holder, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refusal to renew license. In the event certified mail is used, the notice shall also be sent by regular first-class mail to the same address with postage fully paid thereon. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision if no appeal is filed by applicant or license holder, and the right of the applicant or license holder to appeal to the city council the decision of the city manager.

     D.    Appeal. The applicant or license holder may appeal the decision of the city manager by following the same procedures as set forth in Section 5.40.016. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

 

5.44.028 Violation and penalty.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor for any person to engage in, conduct, perform model or pose as a figure model without obtaining the figure model license required by this chapter. Violations shall subject the violator to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010. Violation of the provisions of this chapter by existing licensees shall subject their license to suspension and/or revocation in accordance with the provisions in this code. (Ord. 670 § 4, 2003; Ord. 588 § 7, 1995)

Chapter 5.46 ESCORT LICENSES
5.46.010 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

     A.    Appeal. The term “appeal” shall have the same meaning as provided in Section 5.40.012(B) of this code.

     B.     Escort. The term “escort” means any person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion, guide or date for another person, and to display specified anatomical areas, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another person. Escort shall not include any person hired by a state-licensed school or other youth organization for purposes of supervising or chaperoning youth activities, while such person acts in that capacity.

     C.     Escort Agency. The phrase “escort agency” means a person or business entity which furnishes, offers to furnish or advertises to furnish an escort or escorts as one of its primary business purposes, for any form of consideration where the escort receives any form of consideration to display specified anatomical areas.

     D.    Escort License—Agency. The phrase “escort license—agency,” as used herein, means that license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to conduct the business of an escort agency as defined herein.

     E.     Escort License—Individual. The phrase “escort license—individual,” as used herein, means that license issued by the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter to an individual escort as defined herein for the privilege of working as an escort.

     F.     Specified Criminal Acts. The phrase “specified criminal acts,” as used herein, shall have the same meaning as set forth in Sections 5.40.012 (F)(7), and 17.48.018(E) of this code. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.012 License required.
     No person shall engage in, be employed as, be hired as, accompany anyone for a fee or any form of consideration, perform, model or pose as an escort, or own, operate, conduct, manage or carry-on any escort agency within the city without first obtaining an escort license—individual or escort license—agency pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, and securing the necessary zoning permits and business licenses required by the code. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.014 License application—Contents.
     A.    Applications for escort licenses shall be filed with the city manager on forms supplied by the city, together with a fee established by Resolution of the city council to cover the cost of processing and investigation. The application shall be signed and verified by the applicant and shall contain such information as set forth below. The city manager may require that the applicant be fingerprinted and photographed.

     B.     Any applicant for a license shall submit the following information:

     1.     The full name and present address of the applicant. Applications for an escort license— agency shall include the street address of the agency’s principal place of business where business records are maintained and the business address of any agency office located in the city. Post office boxes or postal annex addresses shall not be sufficient to meet the requirements of this provision;

     2.     The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant;

     3.     Written proof that the applicant is over the age of eighteen (18) years;

     4.     Applicant’s height, weight, color of eyes, and hair;

     5.     Applicant’s business, occupation or employment for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application;

     6.     The business license and/or permit license history of the applicant, including whether the applicant has ever had any license or permit issued by any agency, board, city, county, territory or state. The date of issuance of such license or permit, including whether the license or permit was denied, revoked or suspended shall also be included;

     7.     All criminal convictions including, but not be limited to, specified criminal acts, excluding minor traffic violations and those convictions authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900, including date and place of each such conviction and the reason thereof;

     8.     Authorization for the city, its agents and employees, to seek verification of the information contained in the application;

     9.     A statement in writing, signed and dated by the applicant, that he or she certifies under penalty of perjury that all information contained in the application is true and correct.

     Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed hereunder may be a “public record” under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of such application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established herein which is personal, private, confidential or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Such information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or Social Security Number, and/or personal financial data. The city council in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system set forth herein has determined in accordance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information set forth above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this chapter by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality or security interests are protected. The city clerk shall cause to be obliterated from any copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information set forth above. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.016 Issuance of license—Investigation.
     A.    Upon receiving an application for an escort license—individual or escort license—agency, the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an investigation to be made to determine whether a license should be issued as requested. The chief of police shall, within ten days of the filing of an application, recommend that the city manager, or designee thereof, approve, conditionally approve or deny the application based on the information obtained during the investigation, including that obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code. In the event the information requested pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code is not available within said ten-day period, the chief of police shall—if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this code—recommend issuance of the license. Whereupon the city manager, or designee thereof, shall issue the same. Should the information obtained pursuant to Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code materially vary from that on the application, such variance shall be cause to suspend or revoke the license. Any license issued prior to the city receiving the information required by Section 2.64.130 et seq., of this code shall state clearly on its face that the license is subject to suspension or revocation pursuant to Sections 5.40.024 and 5.40.026 of this code. In no event shall the decision to grant or deny the license be based on information authorized or required to be kept confidential pursuant to Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600-900.

     B.     The city manager shall issue such license as requested, unless the city manager makes any of the following findings:

     1.     The applicant:

     a.     Has been convicted of a violation of California Penal Code Sections 266h; 266i; 314; 315; 316; 318; subsections (a), (b), and (h), of Penal Code Section 647 or any other provision of law pursuant to which a person is required to register under the provisions of Penal Code Section 290;

     b.     Has been subjected to a permanent injunction against the conducting or maintaining of a nuisance pursuant to Sections 11225 through 11235 of the California Penal Code or any similar provisions of law in a jurisdiction outside the state of California;

     c.     Has been convicted of any offense in any other state which is the equivalent of any of the above-mentioned offenses;

     d.     Reserved;

     e.     Has committed an act in another jurisdiction, which, if done by a licensee under this chapter, would be grounds for denial, suspension or revocation of the license;

     f.      Has been convicted of an act involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude or an act of violence, which act or acts are related to the qualifications, functions or duties of the licensee;

     g.     The applicant has made a false, misleading or fraudulent statement of fact to the city in the license application process, including the failure to disclose convictions for specified criminal acts;

     h.     The application does not contain all of the information required;

     i.      The applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal act as defined herein within the last two years.

     2.     The agency proposes to operate from an adult-oriented business as the same is defined in Chapters 5.40 and 17.48 of this code. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.018 Transfer and duration of license.
     A.    No license issued hereunder shall be transferable to any other person.

     B.     Escort licenses shall be issued for the period of twelve (12) months and shall expire twelve (12) months from issuance.

     C.     Renewal applications for the next insuring license shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the license to prevent a lapse of the license.

     D.    Each applicant for renewal shall file such information as may be required by the city manager, or designee thereof, to update the information required for his or her original license application. If in reviewing the renewal application, the city manager, or designee thereof, determines that the application will likely be denied, then the city manager, or designee thereof, shall cause an administrative hearing to be held within ten days of the receipt of the application. At the hearing, the applicant may present evidence supporting the application or contradicting the evidence presented by the city. The application for renewal shall include the appropriate filing fees as set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.020 Escort license—Agency.
     No owner, manager or operator of an escort agency shall employ or utilize the services in any way of an escort who does not possess a valid license therefor. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.022 Escort license—Display.
     The license issued pursuant to this chapter for each escort shall be displayed within an area on the premises open to the public at all times. The identification card issued to an escort shall be available for display to any police officer or other city officer upon demand. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

 

5.46.024 Suspension, revocation, denial and appeal.
     A.    Violation and Nonviolation. The city manager, or designee thereof, may refuse to renew a license or may revoke or suspend an existing license on the grounds that the applicant or license holder has failed to comply with the license conditions or other requirements of this chapter. If a suspended license lapses during the suspension period, a new application must be made at the end of the suspension period. In any such case, the applicant or license holder shall have the right to appeal to the city council in the time and manner set forth in this section.

     B.     Revocation and Suspension.

     1.     The city manager, or designee thereof, may revoke or refuse to renew a license if he or she makes any of the findings for denial of a license under Sections 5.46.014 and 5.46.016, for the failure to provide the city with the accurate and current business address as required by Section 5.46.014(B)(1) of this code, upon any subsequent violation of any provision of this chapter within one year following a prior suspension under subdivision (2) below or upon the conviction of the license holder of a specified criminal act as defined herein.

     2.     The city manager, or designee thereof, may suspend a license for a period of thirty (30) days for any violation of the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Notice. When the city manager, or designee thereof, concludes that grounds for denial, suspension, revocation or refusal to renew a license exist, the city clerk shall serve the applicant or license holder, either personally or by certified mail, addressed to the business or residence address of applicant or license holder, with a notice of denial or notice of intent to suspend, revoke or refuse to renew license. This notice shall state the reasons for the proposed action, the effective date of the decision if no appeal is filed by applicant or license holder, and the right of the applicant or license holder to appeal to the planning commission and city council the decision of the city manager, or designee thereof.

     D.    Appeal. The applicant or license holder may appeal the decision of the city manager, or designee thereof, in accordance with Section 17.54.090 et seq., of this code. (Ord. 588 § 8, 1995)

Chapter 5.48 DISPLAY OF ADULT MATERIALS HARMFUL TO MINORS—IN-STORE NEWSRACKS—BLINDERS REQUIRED
5.48.010 Legislative findings and authorization.
     The city council does find that there exists and has existed an increasing trend toward the display of harmful matter within the meaning of the California Penal Code Section 313 et seq., at grocery stores, conveniences stores, drug stores, liquor stores, supermarkets, book stores, video stores, and other retail outlets within the city. Said material is often displayed within the open view of children of tender years and is easily accessible to them. The city council finds that this material is adverse to the public peace, morals and good order of young children. The city council further finds that it is in the best interest of the public safety, welfare, and convenience of the city to restrict the display of said materials and to adopt the following regulations so that adverse impacts upon young children are kept to a minimum. (Ord. 593 § 2, 1995)

 

5.48.020 Display of adult materials harmful to minors.
     The display of material which is harmful to minors, as defined in Chapter 7.6 of Title 9 of the California Penal Code, (Section 313 et seq., thereof) in a public place, other than a public place from which minors are excluded, is prohibited unless a device commonly known as a blinder rack, is placed in front of such material, so that the lower two-thirds of the material is not exposed to view. The phrase “public place” shall include grocery stores, convenience stores, drug stores, liquor stores, supermarkets, book stores, and other retail establishments, unless minors are excluded therefrom by law. (Ord. 593 § 2, 1995)

 

5.48.030 Penalties.
     Any person violating any provision in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 of this code. (Ord. 593 § 2, 1995)

 

5.48.040 Forwarding copy of chapter to businesses handling harmful matter.
     Upon adoption, a copy of this chapter shall be forwarded to all businesses in the city who may handle “harmful matter” as defined in Section 313 of the California Penal Code. (Ord. 593 § 2, 1995)

Chapter 5.50 PEDDLING, CANVASSING AND SOLICITATION
5.50.010 Legislative findings.
     The city council finds that persons and organizations have been visiting and continue to visit private residential properties, as well as privately-owned businesses, for the purposes of soliciting or peddling of goods, wares, merchandise or services. Some residents and business owners find these activities to be intrusive upon their privacy. The city council further finds that a variety of misrepresentations and other frauds are at times employed in such activities. As such, the city council wishes to enact this chapter for the purposes of protecting the privacy of residents and business owners and minimizing fraudulent practices by persons representing themselves as peddlers or solicitors. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Canvasser” means any person who engages in canvassing.

     “Canvassing” means and includes the act of any person, whether a resident of the city or not, traveling by foot, vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, who goes from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street:

     1.     Conducting a poll, survey or petition drive (unless such drive is led and/or sponsored by a local, state or federal governmental body or agency); or

     2.     Sharing, communicating or otherwise conveying ideas, views or beliefs; or

     3.     Disseminating oral or written information, including, but not limited to, handbills, to a person willing to directly receive such information, whether political, religious, commercial, noncommercial, charitable, or otherwise.

     “City” refers to the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Handbills” mean and include any commercial or noncommercial handbill, pamphlet, circular, newspaper, paper, newsletter, booklet, poster, leaflet, brochure or other printed or written materials that have been cast, deposited, placed, scattered or thrown onto the property of a business or residence in the absence of a subscription agreement.

     “License collector” means the city tax collector, financial officer or employee charged with administering this chapter.

     “Peddler” means any person who engages in peddling.

     “Peddling” means any person who goes onto the premises of a private residence or business and sells, or offers for sale and delivery, goods or merchandise or services of any kind or description. Peddling shall not include the act of carrying, conveying or transporting milk, dairy products, newspapers or other goods to regular subscription-based customers on established routes.

     “Person” means any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, social club, church, sect, denomination, league, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate or any other group acting as a unit.

     “Solicitation” occurs when a solicitor travels by foot, vehicle, or any other conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, requesting money or any other personal or real property controlled by the owner or occupant of the residence or business.

     “Solicitor” means any person who engages in solicitation. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.030 Notice prohibiting peddling, solicitation and canvassing.
     A.    No person shall enter upon any residence or place of business and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock upon any door, or create any sound in any other manner calculated to attract the attention of any occupant of such premises, for the purpose of securing an audience with the occupant and engaging in peddling, solicitation or canvassing in defiance of a notice described in subsection B of this section, unless there is a pre-arranged meeting between the solicitor, canvasser or peddler and an occupant of the residence or place of business.

     B.     Notice by the owners or occupants of any residence or place of business of their unwillingness to receive any uninvited peddlers, solicitors, or canvassers shall be given by displaying a weatherproof card, decal, or sign easily seen from the public right-of-way or the normal entryway to a house or dwelling. The notice must be placed upon or near the main entrance door to the residence or place of business and must state: “No Solicitors,” or words to that effect, with the letters at least one-inch high. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.040 Permit required—Solicitation and peddling.
     A.    No person shall engage in solicitation or peddling unless such person obtains a permit from the license collector, or his or her designee. Any permit obtained is nontransferable unless used on behalf of an employer, corporation, group or organization as described in subsection (B)(5) of this section.

     B.     The application for the permit, as provided by the city shall contain information about the solicitor or peddler, including:

     1.     Name and physical description of the applicant.

     2.     Date of birth, driver’s license number or other identification number, and Social Security number.

     3.     Permanent home address.

     4.     Local address and telephone number.

     5.     If employed, the name, address and telephone number of the employer, or if acting as an agent, the name, address and telephone number of the principal who is being represented, with credentials in written form establishing the relationship and the authority of the employee or agent to act for the employer or principal.

     6.     A statement as to whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any criminal offense, whether felony or misdemeanor, other than minor traffic violations. As to any such offense, the applicant must provide the date and place of conviction, the nature of the offense, and the punishment or penalty imposed.

     7.     Proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local laws and regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business, or which, under any such laws or regulations, would exempt the applicant from the licensing requirements of this chapter.

     C.     Upon submission of the application, the applicant shall pay a processing fee as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.050 Activities exempt from permit.
     A.    Persons engaging in the following activities do not need a permit and are exempt from the requirements of Section 5.50.040:

     1.     Those seeking to obtain contributions or to sell any goods, articles or services of any kind for the support or benefit of any charitable, religious or political purpose; or on behalf of any nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project.

     2.     Those seeking to influence the personal belief of the occupant of any residence or business in regard to any political or religious matter.

     3.     Those seeking to obtain, from an occupant of any residence or business, an indication of the occupant’s belief in regard to any political or religious matter.

     4.     Those who canvass door-to-door.

     5.     Those seeking to obtain donations made incidental to canvassing door-to-door on behalf of any charitable, religious or political purpose; or on behalf of any nonprofit association, organization, corporation or project.

     B.     Those solicitors, peddlers and canvassers who are exempt under this section are still required to comply with the requirements set forth in Sections 5.50.030, 5.50.090, 5.50.100, 5.50.110, and 5.50.120. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.060 Permit issuance—Solicitation and peddling.
     A.    Upon receipt of an application and conclusion of his or her investigation, the chief of police services, or his/her designee, shall recommend that the license collector issue a permit unless:

     1.     The applicant made one or more material misstatements in the permit application.

     2.     The applicant has been convicted, or held liable for, a crime of moral turpitude, or any felony or misdemeanor offense that reasonably and directly indicates a risk to the public.

     3.     The applicant has had a judgment in an action for fraud, deceit or misrepresentation entered against him or her by any court of competent jurisdiction within ten (10) years prior to the date of the application.

     4.     The applicant fails to provide proof of possession of any license or permit which, under federal, state or local law or regulations, the applicant is required to have in order to conduct the proposed business.

     5.     The applicant has previously been convicted for violation of any provision of this chapter, or has had any license issued pursuant to this chapter revoked.

     B.     The license collector, or his/her designee, shall notify in writing the applicant of the granting or denial of his or her permit within ten (10) business days of the applicant’s submission of his or her application. Sufficient notice shall be given if mailed or delivered to the permitee at the address listed on the application.

     C.     If granted, the permit shall expire within one year of the date of issuance. If denied, the license collector’s decision may be appealed pursuant to the same provisions as Section 5.04.360 of this code, which address appeals to city council for denial of building/business permit. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.070 Violation of permit conditions.
     A.    A permit issued under this chapter may be subject to a revocation hearing if the license collector, or his/her designee, finds any of the following:

     1.     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license.

     2.     Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of carrying on the business of the peddler or solicitor.

     3.     Any violation of this chapter.

     4.     Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude.

     5.     Conducting the business of soliciting or peddling in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public.

     B.     If the license collector, or his/her designee, finds that a permit holder’s activity is a public health or safety risk, or subjects any individual, or the community, to imminent danger, he or she may suspend the permit, effective immediately, prior to any revocation hearing.

     C.     In the event that the license collector, or his/her designee, suspends the permit according to subsection B of this section or determines that grounds exist to warrant the revocation of a permit issued under this chapter, a hearing on such determination will be held in accordance with Section 5.04.360 of this code and the applicant shall have all appeal rights as set forth in Chapter 5.04 of this code. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.080 Photo identifications.
     A.    Every person, when acting as a solicitor or peddler, shall carry a photo identification showing the person’s name and permanent address. In addition, the solicitor or peddler must carry a copy of a valid permit, if applicable, obtained pursuant to Section 5.50.040.

     B.     If acting on behalf of an employer, corporation, group or organization, the solicitor or peddler shall carry written authorization by such third party and a copy of the permit issued to such third party.

     C.     Permits, identification and authorizations shall be presented upon request by any person approached by the solicitor or peddler for the purposes of soliciting or peddling, and to any law enforcement or city official. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.090 Prohibited acts.
     The performance by a solicitor, canvasser or peddler of any of the following acts shall constitute a violation of this chapter:

     A.    No person shall represent in any manner that the city, or its departments or officers, have endorsed the permit holder or the products, services or causes on behalf of which individuals are being solicited, peddled or canvassed without the written consent of the city manager.

     B.     No person shall affix any object to, or place any object on, the body of any individual to whom any solicitation, peddling or canvassing is directed without that individual’s express consent.

     C.     No person shall touch, brush up against, or otherwise voluntarily come into physical contact with any person without that person’s express consent.

     D.    No person shall willfully obstruct the movement of any person on any street, sidewalk or other public place.

     E.     No person shall solicit, peddle or canvass any person that has objected, by words or conduct, to such soliciting, canvassing or peddling.

     F.     No person shall represent in any manner that the soliciting or peddling is conducted for anyone other than the permit holder.

     G.    No person shall refuse to identify the permit holder on whose behalf the soliciting or peddling is being conducted when requested to do so by any person contacted by the solicitor or peddler, or fail to truthfully state the uses to which any solicited items will be put when requested to do so by any person being solicited.

     H.    No person shall threaten any injury or damage to any individual who declines to be subject to any soliciting, peddling or canvassing or who declines to make a purchase, donation or contribution.

     I.      No person shall accept food stamps as a contribution.

     J.      No person shall, directly or indirectly, solicit, peddle or canvass for any purpose by misrepresentation of his or her name, occupation, financial condition, social condition, physical or mental health, or residence, and no person shall make or perpetrate any misstatement, deception or fraud in connection with any soliciting, peddling or canvassing for any purpose in the city. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.100 Hours of soliciting, peddling and canvassing.
     No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the doorbell, or rap or knock on the door, or create any sound in a manner calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to solicit, peddle or canvass before 8:00 a.m. or after dusk on Monday through Saturday, or any time of day or night on Sunday or any state or federal holiday. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.110 Records.
     A.    Every person who engages in soliciting or peddling within the city shall maintain a system of accounting whereby written records are kept of all monies collected during the permitted solicitation or peddling activities.

     B.     Solicitors for charitable purposes must also keep a written record detailing what percentage of the donations collected during the solicitation, including real or personal property, goes toward the charity. This record must be made available, upon request, to the city, or to any resident or business owner who inquires about it. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

 

5.50.120 Penalties.
     A.    It shall be the duty of the chief of police services, or his/her designee, to investigate any complaints of violations of this chapter and to enforce its provisions contained herein.

     B.     Engaging in solicitation or peddling without having first acquired a permit, if required, or soliciting, peddling or canvassing while failing to comply with any applicable regulation in this chapter constitutes a violation of this chapter. The solicitor, peddler or canvasser will be charged with a separate violation for each day in which he or she continues to practice or engage in the activity.

     C.     Each person convicted of violating this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period. Third and subsequent offenses within a twelve (12) month period shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 695 § 3, 2006)

Title 6 ANIMALS
Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL SHELTER
Chapter 6.07 HORSES
Chapter 6.08 DOG LICENSING
Chapter 6.12 RABIES CONTROL
Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL REGULATION
Chapter 6.20 FOWL, RABBITS AND GOATS
Chapter 6.22 INSECT CONTROL MEASURES
Chapter 6.24 PIGEONS AND BEES
Chapter 6.28 POLICE ANIMALS

Chapter 6.04 ANIMAL SHELTER
6.04.010 Established.
     There shall be provided a suitable enclosure or place for the purpose of keeping and safely holding animals impounded, which shall be designated as the animal shelter; provided, that one or more suitable enclosures or places may be provided for the purpose of keeping and safely holding animals impounded, which places shall be designated as branches of the city animal shelter and shall be included within the meanings of the words “animal shelter” wherever the name may appear in this title. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.020 Director designated.
     Whenever in this title the words “director” or “director of animal shelter” are used, they shall mean the director of the animal regulation division of the city of Long Beach, or his or her designee. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.030 Impoundment—Authority.
     The director shall take up, impound and safely keep any and all of the animals enumerated in this chapter and found running at large, pastured, herded, staked or tied in any street, park, or other public place, or upon any private property, in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.040 Impoundment—Dogs.
     It shall be the duty of the director and of every police officer to take up and deliver to the animal shelter any dog found upon any public or private property within the city in violation of any of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.050 Impoundment—Care of animals.
     The director shall safely keep all dogs, or other animals impounded at the animal shelter and shall furnish the same all necessary food and water, and shall give the same ordinary attention as may appear to be reasonably required for the welfare of such animals. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.060 Voluntary impoundment.
     The owner of a dog or cat may, with the consent of the director, place the custody of such animal with said official for the purpose of obtaining his assistance in procuring a new owner for the animal under such terms and conditions as that official, in his sole and absolute discretion, shall determine. The act of the owner in so placing the custody of the animal with the director shall, in no event and under no circumstances, obligate that official of the city to procure a new owner for the animal and, in the event such official so determines, the animal may be destroyed and disposition made of the carcass. The owner of any other small animal may, with the consent of the director, place the custody of such animal with said official for the purpose of disposing of the animal as that official so determines. By placing the animal in the custody of the director in accordance with this section, the owner thereof relinquishes and conveys to the city all his right, title and interest in and to the animal and to the proceeds of any sale of the animal thereafter made, and neither the city nor the official shall be required to make an accounting for any such proceeds. If the director elects to accept the custody of the animal, he shall require the owner thereof to evidence in writing his knowledge and acceptance of the provisions of this section. Notwithstanding anything in this section to the contrary, in the event the director has not procured a new owner for the animal and the same has not been destroyed, the person so placing the animal in custody may redeem and reclaim it from the custody of the city upon the payment of a fee therefor established by the city council by resolution. The owner of the unwanted animal may deliver the animal to the director at the animal shelter without charge or, at the owner’s request, that official will pick up the animal at a fee established therefor by the city council by resolution. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.070 Impoundment—Disposal.
     Upon the impounding of any stray dog, or other animal, the director shall immediately notify the owner thereof, if known, to redeem the dog or other animal within five days; and unless sooner redeemed, the director shall sell the dog or other animal at public or private sale, at such price as he may deem reasonable. At the time of sale of any dog or cat, a spay and neuter deposit shall be required from the purchaser. Such deposit shall be as established by contract with the city of Long Beach or as otherwise set by resolution of the city council. All such deposits shall be deposited in the city of Long Beach animal control program unclaimed altering deposits trust fund. A purchased dog or cat under six months of age at the time it is sold shall be spayed or neutered within six months or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed and forfeited to the city. Any dog or cat six months of age or over, at the time it is sold, shall be spayed or neutered within sixty days or the deposit shall be deemed unclaimed and forfeited to the city. If a written statement is obtained by the purchaser from a veterinarian that the dog or cat is not suitable for surgery the deposits shall not be deemed forfeited. All unclaimed and forfeited deposits shall be used by the city only for those specific purposes set out in Sections 30503 of the California Food and Agricultural Code. In the event a purchaser cannot be obtained for any dog or cat or any other animal, the director shall destroy such animal and dispose of the carcass. The director may, without waiting for such five-day period to elapse, cause any impounded animal to be destroyed when that official reasonably determines that such animal is unfit for further use by reason of its having been injured, having become infected with a dangerous or communicable disease, having become incurably crippled or having become infirmed on account of advanced age. Such official may likewise so destroy any impounded animal upon receiving the written report of a duly licensed veterinarian that such animal is afflicted with a painful and incurable disease. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.080 Impoundment—Redemption by owner.
     The owner or person entitled to the possession of any impounded dog or other animal shall have the right to redeem and have the possession of the same at any time prior to the sale or destruction thereof upon payment to the director of the costs and charges incident to the impounding, taking and keeping thereof, upon satisfactory proof of the ownership and right to possession of the dog or other animal being made to the director and, if sold, to receive all of the net proceeds of such sale in excess of the costs and charges for the taking, impounding, keeping and expenses of sale thereof. As an incident to the redemption of any dog, the owner or other person shall also pay the license tax, plus any penalty, for any dog for which a license tag has not been issued for the current year. The person redeeming the dog shall also provide satisfactory evidence of compliance with Section 6.12.110. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.090 Impoundment—Fees—Establishment.
     Fees for impounding animals shall be those established by contract with the city of Long Beach or otherwise set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.100 Impoundment—Boarding or keeping fees.
     Fee for boarding or keeping impounded animals shall be charged in addition to the impounding fees to which Section 6.04.090 makes reference. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.04.120 Interference with officers or shelter.
     No person shall conceal or attempt to conceal, rescue, or attempt to rescue any dog or any of the animals mentioned in this title from the director, or from any other officer authorized to enforce any of the provisions of this title, while engaged in the capture or in conveying to the animal shelter any such dog or animal, or to interfere in any manner with said persons in the performance of any duty incident to their office, or to rescue or attempt to rescue any dog or other animal which has been impounded in the animal shelter. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.07 HORSES
6.07.010 Riding on public right-of-way.
     No person shall ride or walk any horse or permit any horse to walk upon any public highway or right-of-way within the city, except upon that portion of the right-of-way or highway reserved for the use of motor driven vehicles. No person shall ride or walk any horse or permit any horse to walk upon the public sidewalk or upon any portion of the public right-of-way other than the paved roadway. (Ord. 647 § 2, 2001; Ord. 235 § 1, 1972)

 

6.07.020 Curfew.
     No person shall ride or walk any horse or permit any horse to be ridden or walked upon any public right-of-way or highway within the city, except between the hours commencing with sunrise of each day and ending one-half hour after sunset of the same day. (Ord. 647 § 2, 2001; Ord. 235 § 2, 1972)

Chapter 6.08 DOG LICENSING
6.08.010 License tag—Required.
     No person shall own or have in custody or control any dog, male or female, over the age of four months, within the city without at all times having upon such dog a collar or harness to which shall be securely fastened a tag proving the dog is licensed as provided in this chapter. Said tag may be issued at any time during the calendar year and may be issued for a period of twelve (12) months. The tag shall be obtained from the director or from the office of the Long Beach tax collector inscribed with the serial number of the license. The license shall be sufficient only during the period for which the tag is issued. Fees for dog license tags shall be established by contract with the city of Long Beach or otherwise set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.015 Penalty.
     Violation of or failure to comply with any provision of this chapter constitutes an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense and not more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the second offense within a twelve (12) month period. A third offense within a twelve (12) month period shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.020 Annexed territory—County license acceptable.
     It shall not be necessary for a person who is a resident of any area at the time the area is annexed to the city and who at said time owns or has in his custody or control a dog for which a license fee has been paid and a dog license issued under and by virtue of the ordinances of the county to obtain a tag for the animal as is provided in Section 6.08.010 except that after the effective date of an annexation such person shall cause the dog to have upon it a collar, harness or similar device to which shall be attached the county dog license tag or such other official indicia as is issued by the county; but such person shall be subject to all provisions of Section 6.08.010 from and after the expiration date of the county dog license. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.030 Tag—Issuance—Records.
     The director of the animal regulation division is authorized and directed to procure on an as needed basis such quantity of tags as may be required for dogs in the city, which tags shall be plainly inscribed as set forth in this chapter, and shall be valid for only the period for which they are issued. The director of the animal regulation division shall furnish the Long Beach tax collector, from time to time, with such quantity of such tags and necessary receipt books as may be necessary to meet the demands of applicants for such tags applying therefor at the office of the tax collector. The tax collector shall report all collections promptly to the director of animal regulation division and shall furnish him with a duplicate record of all tags issued and the registration numbers thereof, but shall deposit all funds so collected promptly with the city treasurer. The director of the animal regulation division, his assistants, deputies and the Long Beach tax collector shall furnish such tags to the owners and persons in control of dogs in the city upon the payment of applicable fees for each unaltered dog and for each altered dog whose spaying or neutering is verified by a certificate from a licensed veterinarian. The director of the animal regulation division shall keep a register wherein shall be entered the name of every person to whom a dog tag has been issued, together with the serial number, and the period for which it is valid, the date of issuance, the address of applicant, and any other data deemed pertinent. Such tag shall be good only for use upon the dog described in such application, and to the original applicant. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.040 Tag—Late penalty.
     Penalties, which shall be established by contract with the city of Long Beach or otherwise set by resolution of the city council, shall be added to the dog tag fees for altered and unaltered dogs, respectively, if the required tag for a dog is secured more than sixty (60) days subsequent to the required renewal date; provided, that no penalty shall be added for the securing of any tag secured within sixty (60) days after the date on which the dog for which the tag is secured becomes subject to the provisions of this chapter, nor shall any penalty be added for a tag secured within sixty (60) days after the applicant becomes the owner of the dog for which the tag is bought. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.050 Annexed territory—Prorated fee.
     On and after the date a person specified in Section 6.08.020 becomes subject to all the provisions of Section 6.08.010, such person shall be furnished a dog tag upon payment of a sum equal to the product resulting from multiplying the charge per day by the number of days from said date to the end of the calendar year during which the date occurs, both inclusive, plus applicable penalties, if any. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.060 Tag—Replacement.
     In case of loss or destruction of any tag required by the provisions of this chapter, a duplicate shall be issued by the director or the tax collector upon request and upon the payment of applicable fees. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.070 Exemptions.
     No license fee shall be required for the issuance of a tag for any dog owned as a pet of a blind person, or certified as being duly and properly trained to aid or assist blind persons when such dog is actually being used by a blind person for the purpose of aiding or assisting such blind person, and the director, or the Long Beach tax collector, shall annually issue tags free of charge to owners or persons having the custody and control of such dogs. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.080 Tag—Counterfeit prohibited.
     No person shall imitate or counterfeit any tag, receipt, or registration certificate required or issued pursuant to this chapter or use any imitation or counterfeit of any such tag, receipt or certificate. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.08.090 Exhibit of receipt or tag required.
     No person owning or having in his control any dog subject to license under this chapter shall refuse to show upon demand to the director, license investigators of the Long Beach tax collector’s office, or any police officer, the city dog license receipt or the license tag for any duly registered dog. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.12 RABIES CONTROL
6.12.010 Owner report responsibility.
     Whenever the owner or person having custody or control of any dog or other animal observes or learns that such dog or animal shows symptoms of rabies, or acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that the dog or animal may have rabies, the owner or person having the custody or control of the dog or animal shall immediately notify the Long Beach health officer, and it shall be the duty of the health officer, when called upon, to examine or have examined the dog or animal and to ascertain whether or not the dog or animal is afflicted with rabies, and no owner or person having the custody or control of any such dog shall fail, refuse or neglect to notify the health officer. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.020 Suspected infection.
     Whenever the director, or any other person, captures a dog or any other animal suspected of having rabies, he shall deliver the same to the animal shelter or shall confine the same in some safe place and shall immediately report the same to the health officer, and it shall be the duty of the health officer, when called upon, to examine or cause to be examined any such dog or other animal and to ascertain whether or not any such dog or animal is afflicted with rabies. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.030 Refusal to report prohibited.
     No owner or person having custody or control of any dog or other animal showing symptoms of rabies, or that acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that such dog or animal may have rabies, or whenever it is shown that any dog or other animal has bitten any person, shall refuse or fail to submit such dog or animal to inspection or examination by the health officer or his representative in order to ascertain whether or not such dog or animal is afflicted with rabies. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.040 Dog bite—Report.
     Any person having knowledge that any dog has bitten any person shall immediately and without delay advise the director or the police department of such fact, furnishing such information as he may possess relative to the identity of the animal and its owner, or the person in care, custody and control of such animal, and the person bitten. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.050 Dog bite—Identification of animal.
     Upon receipt of a report as described in Section 6.12.040, the director shall undertake all measures necessary to the identification of the subject dog and its owner or the person in care, custody or control of the animal, and upon the identification of the dog or person, or both, shall inform the health officer thereof. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.060 Dog bite—Quarantine.
     A.    Upon written order of the health officer or his authorized representative so directing any person, the owner or person in care, custody and control of a dog having bitten any person shall cause the animal to be kept in strict quarantine in a closed, fenced yard, kennel or animal shelter for a period of fourteen (14) days and shall permit the health officer or his authorized representative to inspect or examine the dog at any time during the period.

     B.     The health officer shall have the power, in his discretion, to quarantine the animal in the animal shelter. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.070 Dog bite—Quarantine order.
     A.    Upon the issuance of a written order of quarantine as described in Section 6.12.060, the person to whom such order is directed shall permit the health officer or his authorized representative to post a printed or written notice of the quarantine order upon or about the premises wherein the subject dog is confined.

     B.     No person shall obscure, deface, render illegible, or remove the posted notice during the quarantine period. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.080 Dog bite—Redemption from animal shelter.
     Whenever any dog or other animal is quarantined in the animal shelter for inspection, examination or observation for rabies, and at the expiration of the period of quarantine, the dog or other animal is determined by the health officer or his representative to be free from said disease, then the director shall immediately cause the owner of the dog or animal, if known, to be notified to redeem the dog or other animal from the animal shelter within the time and in the same manner provided for the redemption of other impounded dogs or animals. The owner of any animal which has been quarantined in the animal shelter shall pay to director the boarding fee established by the city council by resolution for the period the animal is held under quarantine in the animal shelter. If the dog or other animal is not redeemed after the period of such quarantine within the time specified for redemption of impounded animals, then the dog or other animal shall be disposed of in the same manner provided for the disposition of other impounded dogs or animals. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.090 Impoundment of diseased animals.
     If it appears to the health officer or his representative that any dog or other animal has rabies, it shall be his duty to immediately quarantine the dog or other animal at the animal shelter, subject to his further orders, or to notify the director to destroy such animal and dispose of its carcass. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.100 Contact with rabid animal.
     Every dog which has been bitten by a rabid dog or which has come in contact or consorted with a rabid dog, or which has been harbored in the same home, apartment, kennel or part of any premises with a rabid dog, shall be kept isolated and under quarantine for ninety (90) days in a veterinary hospital approved by the health officer, or surrendered to the director to be destroyed. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.110 Inoculation—Required.
     No person shall keep, own or harbor any dog in the city, for a period of thirty (30) days or more unless:

     A.    Such dog has been inoculated with chick embryo rabies vaccine within the last preceding two years; or

     B.     Such dog has been inoculated with nerve tissue rabies vaccine within the last preceding year; or

     C.     Such dog is less than four months of age; or

     D.    Such dog is in such a state of health that inoculation at the time would be hazardous to the life of the dog, as evidenced by the written, dated and signed statement of any licensed veterinarian, and approved by the authority of the health officer. Such statement shall provide exemption from the requirements of this section for a maximum period of one year, unless such statement is endorsed for a different period of time by authority of the health officer. The health officer shall not authorize the endorsement of the statement for any period of time unless the illness of the dog requires it. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.120 Inoculation—Certificate.
     Every person owning, keeping or harboring a dog in the city, whenever such dog is required to be inoculated by the provisions of Section 6.12.110, shall have such dog inoculated against rabies by a licensed veterinarian. The inoculation by any person licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state, or in the event the dog is inoculated in any state other than California, then the inoculation by any person authorized or permitted by such state to practice veterinary medicine, shall be deemed to be inoculated by a licensed veterinarian. The health officer shall, at such intervals of time as he deems necessary, provide for the rabies inoculation of such dog upon payment of a fee established therefor by the city council by resolution. The health officer shall issue to such person a certificate of inoculation, signed under the authority of the health officer, stating thereon the breed and description of the dog, the date of the inoculation, and the type of vaccine used. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.130 Inoculation—Required for license issuance.
     Annually, on or before the renewal date for the license tag, every person owning, keeping or harboring a dog, and required by the provisions of Chapter 6.08 to secure a license tag for such dog, shall provide evidence satisfactory to the licensing authority of compliance with Section 6.12.110. A certificate of inoculation or a statement of health containing the information required by Sections 6.12.110 and 6.12.120, signed under the authority of the health officer or a licensed veterinarian shall be deemed satisfactory evidence of compliance with Section 6.12.110. No dog license shall be issued unless and until the requirements of this section are fulfilled. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.140 Inoculation—Record.
     The director shall, at the time a dog license is issued, record on the register provided for by Section 6.08.030, the date of inoculation, the type of vaccine used, or the reason no vaccine was used. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.12.150 Rabies vaccination certificates.
     Every person practicing veterinary medicine in the city of Long Beach who vaccinates a dog with rabies vaccine shall issue to the person to whom he delivers the dog the original certificate and to the director of animal control of the city of Long Beach a copy of every rabies immunization certificate issued by said veterinarian. The certificate should contain the following:

     A.    Name, address, and telephone number of the dog’s owner;

     B.     A description of the dog, including breed, color, sex, and age;

     C.     The date of rabies immunization;

     D.    The type of rabies vaccine administered;

     E.     The name of the manufacturer and the lot number of the vaccine used;

     F.     The veterinarian’s name, address, and telephone number either stamped, printed or typed on the certificate;

     G.    The signature of the veterinarian who administered the vaccine or the signature of a person authorized by the veterinarian to sign the certificate. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.16 ANIMAL REGULATION
6.16.010 Livestock.
     No person shall have, keep, maintain or have in possession or under control any ox, steer, bull, cow, calf, horse, mare, stallion, colt, jack, mule, sheep, goat, or hog within the city limits. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.020 Livestock—Driving in street.
     No person, as principal, agent, employee or otherwise, shall drive or conduct along any street, avenue, place, lane, alley, park or other public place any ox, steer, bull, cow, calf, horse, stallion, colt, jack, mule, sheep, goat or hog without having such animal or animals enclosed in some conveyance or tied or otherwise attached to some person or vehicle in such manner that such animal or animals cannot run at large or enter upon private property, or drive or conduct a herd or any number of such animals along any street or other public place without obtaining a written permit therefor from the police department, and such permit shall be granted only upon the applicant’s therefor depositing with the police department a certified check on a responsible bank in the city in the amount as established by resolution of the city council in lawful money of the United States, which money shall be transmitted to the city treasurer for the purpose of paying any damage that may be done or caused by any such animal or animals while being so driven or conducted, and said deposit shall inure to the benefit of every person damaged by such animal or animals while being so driven or conducted, and a lien shall attach to the deposit in behalf of every such person so sustaining damage, provided a claim therefor is filed with the treasurer within five days after such damage has been suffered, and if no claim is so filed the treasurer shall return the deposit upon the filing of a claim for refund thereof after the expiration of five days after the driving or conducting of such animal or animals has been concluded. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.030 Dangerous animals prohibited.
     No person shall have, keep, maintain, or have in possession or under control, within the city, any elephant, bear, hippopotamus, rhinoceros, lion, tiger, leopard, wolf, reptile, serpent, or any dangerous or carnivorous wild animal. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.050 Selling animals in public place.
     No person shall sell, offer or display for sale, barter, or give any live animal to any person on any public street or other public place within the city other than to a person maintaining a fixed place of business wherein such animals are sold. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.060 Animal shop—Report of sales to city.
     Every person who owns, operates or maintains an animal shop, as described in Title 17 of this code, shall report to the director of animal control the name and address of the purchaser of every dog sold by the animal shop, along with the breed, age and description of the animal, on forms provided by the city. The report shall be transmitted to the director no later than ten (10) days from the date of sale. The shop may charge a fee of up to one dollar to the purchaser to cover the cost of the report. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.070 Limitation on number of dogs and cats.
     Except in the instance of an animal shop as provided in Section 6.16.060, no person shall keep or maintain more than three licensed dogs and three cats, over the age of four months, on any lot or parcel of land within the city unless first obtaining a permit therefor. Such permit shall be required in addition to tags or other licenses which may be required by this title. The director may issue a permit for the keeping of four or more dogs or cats in his or her discretion, giving particular concern to the safety and comfort of such animals and the inhabitants of the neighborhood. The permit shall specify the number and types of animals authorized to be kept thereunder and may contain conditions as deemed necessary by the director. Such permit shall be nontransferable and must be renewed annually. Permit fees shall be established by contract with the city of Long Beach or otherwise set by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.080 Breeding prohibited.
     No person, as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, shall breed any stallion, jack, bull, or other animal at any place within the city. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.090 Dogs prohibited on schoolgrounds.
     No person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control, custody or possession of a dog shall permit such dog to be upon any public schoolgrounds. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.100 Dog leash required.
     A.    No person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control, custody or possession of a dog, shall permit such dog to be in or upon any public street, park or other public place unless such dog is upon a secure leash not more than eight feet long held continuously in the hands of a responsible person capable of controlling the dog, or unless the dog is securely confined within an automobile, or in or upon any unenclosed lot or premises, unless the dog is securely leashed upon the unenclosed lot or premises; provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any such person who is in possession or operating within the terms of a valid, unrevoked permit from the city for the conduct of obedience or other types of trial or show of dogs in or upon any public place.

     B.     This section shall not apply to dogs under the control of a competent person in a designated fenced dog exercise and training area in a city park or portion of a city park approved and designated for that purpose by the city council.

     C.     The following regulations and limitations shall apply to all dog exercise and training areas:

     1.     Designated off-leash exercise and training areas will be open from six a.m. to ten p.m.

     2.     As a condition of admission to such dog exercise and training areas, the owner of such dog must carry a suitable container or instrument for the removal and disposal of dog feces.

     3.     Owners of dogs making use of the facilities shall clean all dog feces from the designated area.

     4.     Aggressive dogs are not permitted in the exercise and training areas. Owners are legally responsible for any injury caused by their dog.

     5.     Any dog over the age of four months shall have been vaccinated and legally licensed prior to use of the designated exercise and training area.

     6.     Female dogs in heat are not permitted to use the facilities.

     7.     Professional dog trainers may not use the facilities in the conduct of their business.

     8.     There shall be no smoking in the exercise and training area.

     9.     The owner of any dog using the designated exercise and training area must have in his possession at all times that the dog is in the exercise and training area a leash for such dog which shall be worn by the dog at all times the dog is not in the exercise and training area.

     10.   Owners will otherwise comply with all rules governing the parks and relevant parking regulations.

     11.   Use of the dog exercise and training area by any dog shall constitute implied consent of the dog’s owner to all of the conditions stated in this section and shall constitute a waiver of liability to the city and an agreement and undertaking to protect, indemnify, defend and hold the city harmless for any injury or damage caused by such dog during any time that the dog is not on its leash. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.110 Dog noise—Permitting prohibited.
     No person shall permit any dog under his control to bark, howl, whine and make other loud and unusual noises, whether within a building or enclosure, tied, or otherwise confined, or while at large upon any public street, so as to annoy and become offensive to the neighborhood or persons residing immediately surrounding the habitation of the same. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.120 Dog noise—Causing by confinement.
     No person shall tie up, lock up, or enclose, and leave unattended any dog under his control within any house, garage or similar structure by reason of which the dog barks, howls, whines or makes other loud and unusual noises so as to annoy and become offensive to the neighborhood or persons residing immediately surrounding the habitation of the same. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.130 Food business—Keeping animals prohibited.
     No person shall keep any dog or other animal in any bakery, restaurant, lunch stand, or other place of business wherein food or foodstuffs are served or sold. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.140 Food business—Permitting animal at large prohibited.
     No owner of any dog or any other animal shall permit the same to run at large in any place where food or foodstuffs are served, displayed, and offered for sale or shall permit any dog or any other animal to come in contact with any food products intended for human consumption in any such place of business where food or foodstuffs are served, displayed or offered for sale. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.150 Food business—Allowing animal on premises prohibited.
     No owner, operator, manager, or employee of any place of business where food or foodstuffs are served, displayed or offered for sale shall permit any dog on said premises or in such place of business, except where that business permits dogs in the patio dining area. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.160 Possession without owner’s consent.
     No person, not the owner thereof, and without the consent of the owner thereof, shall hold or retain in his possession any dog within the city for any period longer than twenty-four (24) hours unless such person reports the same, with the true description thereof, to the director. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.200 Defecation removal required.
     No person owning, having a proprietary interest in, harboring or having the care, charge, control, custody or possession of any animal shall permit such animal to defecate on any public sidewalk, park, or building, or on any private property without the consent of the owner of such private property, unless such person removes any such defecation to a proper trash receptacle. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.210 Enforcement.
     A.    The director of animal control, the senior animal control officer and all animal control officers employed by the department of health and human services, animal control bureau, shall have the duty to enforce the sections included in this chapter and are authorized, pursuant to the California Penal Code, Section 836.5, to arrest persons and to prepare, issue and deliver to any such arrested person written notice to appear in court and to release such person from custody upon receiving from him his written promise to appear in court for any violation or violations of any section or sections in this chapter. And, license inspectors shall have the duty to enforce Section 6.08.010 and are authorized, pursuant to California Penal Code, Section 836.5, to issue citations for any violation of Section 6.08.010. Additionally, those employees of the city holding the classified positions of park district supervisor and park crew supervisor employed by the department of parks and recreation and those employees holding the classified position of security officer employed in the department of parks and recreation shall have the duty to enforce Sections 6.16.100 and 6.16.200 and are authorized, pursuant to California Penal Code, Section 836.5, to arrest persons and to prepare, issue and deliver to any such arrested person written notice to appear in court and to release such person from custody upon receiving from his written promise to appear in court for any violation or violations of Section 6.16.100 or Section 6.16.200.

     B.     Nothing in this section is intended to operate either in addition to or in contravention of Title 3, Chapter 4.5, of the Penal Code which expressly designates those persons who are classified as peace officers.

     C.     Further, nothing in this section is intended to or shall operate to change or shall have the effect of changing the status of the officers and employees authorized to act pursuant to this section from public or miscellaneous officers and employees to individual peace officers or safety members or classes of peace officers or safety members for purposes of retirement, workmen’s compensation or similar injury or death benefits or any other employee benefit or benefits to which said officer or employee would not have been entitled as a public or miscellaneous officer or employee prior to the adoption of this section. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.220 Refunds.
     In the event the director or the director’s designee determines after the sale of an animal by the animal control division that the animal bites or destroys property, or that an examining veterinarian has determined that the animal is ill and there are sufficient facts and circumstances which indicate that the illness was incurred by the animal prior to the sale, the director or the director’s designee may authorize the refund of the purchase price, inoculation fee, licensee fee, and any other fees or charges paid by the purchaser to the animal control division in connection with the sale of the animal; provided, that the purchaser of the animal files a written request for the refund with the animal control division within fifteen (15) days after the date of the sale of the animal. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.240 Dead animal disposal.
     The carcass of any dead horse, cow, mule, or donkey not slaughtered for human food shall be removed and disposed of by the owner of the carcass. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.250 Vicious animals—Defined.
     A.    “Vicious animal” is any animal which bites or attempts to bite any human or animal without provocation, or which has a disposition or propensity to attack, bite or menace any human or animal without provocation and endangers the health and safety of any person.

     B.     Any animal who bites or attempts to bite a person or other animal that is unlawfully on its owner’s premises, or which has been provoked or teased, or which is otherwise performing its duties as a police dog, shall not be deemed to be a vicious animal. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.260 Impoundment of vicious animal.
     A.    Any law enforcement or animal control officer of the city shall have the authority summarily and immediately to impound a dog or other animal where there is evidence it is vicious within the meaning of this chapter.

     B.     Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, such official may enter private property at all reasonable times to inspect same or to perform any duty imposed by this chapter; provided, that if such private property is occupied, such official shall first present proper credentials and demand entry. If entry is refused, or if the owner or other person having control of such property is not present to permit entry, such official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry at a later time.

     C.     Any person keeping or harboring such dog or other animal subject to being impounded who fails to surrender the animal to such official upon demand shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.

     D.    If the dog or other animal cannot be safely taken up and impounded, it may be destroyed forthwith by such law enforcement or animal control officer. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.270 Vicious animal hearing.
     Where there exists evidence sufficient to give rise to the suspicion that a dog or other animal falls within the provisions of Section 6.16.250(A), the director shall conduct a hearing for the purpose of determining whether the dog or other animal is a vicious animal. The director shall notify the owner of the animal, and may notify any interested parties of the time and place of hearing. At such hearing the owner and any interested party shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence relevant to the issue.

     After such hearing the director is empowered to declare such dog or other animal to be a vicious animal. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.280 Disposition of vicious animals.
     Any dog or other animal declared to be a vicious animal may, at the discretion of the director, be humanely destroyed. Such humane destruction shall occur no earlier than ten days following notice given to the owner of such animal of intention to destroy. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.290 Issuance of rules and regulations—Summary destruction.
     A.    If, after the hearing provided in this chapter, it is determined that the dog or other animal is vicious, the director, if he elects not to destroy the animal, may issue certain rules and regulations pertaining to the keeping and containing of such animal.

     B.     If such dog or other animal is thereafter determined to be in violation of any rule or regulation as made pursuant to subsection A of this section, such animal shall be impounded and thereafter subject to summary destruction no earlier than ten days following notice given to the owner of intention to destroy.

     C.     Any owner of a dog or other animal who knowingly permits such animal to violate any rule and regulation set forth pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.16.300 Liability for charges.
     The owner of a dog or other animal impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be liable for any and all of the prevailing board and keep charges at the animal control center. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.20 FOWL, RABBITS AND GOATS
6.20.010 Fowl.
     No person shall have, keep, maintain or have in possession or under control any live fowl within the city. “Live fowl” means and includes male and female chicken, duck, goose, seafowl, peacock, turkey and pheasant. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.020 Rabbits—Number restricted.
     No person shall keep or maintain more than a total of five rabbits on any lot or parcel of land within the city. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.030 Rabbits—Distance from dwelling.
     A.    Except as provided in subsection B, no person shall keep or maintain any rabbit within the city less than fifty (50) feet from any single-family or two-family dwelling or less than one hundred (100) feet from any hotel or dwelling occupied by, or designed for the occupancy of three or more families.

     B.     One live rabbit may be kept or maintained as a pet on any lot or parcel of land within the city, provided that the pen, coop or other such enclosure for any such pet rabbit shall be no less than twenty (20) feet from any structure designed or used for human habitation. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.060 Rabbits—Dealers exempt.
     Nothing contained in this chapter shall be deemed to prohibit the keeping of rabbits by regularly licensed dealers for the purpose of sale at their respective places of business. Such animals shall be kept and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and such dealers shall conform to and abide by the rules and regulations of the health department with reference to the keeping of such animals on the premises of such dealers. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.120 Rabbits—Artificial coloring prohibited.
     A.    No person, by means of any application to or upon the exterior portion thereof or in any other manner, shall dye, artificially color or alter or otherwise change the natural color of any live rabbit.

     B.     No person shall sell, offer or display for sale, barter or give to any person any live rabbit, the natural color of which animal has been changed by dyeing, coloring, or any other artificial manner.

     C.     No person shall sell, offer for sale, barter or give away any rabbit under two months of age, as pets, toys, premiums or novelties. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.140 Goats—Prohibited.
     No person shall keep or maintain any live goat in any portion of the city. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.160 Rabbits—Enclosure sanitation.
     Wherever live rabbits are permitted to be kept or maintained in the city, no person so keeping or maintaining such rabbits shall fail at any time to keep the pens, hutches, spaces or other enclosures wherein such rabbits are enclosed in a clean and sanitary condition or fail to remove the manure or other debris from such enclosures daily. No person shall fail to conform to and abide by the rules and regulations of the health department with reference to the keeping of such rabbits in such enclosures. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.20.170 Rabbits—Running at large prohibited.
     No person shall allow any rabbits owned or controlled by such person to run at large. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.22 INSECT CONTROL MEASURES
6.22.010 Insect control measures.
     A.    All premises shall be cleaned, and effective insecticides applied, as often as necessary to prevent the harboring of fleas, flies, roaches, stinging insects, venomous arachnids, and other insects that may be a danger to the public health. Stinging insects include, but are not limited to, Africanized honeybees; and

     B.     It shall be unlawful for any property owner or tenant to maintain or permit a beehive, nest or swarm to exist that may pose a danger to the public health and safety. This includes a managed hive that has become Africanized. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.24 PIGEONS AND BEES
6.24.010 Beehives.
     A.    No person shall establish or maintain a beehive anywhere within the city.

     B.     For the purposes of this section, a “beehive” means any box, container, structure, chamber or shelter within which bees are kept or of which bees have taken possession. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

 

6.24.020 Pigeon keeping—Prohibited.
     No person shall have, keep, maintain, or have in possession or under control any pigeon within the city. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Chapter 6.28 POLICE ANIMALS
6.28.010 Protection of animals utilized by police department.
     It is unlawful for any person to willfully tease, taunt, torment, strike, kick, mutilate, disable, or otherwise injure, or kill, or to interfere or meddle with any dog while such animal is being utilized by the police department or any officer or employee thereof, in the performance of any function or duty of the department, or of such officer or employee. (Ord. 647 § 3, 2001)

Title 7 (Reserved)

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY
Chapter 8.04 BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.08 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
Chapter 8.12 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Chapter 8.13 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
Chapter 8.16 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
Chapter 8.20 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE
Chapter 8.24 LITTER
Chapter 8.28 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION
Chapter 8.32 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Chapter 8.36 SMOKING
Chapter 8.40 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
Chapter 8.44 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROLS
Chapter 8.48 LIGHTING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
Chapter 8.52 UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS

Chapter 8.04 BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS
8.04.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to set forth regulations governing the use of burglary and robbery alarms; to require permits therefor and to establish fees and provide a penalty for violations. The city finds and determines that the regulation of alarm systems and the control of false alarms is necessary to promote the health, welfare and safety of the people, in that a substantial number of alarm systems either mechanically malfunction or are not operated systems by their users resulting in substantial waste of peace officer time, thereby causing an increase in false alarm reports, and thereby creating a hazard to the safety of peace officers and the public in general. (Ord. 543 § 2, 1991; Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, certain words and phrases shall be construed as set forth in this section unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended.

     “Alarm agent” means any person employed by an alarm business whose duties include the altering, installing, maintaining, moving, repairing, replacing, selling, servicing, responding to, (excluding public safety officers) or causing others to respond to an alarm system in or on any building, structure or facility.

     “Alarm business” means any person, firm or corporation conducting or engaging in the business of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, removing, installing or monitoring an alarm system in or on any building, place or premises. (This section shall exclude the Los Alamitos police department.)

     “Alarm system” means any mechanical or electrical device which is designed or used for the detection of fire, intrusion into a building, structure or facilities, or for alerting others of an event within a facility, or both, which events cause a local audible sound or transmission of a signal message. Alarm systems include but are not limited to direct dial devices, audible alarms and proprietor alarms. Not included within this definition are devices which are not designed or used to evoke a police response, or to register alarms that are intended to be audible, visible or perceptible outside of the protected building, structure or facility, or auxiliary devices installed by a telephone company to protect its systems which might be damaged or disrupted by the use of an alarm system.

     “Applicant” means a person, firm or corporation who files an application for a permit as provided in this chapter.

     “Audible alarm” means a device designed for the detection of an intrusion on premises which generates an audible sound on the premises when it is activated.

     “Automatic dialing device” means any alarm system which automatically sends over regular telephone lines, by direct connection or otherwise, a prerecorded voice message or coded signal indicating the existence of the emergency situation that the alarm is designed to detect.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Day” means a calendar day.

     “False alarm” means the activation of an alarm system caused by mechanical failure, accident, misoperation, malfunction, misuse or the negligence of either the owner or lessee of the alarm system or their employees or agents prompting response by the police department or other emergency service, where an emergency situation for which the alarm system was designed or used does not exist.

     “Nonemergency response status” means that category in which an alarm system is placed as a result of permit suspension or revocation, thereby relieving the police department of the duty to respond.

     “Notice” means written notice, served personally or mailed, postage prepaid, addressed to the person to be notified at his last known address. Service of such notice shall be deemed effected upon completion of personal service or upon deposit of such notice in the United States mail.

     “Permittee” means any person, firm, partnership, association or corporation who or which shall be granted a permit, as approved herein, and his or its agents and representatives.

     “Person” means a person, firm, corporation, association, partnership, individual, organization or company.

     “Proprietary system” means an alarm system sounding and/or recording alarm and supervisory signals at a control center located within the protected premises, the control center being under the supervision of the subscriber of the protected premises. If a proprietary system includes a signal line connected directly or by means of an automatic dialing device to the police department, a central station or answering service, it thereby becomes an “alarm system” as defined in this chapter.

     “Robbery” is the felonious taking of personal property in the possession of another, from his person or immediate presence and against his will, accompanied by means of force or fear. (Ord. 543 § 2, 1991; Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.030 Alarm agent—Registration required.
     Any person acting as or performing the duties of an alarm agent within the city shall carry on his or her person at all times while so engaged a valid registration issued to him or her by the State Director of Consumer Affairs pursuant to the provisions of Section 7515 of the California Business and Professions Code, and shall display such card to any officer or agent of the city upon request. Further, no person shall perform the duties of an alarm agent unless he or she has provided a copy of his Consumer Affairs registration card to the chief of police. (Ord. 585 § 4, 1994; Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.040 Alarm business permit— Required.
     No person who is not licensed by the California Department of Consumer Affairs shall be issued a permit to operate an alarm business in the city. No person shall operate or conduct an alarm business in the city without first obtaining a permit issued by the city. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.050 Alarm business permit— Application.
     Application for an alarm business permit shall be filed with the city business licensing clerk on forms provided by the city. The application shall be signed and verified by the owner or manager of the alarm company for which the permit is requested and the application shall contain such information as required by the city in order to ensure that the permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.060 Alarm business permit— Application—Investigation.
     Upon receiving from any person an application for an alarm business permit, the city shall cause an investigation by the police department to be made to determine if the person complies with the provisions of this chapter. If the person complies with this chapter, the chief of police will approve and cause a permit to be issued. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.070 Alarm system permit—Required.
     No person shall install, or use an alarm system without first applying for and receiving an alarm permit issued by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.080 Alarm system permit— Application.
     Application for an alarm permit shall be filed with the business licensing clerk on forms provided by the city and the applicant shall, at the time of application, pay the fee established by resolution of the city council. The application shall be signed and verified by the owner or lessee of the alarm system for which the permit is requested and the application shall contain such information as may be required by the city in order to ensure that the permit is issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Permits provided for in this chapter shall only be issued upon approval of the chief of police and shall be nontransferable. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.090 Alarm system permit— Application—Investigation.
     Upon receiving an application for any person for an alarm permit, the city shall cause an investigation to be made of the system to determine if the system complies with the requirements of this chapter. If the proposed system complies with this chapter, the chief of police will cause a permit to be issued. An alarm permittee may be allowed a direct connection to the Los Alamitos police department alarm system, provided facilities are available for direct connection. Each alarm permit holder whose system directly connects with the Los Alamitos police department shall pay to the city on or before January 1st of each year, a monitoring fee set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.100 Alarm permit renewal.
     Each alarm permit holder shall apply for renewal of that permit on or before January 1st of each year on a renewal request form provided by the city, and shall pay to the city the renewal fee set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.110 Separate alarm system permit required.
     A separate alarm permit shall be required for each premises on which an alarm system is used or installed. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.120 Correction of information.
     Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by the alarm business or alarm system permit application, the permittee shall give written notice of such change to the enforcing authority within twenty (20) days. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.130 Exceptions.
     The provisions of this chapter are not applicable to audible alarms affixed to automobiles, boats, boat trailers or recreational vehicles. If a residential alarm user is over the age of sixty-five (65) and is the primary resident of the residence and if no business is conducted in the residence, an alarm permit may be obtained without the fee. The resident shall abide by all other requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.140 Limitations of liability.
     The city is under no obligation or duty to the permittee or any other person by reason of any provision of this chapter, or the exercise of any privilege by any permittee hereunder including but not limited to any defects in a police or fire alarm system, any delay in transmission of an alarm message to any emergency unit or damage caused by delay in responding to any alarm by any city employee, officer or agent or by reason of the discontinuance or suspension of service. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.150 Alarm standards and requirements.
     The chief of police shall adopt written standards and regulations governing the installation of alarm systems and related equipment. In addition to such standards, the following shall apply:

     A.    Audible Alarm Requirements.

     1.     Every audible alarm installed shall have a timing device which automatically shuts off the alarm within fifteen (15) minutes (residential) and thirty (30) minutes (commercial) after it is activated.

     2.     Every audible alarm without such time device shall be required to have such a device installed within ninety (90) days from the enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter.

     3.     No person shall install or maintain any audible alarm or other alarm system annunciator affixed to the exterior of a building which, upon activation, emits a sound similar to sirens in use on emergency vehicles or for civil defense purposes.

     B.     Delay Device Requirements. All burglary alarm systems to which the police are expected to respond shall include a device which will provide a minimum of thirty (30) second delay of the original transmission of alarm, and activate a signal immediately in such a manner as to be perceptible to a person entering, leaving or occupying the premises. Such a device is intended to provide an opportunity for the person having lawful control of the alarm system to terminate the alarm.

     C.     Power Supply. An alarm system shall be supplied with an uninterruptible power supply in such a manner that the failure or interruption of normal utility electricity will not activate the alarm system. The power supply must be capable of at least four hours of operation.

     D.    Testing Alarm. The permittee shall notify the police department prior to any service, test, repair, maintenance, adjustment, alterations or installations which might activate a false alarm.

     E.     Alarm Systems — Automatic Dialing Devices. It is unlawful for any person except a public utility engaged in the business of providing communications services and facilities to use or operate, attempt to use or operate, or cause to be used or operated, or arrange, adjust, program or otherwise provide or to install any alarm system that will upon activation, either mechanical, electronic or by other automatic means, initiate an intrastate call and deliver a recorded message to any telephone number assigned to any public telephone company subscriber without the prior written consent of such subscriber.

     F.     Notice of Change. Whenever any change occurs relating to the written information required by this chapter, the applicant or permittee shall give written notice thereof to the police department within twenty (20) days after such change or at any hearing conducted under this chapter if such hearing is conducted before the notice has been given. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.160 Enforcement provisions.
     The enforcing authority is directed to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter. The enforcing authority shall be the Los Alamitos police department. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.170 Confidentiality.
     Information furnished and secured pursuant to this chapter shall be confidential in character and shall not be subject to public inspection, and shall be kept so that the contents thereof shall not be known except to persons charged with the administration of this chapter. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.180 False alarm prevention payment.
     A.    When emergency alarms, messages, signals or notices are received by the police department which evidence a failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, or a permit issued hereunder, the chief of police is authorized to direct that the owner or lessee of the alarm system initiating such alarms, messages, signals or notices, or his representative, disconnect the alarm system until it is made to comply with such requirements.

     B.     The owner or lessee of any alarm system which has caused any signal message, or alarm to be transmitted to the police department, either by telephone or other communication, or by communication from an alarm agent, or an alarm business, or by a person responding to an audible alarm, and which is proved to be a false alarm, shall pay a false alarm prevention fee, established by resolution of the city council, for the following:

     1.     For false alarms in excess of three received in a twelve (12) month period by the police department, the owner or lessee shall be assessed a fee for each such alarm.

     2.     For false alarms in excess of six received in a twelve (12) month period by the police department, the owner or lessee shall be assigned an increased fee for each such alarm. In addition, proceedings will commence to revoke the alarm system permit.

     3.     Any deliberate activation of a false alarm indicating a violation of California Penal Code Section 211 (Robbery).

     C.     An alarm permit may be suspended or revoked in addition to the false alarm prevention fee, established by resolution of the city council, or in the event of failure to pay such false alarm prevention fee.

     D.    Exceptions. A thirty (30) day adjustment period to correct mechanical problems will be allowed for any new, improved or replaced alarm system, provided the user demonstrates to the chief of police that any false alarm was the result of conditions beyond his control and not the result of negligence on his part or that of his employees. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.190 Permit suspension.
     Upon evidence that any section of this chapter has been violated, and when written notice thereof has been served upon the permittee, either by personal service or by certified mail, the chief of police may suspend an alarm permit for a period of ten days, during which time such alarm system shall not be used and shall be placed on nonemergency response status. Failure or refusal by permittee to correct any condition in violation of the sections of this chapter within the ten-day suspension period may result in revocation of the alarm system permit, as provided hereinafter. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.200 Permit revocation.
     When an alarm permit is to be revoked, the chief of police shall give the permittee fifteen (15) days notice of his intention to do so by personal service or by certified mail, postage prepaid, addressed to permittee at the address set forth on the permit application. Upon failure of permittee to present satisfactory evidence to the chief of police that the system has been repaired, replaced or altered, or to pay the false alarm prevention fee within such fifteen (15) day period, or to file an appeal to the city manager, as provided in this chapter, the permit shall be revoked at the expiration of such fifteen (15) day period, and the alarm system shall be placed on non-emergency response status and shall not be used until a new permit has been issued. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.210 Right to discontinue response.
     The chief of police reserves the right to discontinue response by police officers to any location of a silent or audible alarm when the permit has been suspended or revoked. Reinstatement may occur when the permittee has taken steps to eliminate or correct the problem(s), has documented the corrective action in writing to the chief of police, and has paid all penalty assessments. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.220 Notice of appeal.
     If any permittee is aggrieved by any action of the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant may appeal to the city manager by filing with the city clerk a notice of appeal, setting forth the facts and circumstances regarding the appeal. This notice of appeal shall be filed not later than fifteen (15) days after service of a notice of revocation as provided for in this chapter. The city manager or duly authorized representative shall, within fifteen (15) days from the date on which the appeal is filed, hold a hearing, consider all relevant evidence produced by the alarm permittee, the chief of police and any other interested parties, make findings and determine the merits of the appeal. The city manager may affirm, overrule or modify the decision of the chief of police and, the decision of the city manager shall be final. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.230 Fees.
     The fees prescribed in this chapter shall be in addition to any other lawful fees imposed by the city for doing or conducting business within the city. (Ord. 524, 1990)

 

8.04.240 Violation—Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to install, use or maintain any alarm system contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor and is punishable by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six months or by fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by both. (Ord. 524, 1990)

Chapter 8.08 FIRE ALARM SYSTEMS
8.08.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “Alarm” means the giving, signaling or transmission to the fire department, its station(s) or companies or to any officer or employee thereof, whether by telephone, spoken word or otherwise, an indication or information to the effect that there is a fire or other emergency at or near the place indicated by the person, devices or system giving, signaling or transmitting such information.

     “Alarm business” means the work, occupation or profession of any person who performs, authorizes, directs or causes the selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing, inspection, repairing, altering, replacement, moving or installing of any alarm system, including any business that monitors alarms.

     “Alarm system” means any manual, mechanical or electrically operated circuits, instruments and/or devices, when activated emits a sound or transmits alarms, a message and/or trouble signals for the protection of life and property from heat, smoke, fire, hazardous materials or medical emergency. Provided, however, that this definition shall not include domestic smoke, fire or burglar alarm devices whose primary purpose is to awaken or alert persons on the premises and which emit a light or sound only within the protected premises.

     “Alarm subscriber” means any person who purchases, leases, contracts for, or otherwise obtains an alarm system or the servicing or maintenance of an alarm system.

     “Automatic communication device” means any electrical, electronic or mechanical device capable of being programmed to send a prerecorded message, when activated, over a telephone line or dedicated circuit to a central station.

     “Central station” means an office to which remote and supervisory signaling circuits are connected, where personnel are in attendance at all times to supervise the circuits and investigate signals.

     “Direct alarm systems” means alarm systems electrically or otherwise connected directly to the emergency response agency from the protected premises.

     “False alarm” means an alarm necessitating response by the fire department where an emergency situation does not exist. This shall include mechanical failure, accidental tripping, misoperation, malfunction, misuse or neglect of an alarm system.

     “Fire department” means the Orange County fire department. Fire department includes and also means the emergency response agency.

     “Person” means any individual, occupant, business owner, partnership, corporation or other entity. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.020 Alarm systems, standards and regulations.
     All alarm systems shall meet or exceed the standards established by the fire department including National Fire Protection Association Codes 72A and 72C, and such other regulations as may be adopted by the Orange County board of supervisors. All alarm systems, equipment, installations and repairs and all fire and other emergency drills shall comply with rules and regulations promulgated by the emergency response agency or the fire department regulating the times and conditions under which such installations, repairs, tests or drills may be made. All audible alarm systems shall, after activation, limit the generation of the audible sound to a maximum of fifteen (15) minutes when the system is protecting residential premises, and thirty (30) minutes when an alarm is protecting any other premises. The limitation shall be incorporated into the equipment at the protected premises. The systems may include an automatic resetting device causing the alarm system to rearm upon automatic shutoff. The director or designee of the fire department may exempt any alarm system or kind or type of alarm system from any or all of the requirements of this chapter if in his opinion such system does not create a substantial danger of generating false alarms necessitating a response by an emergency response agency or the fire department. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.030 Central station permit.
     All central stations or any business which receives signals that an emergency exists at a protected premises and transmits that information to the emergency response agency or the fire department shall be required to have a permit from the fire department which shall be renewed annually. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.040 Automatic communication devices.
     A.    No automatic communication device shall be programmed to the 911 emergency line.

     B.     Direct alarm systems shall not be connected to an emergency response agency or the fire department except with permission of the emergency response agency or the department.

     C.     No person shall lease, maintain, install or use any alarm system which automatically direct dials the telephone number of the fire department. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.050 Responsibilities of alarm businesses and alarm systems subscribers or users.
     A.    Each alarm business shall provide accurate and complete instructions to the alarm system user in the proper use and operation of the system which is provided to the user by that business or which is monitored by that business. Specific emphasis shall be placed on the avoidance of false alarms.

     B.     The alarm subscriber or user shall maintain the alarm system and equipment in proper working order at all times.

     C.     When an alarm system has been activated for an alarm subscriber, the alarm business or central station shall arrange for a representative to have the ability to be present at the location of the alarm within one hour after being requested by the fire department. The user of an alarm system which is not connected to an alarm business or central station shall designate a person to be available to respond to the protected property within one hour after being requested by the fire department. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.060 Alarm business, central station and false alarm service charges.
     In addition to such other fines or penalties established by law, a false alarm service fee is imposed upon the residential occupants and/or commercial owner and/or operator of the premises wherein a false alarm was made and any central station owners and operators who initiated the fire department’s response to such premises. The board of supervisors of the county of Orange is authorized to provide by resolution the amount of each fee which shall be charged to those city residents who incur false alarm charges and/or penalties and other miscellaneous charges relating to alarm systems and businesses for services provided by the fire department. The fees are imposed effective January 1, 1991, as may be amended by the county of Orange from time to time. The county of Orange is authorized to administer and take collection and enforcement action as may be necessary on such fees, charges and/or penalties. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.070 Intentional false alarms— Penalties.
     No person shall intentionally initiate a false alarm except for purposes of testing an alarm system and then only if made in accordance with the rules and regulations of the fire department therefor and after having given the emergency response agency or the fire department prior notice thereof. Any person who violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be also subject to such other penalties prescribed by law. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.080 Tampering with or damaging alarm systems.
     It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, render inoperative or maliciously damage any alarm system maintained for the purpose of sounding or transmitting alarms excepting alarm systems undergoing approved maintenance or repairs. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

 

8.08.090 Violations and enforcement.
     Violations of this chapter shall be an infraction unless otherwise noted herein. This chapter may be enforced by the city and the fire department. (Ord. 543 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 8.12 INTEGRATED WASTE MANAGEMENT
Note
*      Prior history: Ords. 71, 101 and 530.

 

8.12.010 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this chapter. Words and phrases not ascribed a meaning by this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed by Division 30, Part 1, Chapter 2 of the Public Resources Code, Sections 40105 — 40200, and the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, if defined therein, and if not, to the definitions found in the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (“RCRA”), 42 U.S.C. Sections 6901, et seq., and the regulations implementing RCRA, as they may be amended from time to time.

     “AB 939” or “Act” means the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, codified in part at Public Resources Code Sections 40000 et seq., as it may be amended from time to time and as implemented by the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or its successor.

     “Bulky goods” means and includes, but not by way of limitation, large and small household appliances, furniture, carpets, mattresses, white goods, oversized yard waste such as tree trunks and large branches if no larger than two feet in diameter and four feet in length and similar large items.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, California, a municipal corporation, and all of the territory lying within the municipal boundaries of the city as presently existing and all geographic areas which may be added or annexed to the city.

     “City manager” means an individual having that title in the employ of the city of Los Alamitos or the city manager’s duly authorized representative.

     “Civic litter containers” means city-owned receptacles located in public areas for disposal of waste generated by the public in public places, which meet the standards of 14 C.C.R. Chapter 3, Article 9, Sections 17830, et seq., as amended.

     “Collection” means the act of collecting solid waste at or near the place of generation or temporary accumulation by a solid waste collector.

     “Commercial bins” means those containers provided for temporary accumulation and collection of commercial solid waste from commercial premises. Bins include solid waste containers with nominal capacities of two, three, four, five or six cubic yards, or larger, compactor bins, compactor boxes and roll-off boxes.

     “Commercial premises” means all premises in the city, other than single-family residences, where solid waste is generated or accumulated. The term “commercial premises” includes, but is not limited to, multifamily residences using commercial bins, and not cans or carts for the temporary accumulation of residential solid waste; stores; offices; federal, state, county and local governmental facilities, including, but not limited to schools, school district offices, special districts and water districts (to the extent permitted by law); restaurants; rooming houses; hotels; motels; manufacturing, processing or assembly shops or plants; and hospitals, clinics, convalescent centers and nursing homes (nonmedical waste only).

     “Commercial solid waste” means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, but not hazardous waste or medical waste, generated or accumulated at commercial premises. The term “commercial solid wastes” does not include residential solid waste from single-family residences.

     “Construction and demolition waste” means discarded building materials, recyclable construction and demolition materials, wood, packaging, plaster, rock or brick, drywall, cement and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations. “Construction and demolition waste” does not include asbestos-containing materials or asbestos waste.

     “Construction bin” means any container, commercial roll-off bin or other similar receptacle used for the accumulation and temporary storage of construction and demolition waste or similar material, and which is emptied by means of special collection equipment.

     “Container” means any commercial bin, construction bin, residential solid waste container, vessel, can or other receptacle used for the temporary accumulation, collection and removal of solid wastes, including but not limited to construction and demolition waste, recyclable solid wastes or green waste.

 

     “Continuation/claim hauler” means a solid waste collector which claims a right to collect solid waste based on “continuation rights” as set forth in Public Resources Code Section 49520 et seq., or any other law. No inference shall be drawn from this or any other section of this chapter that the city recognizes any such claim or has determined any solid waste enterprise as eligible for “continuation” or any other rights under the Public Resources Code or other law.

     “Franchise” means the right and privilege: (1) to make arrangements for the collection of and to collect; (2) to transport to landfills, transformation facilities or other licensed solid waste management facilities; and/or (3) to recycle solid waste collected within the city. Any franchise is subject to any continuation or other rights, if any, held by any other solid waste enterprise pursuant to Public Resources Code Section 49520 et seq., or other laws granting the right to provide solid waste hauling services in the city. Roofing debris removed by an entity the primary business of which is roofing and which is not a solid waste enterprise is not within any franchise granted by the city.

     “Franchise fee” means the fee or assessment imposed by the city on a solid waste collector because of its status as a solid waste collector and which, inter alia, is intended to offset the city’s expenses in administering the franchise and to compensate city for damage to its streets, sidewalks, curbs and gutters and other infrastructure resulting from the solid waste collector’s exercise of the franchise, the expenses of administering the solid waste program, reporting requirements under the Act and other related expenses.

     “Generator” means any person or other entity which produces or accumulates solid waste.

     “Green waste” or “yard waste” means leaves, grass clippings, brush, branches and other forms of organic matter generated from landscapes and gardens at residential premises, and incidental pieces of scrap lumber no longer than twenty-four (24) inches separated from other forms of solid waste. Green waste also includes holiday trees. Green waste does not include stumps or branches exceeding four inches in diameter or four feet in length, or palm fronds or other materials which are not suitable for composting.

     “Hazardous waste” means any substance, waste or mixture of wastes defined as a “hazardous substance” or “hazardous waste” pursuant to the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA), 42 U.S.C. Section 6901 et seq., the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act (CERCLA), 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., the California Health and Safety Code, and all future amendments, or as defined by the California Integrated Waste Management Board, or its successor, and any consumer product with the characteristics of a hazardous substance. Where there is a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction over hazardous or solid waste, the term “hazardous waste” shall be construed to have the broader, more encompassing definition.

     “Recyclable material” means a material which has commercial value and which is sold for compensation or donated to an entity other than a solid waste collector or enterprise. Recyclable materials are commodities and not part of the waste stream. Recyclable materials lose their character as recyclable materials upon being disposed of in the waste stream and become solid waste subject to this chapter. If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer or donee, including any solid waste enterprise, any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling, transporting or disposing of recyclable material or for providing consultation or other services which exceed the market price of the recyclable material, the transaction shall not be regarded as a sale or donation of recyclable material, but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste subject to this chapter.

     “Recyclable solid waste” means a form of solid waste which has been separated by a solid waste service recipient before having been disposed of into the waste stream. Recyclable solid waste is a part of the solid waste stream which can be reused or processed into a form suitable for reuse through reprocessing or remanufacture, consistent with the requirements of the Act. The term recyclable solid waste includes both mixed recyclables which have been separated from other solid waste and source-separated single-category recyclable solid waste. Recyclable solid waste does not include those potentially recoverable items which are commingled with nonrecyclable solid waste, i.e., commingled nonrecyclable solid waste and potentially recyclable solid waste. Nor does recyclable solid waste include recyclable material, which is not a part of the waste stream.

     “Residential premises” or “single-family dwelling” means a detached building, or each unit of a multifamily unit, with kitchen facilities, in which the residents utilize one or more residential solid waste containers, but not bins, for the temporary accumulation of solid waste. The term “residential premises” does not include multifamily units using bins, hotels, motels, rooming houses, hospitals, nursing homes, convalescent centers, dormitories or barracks or other group living places using commercial bins for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste.

     “Residential solid waste” means all types of solid waste, including green waste and recyclable solid waste, generated or accumulated at residential premises and placed in residential containers for accumulation and collection. Residential solid wastes does not include commercial solid waste or recyclable material.

     “Residential solid waste container” means a container (a trash can, barrel or cart) provided by a service recipient or a solid waste collector used for the temporary accumulation, and collection of single-family residential solid waste. The term residential solid waste containers does not include multifamily residential bins nor those commercial bins used by commercial solid waste service recipients.

     “Self hauler” means a person who personally collects and removes solid waste from property owned by that person, with equipment owned or leased by that person, and who personally transports the solid waste to a solid waste facility licensed or permitted to accept such solid waste. Solid waste generated on property owned by a self hauler which is collected and transported for recycling or disposal by the self hauler is not within any franchise approved by the city.

     “Solid waste collector” means a solid waste enterprise which collects solid waste, or which places bins for the temporary accumulation and collection of solid waste, including construction and demolition waste, in the city. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.015 Grant of franchise, contract, permit or license.
     In order to protect public health, safety, and well-being, to control the spread of vectors, and to limit sources of air pollution, noise and traffic within the city, the city council, by resolution referring to the solid waste enterprise by name, may grant a franchise, contract, permit, or license to one or more solid waste enterprises to make arrangements with generators of solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes, green waste, construction and demolition waste, for the collection, transfer, recycling, composting, and disposal of solid wastes within all or any part of the city, in accordance with this chapter. Upon the expiration of any exclusive franchise, contract, permit, or license for the collection, transfer, recycling, composting and/or disposal of solid wastes, the city shall issue a formal request for proposals for the provision of the services covered by the franchise, contract, permit, or license. The request for proposals shall be administered consistent with the non-public project formal bidding provisions for services set forth in Section 2.60.140 of this code, shall be sent to various qualified providers of solid waste services, and all proposals received shall be considered in the granting of a franchise, contract, permit or license. In addition, and notwithstanding the provisions of Chapter 2.60, all proposals shall be submitted in hard copy (no electronic submissions) in a sealed envelope, and shall be publicly opened at the same time. No exceptions to competitive bidding which may be provided for in Chapter 2.60 of this code shall be utilized with the exception of renewing an exclusive franchise, contract, permit or license that contains a city option to renew. Any renewal pursuant to this exception shall be for a period not exceeding the renewal period specified in the original agreement or a maximum of five additional years. (Ord. 15-10 § 1, 2015; Ord. 12-01 § 1, 2012; Ord. 08-04 § 1, 2008; Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.020 Manner, time and frequency of collection.
     Solid waste collectors who arrange for the collection of solid wastes shall make arrangements with their customers specifying the manner, time and frequency for integrated waste management services, subject to the provisions in this chapter adopted by the city to protect public health, safety and well-being and to limit sources of noise and air pollution within the city, and to limit the city’s exposure to contaminated landfill cleanup liability. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.025 Solid waste service—Categories.
     In order to carry out its duties to plan for the management of vehicular traffic and to mitigate adverse air quality and noise effects, the city council may determine solid waste service collection categories, including, but not limited to, e.g., residential, single-family residential, multifamily residential, commercial, construction and demolition, industrial, special, special event, household hazardous waste, recyclable solid waste, green waste and other and may make or impose franchise, license, contract or permit requirements which vary for such categories. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.030 Collection arrangements required.
     In order to protect the public health, safety and well-being and to prevent the spread of vectors, the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for the day-to-day operation of every place or premises in the city shall make arrangements with a solid waste collector holding a city-issued franchise, contract, license or permit for the collection of solid wastes, as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.035 Solid waste facilities.
     No person shall construct or operate a solid waste management facility including, but not limited to, a materials recovery facility, solid waste transfer or processing station, composting facility, a buy-back or drop-off center, disposal facility or a recycling center without first satisfying all city requirements for land use, environmental and other approvals. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.040 Ownership of recyclable solid waste placed for collection.
     Upon placement by the owner of recyclable solid waste at a designated recycling collection location, or placement of recyclable solid waste or recyclable material in a container provided by a solid waste collector for collection of recyclable solid wastes, the recyclable materials and recyclable solid wastes become the property of the solid waste collector, by operation of state law (P.R.C. Section 41950(c)). (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.045 Recyclable material—Transfer and disposal.
     A.    Except as provided below, nothing in this chapter shall limit the right of any person, organization, or other entity to sell recyclable material owned by that person, organization or other entity or to donate recyclable material to a charity or any other entity other than a solid waste enterprise or solid waste collector.

     B.     Recyclable material which is mixed with solid waste shall be considered to have been discarded and to have become recyclable solid waste.

     C.     If the seller or donor of recyclable material pays the buyer or the donee any consideration for collecting, processing, recycling, transporting or disposing of the recyclable material, or for consultation services which exceed the market price of the recyclable material, the transaction shall not be regarded as a sale or donation of recyclable material, but as an arrangement for the disposal of solid waste subject to this chapter.

     D.    A person who receives a discount or reduction in the collection, disposal and/or recycling service rates for unsegregated or segregated solid waste shall not be deemed to be selling or donating recyclable material and does not fall within this “donate or sell” exception. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.050 Fees, franchises, permits and licenses—In general.
     Pursuant to Division 30, Part 3, Chapter 8 of the Public Resources Code, Section 41900 et seq., the city may levy fees upon solid waste collectors and premises for planning and program development and administration regarding solid and household hazardous waste, recyclable solid wastes and/or green waste planning, and for access to collection service, for collection service, inspection, auditing, transfer and disposal and the planning for and response to releases and spills of solid wastes which have the characteristics of hazardous substances. Such fees may include charges for the use of disposal facilities and may include costs of preparing and implementing source reduction and recycling elements, household hazardous waste elements and integrated waste management plans. The city may determine to collect all or part of such charges on the tax roll, whether or not delinquent, the water bill, or by such other means as the council may elect. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.055 Residential refuse collection franchise.
     A.    Following the issuance of a formal request for proposals and consideration of all proposals received, as provided for in Section 8.12.015 of this code, the city council may award one or more franchises for collection of solid wastes from all or a portion of residential properties in the city. Any such franchise shall be granted by the city council by resolution upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being would be served by the award of a franchise. Any such franchise granted by the city council shall be for a maximum period of eleven (11) years.

     B.     At a minimum, the franchise shall provide as follows:

     1.     A franchise fee of not less than seven percent of gross revenue;

     2.     The franchisee shall be required to cooperate with city in solid waste generation studies and the preparation of waste stream audits, and to implement measures to achieve the city’s solid waste diversion goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989, and to protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless if those goals are not met for the waste stream covered by the franchise;

     3.     The solid waste collector shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from liability, including, specifically, liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) (42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.), the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., and the California Health and Safety Code, as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, and the common law;

     4.     The solid waste collector(s) awarded a franchise shall be required by the council to reimburse the city for the expenses of awarding the franchise; and

     5.     Such other provisions as the city council may determine to be necessary or convenient for the protection of the interests of the residents and the city.

     C.     Each franchise, contract, license or permit for the collection of residential solid wastes issued or awarded by the city shall be in writing, expressly adopted by the city council, by resolution, as a franchise, contract, license or permit with a solid waste enterprise named in that franchise, contract, license or permit, and shall be signed by the mayor, approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed with the city clerk. No solid waste enterprise or any other person or entity shall infer the existence of any other form of franchise, contract, license or permit not meeting all the foregoing requirements.

     D.    Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no approval by the city engineer, the city engineer’s designee or any other official of the city for the placement of construction and demolition bins in the public right-of-way or any other place shall be construed as a grant of authority to provide solid waste handling services and does not constitute a “franchise, contract, license or permit” to provide such services. No solid waste enterprise or any other person or entity shall draw any inference from any such approval that it constitutes any authority to provide solid waste handling services. (Ord. 08-04 § 2, 2008; Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.060 Commercial refuse collection franchise.
     A.    Following the issuance of a formal request for proposals and consideration of all proposals received, as provided for in Section 8.12.015 of this code, the city council may award one or more franchises, agreements, permits or licenses for refuse collection from commercial properties, which includes all properties other than single-family dwellings, such as commercial, manufacturing, governmental, institutional, and multifamily residential properties. Such franchises, agreements, permits or licenses (collectively “permits”) shall be granted by the city council by resolution, upon a determination that the public health, safety and well-being would be served by the award of the permit.

     B.     The permit shall be granted on such terms and conditions as the city council shall establish in its sole discretion. Any such permit granted by the city council shall be for a maximum period of eleven years.

     C.     At a minimum, the permit shall provide as follows:

     1.     Commercial collection rates set according to different classes of commercial rates, based on volume, frequency of collection, and waste stream composition;

     2.     A franchise fee of not less than seven percent of gross revenue;

     3.     Commercial solid waste collectors shall be required to cooperate with the city in solid waste generation studies, waste stream audits, and implementing measures to achieve the city’s source reduction, recycling, and waste stream diversion goals and to implement measures to achieve the city’s solid waste diversion goals mandated by the California Integrated Waste Management Act of 1989 (Public Resources Code Section 40050 et seq.); and to protect, defend, indemnify and the city harmless if those goals are not met for the waste stream covered by the permit;

     4.     The solid waste collector shall be required to comply with the provisions of this chapter;

     5.     The solid waste collector shall be required to protect, defend, indemnify and hold the city harmless from liability, including, specifically, liability under the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (RCRA) (42 U.S.C. Sections 6901 et seq.), the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act, 42 U.S.C. Sections 9601 et seq., and the California Health and Safety Code, as they may be amended from time to time and all regulations implementing these acts, and the common law;

     6.     The solid waste collector shall comply with the city’s source reduction, recycling, and waste stream diversion goals;

     7.     The solid waste collector(s) awarded a franchise shall be required by the council to reimburse the city for the expenses of awarding the franchise; and

     8.     Such other provisions as the city council may determine to be necessary or convenient for the protection of the interests of the residents.

     D.    Each franchise, contract, license or permit for the collection of commercial solid waste or construction and demolition waste issued or awarded by the city shall be in writing, expressly adopted by the city council, by resolution, as a franchise, contract, license or permit with a solid waste enterprise named in that franchise, contract, license or permit, shall be signed by the mayor, approved as to form by the city attorney, and filed with the city clerk. No solid waste enterprise or any other person or entity shall infer the existence of any other form of franchise, contract, license or permit not meeting all the foregoing requirements. (Ord. 08-04 § 3, 2008; Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.065 Licensing.
     A.    Each solid waste collector, including each solid waste enterprise which is an applicant for or holder of an encroachment permit issued by the city engineer, and each solid waste enterprise asserting a right to collect solid waste pursuant to a “continuation” right based on Public Resources Code Sections 49520 et seq., the dormant commerce clause or any other law, but excepting each solid waste enterprise granted a written franchise by the city in accordance with the procedural requirements of Section 8.12.055 or 8.12.060, shall apply for and possess a current city-issued annual solid waste collector’s permit or other form of city-issued solid waste collection authorization (collectively “solid waste collector’s permit”) for the collection of solid waste, not later than July 1st, annually.

     B.     Each solid waste collector shall comply with all requirements set forth in the solid waste collector’s permit and this chapter. These requirements include, but are not limited to, submission of an application for a solid waste collector’s permit, payment of an application fee, and, if a permit is granted, a permit fee, adherence to a schedule of fees to be charged to service recipients for specific services (as may be adopted by the city council), and meet or exceed all standards required by the city for a solid waste collector franchised by the city, including indemnification, minimum levels of insurance, cash bonds, and any other requirements that the city council may impose.

     C.     In the case of a solid waste enterprise which asserts that it has a right to collect solid waste pursuant to a “continuation” right based on Public Resources Code Sections 49520 et seq., (a “continuation/claim hauler”) or a right under the Constitution or under federal law (a “commerce clause hauler”), or any other law, the city council may approve the issuance of a temporary solid waste collector’s permit, which shall expire on December 31st of the year of issuance, or the resolution of continuation rights or commerce clause rights, whichever occurs first.

     D.    Any person or entity which engages in the collection of commercial solid waste or construction and demolition waste in the city or which places a commercial bin or construction bin for the accumulation of solid waste in the city, or permits a commercial bin or construction bin to remain in the city, without first having obtained a franchise or permit issued by the city, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable as provided generally for violations of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code. Each day in which a person or entity engages in the collection of commercial solid waste or construction and demolition waste in the city or places a commercial bin or a construction bin for the accumulation of solid waste, including construction and demolition waste or permits a commercial bin or a construction bin to remain, in the city without a franchise, permit, license or other authorization granted by the city, shall be a separate offense. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.070 Revocation and suspension of permits—Grounds.
     A.    Any franchise, permit, license or other city-issued authorization (collectively referred to as “permit”) issued under this chapter is subject to revocation or suspension for cause.

     B.     In addition to the grounds provided elsewhere in this chapter, the following shall constitute cause for the revocation or suspension of a solid waste collector’s permit:

     1.     When the continuance of the operations of the permittee under such permit shall be contrary to the public health, safety, well-being, peace, welfare or morals, or shall be found to constitute a public nuisance;

     2.     If the holder of the permit violates any federal or state law, the regulations of the California Integrated Waste Management Board, a Local Enforcement Agency, this code or any condition of the permit;

     3.     If the holder of a permit practices, or attempts to practice, any fraud or deceit upon the city, or makes or uses any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations, or practiced any fraud or deceit or made any false, fictitious or fraudulent statements or representations in connection with the issuance or renewal of the permit;

     4.     If the holder of the permit becomes insolvent, unable or unwilling to pay its debts, or a receiver or trustee is appointed to take over and conduct the business of the permittee whether in a receivership, reorganization or bankruptcy proceeding;

     5.     If the holder of the permit fails to provide or maintain in full force and effect the workers compensation, liability insurance and indemnification coverages and cash bond(s) required; or

     6.     If the holder of the permit violates any order or ruling of any regulatory body with respect to solid waste collected within the city, except that such order or ruling may be contested by appropriate proceedings conducted in good faith, in which case no violation shall be deemed to have occurred until a final decision adverse to the holder of the permit is entered. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.075 Revocation of permits—Procedure for notification of deficiencies and suspension or revocation.
     A.    If city’s integrated waste management coordinator determines that the performance of an entity holding a franchise, permit, license or other form of city-issued authorization (collectively “permittee”) may not be in conformity with reasonable industry standards which obtain in Southern California or the California Integrated Waste Management Act including, but not limited to, requirements for implementing diversion, source reduction and recycling, or any other applicable federal, state or local law or regulation, including but not limited to, the laws/governing transfer, storage or disposal of solid and hazardous waste, or this chapter, the integrated waste management coordinator shall advise the holder of the permit in writing of such suspected deficiencies. The integrated waste management coordinator, in any written notification of deficiencies, shall set a reasonable time within which the permittee is to correct the deficiencies and respond. Unless otherwise specified, a reasonable time for response and correction of deficiencies shall be thirty (30) days from the receipt of such written notice by the holder of the permit.

     B.     At the expiration of the time set for response from the permittee, the city’s integrated waste management coordinator shall review the record, including any written response from the permittee to the notice of deficiencies and decide the matter. If the coordinator’s decision is adverse to the permittee, the coordinator may order remedial actions to cure any deficiencies, assess any letter of credit on deposit with the city, or invoke any other remedy. In the event that the coordinator determines that there has been a material breach and that termination is the appropriate remedy, the coordinator may terminate the permit, and inform the permittee in writing, of the specific facts found and the evidence relied on, and the legal basis in the provisions of the permit or other laws for the coordinator’s decision. An adverse decision by the city’s integrated waste management coordinator shall be final and binding unless the permittee files a “notice of appeal” with the city clerk (with copy to the city manager and city attorney) within thirty (30) days of receipt of the decision or order of the city’s integrated waste management coordinator. In any notice of appeal the permittee shall state the legal basis and all legal and factual contentions of the permittee and shall include all relevant evidence, including affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes. A notice of appeal shall not be accepted by the clerk for filing unless accompanied by a notice of appeal filing fee in an amount to be set by the city council, by resolution.

     C.     Within thirty (30) business days of receipt by the city clerk of a notice of appeal, the city manager shall decide the matter. If the city manager’s decision is adverse to the permittee, the city manager may order remedial actions to cure any deficiencies, assess any letter of credit, or invoke any other remedy. In the event that the city manager determines that there has been a material breach, and that termination is the appropriate remedy, the city manager may terminate forthwith the permit. In addition, the city manager may refer the matter to the city council or refer the matter to a referee and inform the permittee, in writing, of the resolution and the basis for the resolution. The decision or order of the city manager shall be final and binding unless the permittee files a notice of appeal to the city council with the city clerk (and serves a copy, by mail, on the city manager and the city attorney) within ten days of receipt of the decision or order of the city manager. A notice of appeal to the city council shall state the legal basis and all factual and legal contentions of the appellant and shall include all evidence, including affidavits, documents, photographs and videotapes. A notice of appeal to the city council shall not be accepted by the clerk for filing unless accompanied by a notice of appeal filing fee in an amount to be set by the city council, by resolution.

     D.    If a matter is referred by the city manager to the city council, or a notice of appeal to the city council is timely filed, the city council may set the matter for an administrative hearing and act on the matter or refer the matter to a referee. If the city council elects to hear the matter, the city clerk shall give fourteen (14) days written notice of the time and place of the administrative hearing. At the hearing, the city council shall consider the administrative record, including the notice of deficiency, the permittee’s response, the statement of resolution by the city manager and the permittee’s notice of appeal to the city council and shall give the permittee, or its representatives and any other interested person, a reasonable opportunity to be heard. The proceedings before the council shall be an informal administrative hearing and the rules of evidence, as generally applied in judicial proceedings, shall not be applicable.

     E.     Based on the administrative record, the council shall determine by resolution whether the decision or order of the city manager or integrated waste management coordinator should be upheld. A tie vote of the city council shall be regarded as upholding the action of the city manager or integrated waste management coordinator. If, based upon the record, the city council determines that the performance of the permittee is in breach of any material provision of any applicable federal, state or local statute or regulation, or other cause for termination of the license, the city council, in the exercise of its sole discretion, may order remedial actions to cure the breach, or terminate forthwith the permit or other form of authorization. The decision of the city council shall be final and conclusive.

     F.     Termination shall become effective upon the date specified in the written notice to the holder of the franchise, permit, permit or other authorization by the city. Such notice shall state the grounds for termination. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.080 Transfer restricted.
     A franchise, permit, license or other form of city-granted solid waste collection authorization shall not be transferable, except as follows:

     A.    A franchise, permit, license or other form of city-granted solid waste collection authorization (collectively “permit”) shall not be transferred, sold, hypothecated, sublet or assigned (collectively “transferred”), nor shall any of the rights or privileges therein be hypothecated, leased, assigned, sold or transferred, either in whole or in part, nor shall title thereto, either legal or equitable, or any right, interest or property therein, pass to or vest in any person, either by act of the holder of the permit nor by operation of law, without the prior written consent of the city expressed by resolution. Any attempt of the holder of the permit to assign the permit without the prior written consent of the city shall be void. For purposes of this chapter, any sale, dissolution, merger, consolidation, change in control or other reorganization of the holder of the permit or the sale or other transfer of an accumulative fifty (50) percent or more of the voting stock of a corporate permittee by any person, or group of persons acting in concert, who already own less than fifty (50) percent of the voting stock of the holder of the permit shall be deemed a change in control.

     B.     An application for a transfer of a permit shall be made in a manner prescribed by the city manager. The application shall include a permit transfer application fee in an amount to be set by city by resolution of the council. The permit transfer application fee is intended to offset the city’s anticipated cost of all reasonable and customary direct and indirect administrative expenses including consultants’ and attorneys’ fees, necessary to analyze the application, and to reimburse city for all other direct and indirect expenses. In addition, the holder of the franchise, permit, license or other authorization granted by city shall reimburse the city for all other reasonable consultants’, attorneys’ and staff costs not covered by the permit transfer application fee, whether or not the city approves the application for transfer. the city’s request for reimbursement shall be supported with evidence of the expenses and costs incurred. The holder of the permit and the applicant for transfer shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of any reasonable consultants’, attorneys’ and staff costs not covered by the permit transfer application fee.

     C.     The applicant for a transfer of a permit shall have the burden of demonstrating that it has the operational and financial ability to meet all obligations of the franchise, permit, permit or other form of city authorization.

     D.    The city shall not unreasonably withhold its consent to a transfer of the permit. The city may impose reasonable conditions or approval of an application for a transfer.

     E.     Notwithstanding the above, the holder of a permit shall be entitled to pledge, encumber or grant any security interest in the permit provided that the holder shall first notify and obtain city consent to such transaction, subject to the following conditions:

     1.     Any consent so granted shall not be deemed a consent to the exercise by such pledgee, encumbrancer, or secured party of any rights of the holder under the franchise, permit, permit or other authorization unless so noted by the city;

     2.     No consent granted shall be deemed a consent to any subsequent transfer. Any subsequent transfer shall be deemed an assignment of the franchise, permit, permit or other authorization within the meaning of this section and shall be void without the prior written consent of the city expressed by resolution; and

     3.     The pledgee, encumbrancer or secured party shall execute and deliver to city a written instrument, in a form satisfactory to the city attorney, expressing agreement to be bound by the provisions of the franchise, permit, license or other authorization. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.085 Liability for fees.
     A.    Each person required by this chapter to arrange for solid waste collection shall be liable for the fees and charges for such collection.

     B.     To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for day-to-day operation of every premises in the city shall make arrangements for collection, recycling and disposal of solid wastes generated or accumulated on those premises in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. The city may include the fees and charges (plus any interest or penalties) for solid waste and recycling on the water bill, the property tax roll for the premises, or by separate bill from the city or a solid waste collector. The fees and charges (plus any interest or penalties) on the water bill, the property tax roll for the premises, or separate bill shall be due and payable on the date stated on the water bill, the property tax roll for the premises, or separate bill. The owner and occupant of each premises in the city each shall be jointly and severally liable for the payment of the fees and charges (plus any interest or penalties) for solid waste and recycling.

     C.     If solid waste service fees and charges (and any applicable interest or penalties) are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date payment was due, solid waste service may be discontinued. Liability for service access fees continues, whether or not collection services have been discontinued.

     D.    Upon written notice from the owner, occupant, or other person responsible for day-to-day operation of a premises in the city to discontinue solid waste collection services, there shall be refunded any advance collection fees. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.090 Receptacles, bulky goods and green waste—Placement and removal.
     A.    To protect public health, safety and well-being against the growth and spread of vectors, no person shall place for collection any residential solid waste container or commercial bin not in conformance with the residential solid waste container or commercial bin designated by the solid waste collector.

     B.     No person shall place a container adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection if the container and its contents weigh more than sixty-five (65) pounds, unless automated collection is used, without the consent of the solid waste collector.

     C.     To minimize interference with public rights-of-way, no person shall place a container or any bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way for collection service before six p.m. on the day before the regularly scheduled collection day.

     D.    During the hours for collection, residential containers shall be placed at the location designated by the solid waste collector and shall be accessible for mechanized pick-up, if mechanized pick-up methods are utilized by the solid waste collector. Commercial bins shall be accessible to the solid waste collector. Except during the time a container is placed for curbside collection, residential solid waste containers shall not be visible from the public right-of-way.

     E.     Containers shall be removed from locations adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way not later than one a.m. on the day following the regularly scheduled collection day.

     F.     A solid waste collector who has been notified by a commercial solid waste service recipient or city that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued shall remove all of its commercial bins from the premises where commercial solid waste services are to be discontinued within seven calendar days following receipt of notification that commercial solid waste service is to be discontinued.

     G.    Green waste shall be cut into pieces not to exceed four feet in length and four inches in diameter, before being placed in containers designated for green waste. If placed in containers designated for green waste, green waste shall not be contaminated with other forms of solid waste or with hazardous substances. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.095 Receptacles—Use.
     A.    To protect public health, safety and well-being against the growth and spread of vectors, each person required by Section 8.12.030 to arrange for the collection of solid waste shall keep in a suitable place one or more containers capable of holding without spilling, leaking, or emitting odors, all solid waste, including recyclable solid wastes and green waste, which would ordinarily accumulate on the premises between the time of two successive collections.

     B.     To protect public health, safety and well-being against the growth and spread of vectors, every person required by Section 8.12.030 to arrange for the collection of solid waste from any premises within the city shall deposit or cause to be deposited in containers or commercial bins provided or approved by a solid waste collector all solid waste generated or accumulated on those premises.

     C.     No person shall place ashes which are not cold and free from fire in any container. To prevent the spread of airborne ash, before being placed for collection, ashes shall be placed in bags, and the bags shall be placed in containers for collection. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.100 Frequency of collection and removal.
     A.    To protect public health, safety and well-being, and to protect the city against the growth and spread of vectors, persons in charge of the day-to-day operation of each premises in the city shall make arrangements to have all solid waste generated or accumulated on the premises (other than construction and demolition waste) collected and removed not less frequently than once a week.

     B.     Each solid waste collector shall collect the contents of each commercial bin (except construction bins) placed, located or maintained in the city by that solid waste collector not less frequently than one time per week.

     C.     Subject to the requirements for minimum removals per week, set forth above, persons in charge of the day-to-day operation of commercial premises and multifamily residential premises may specify the frequency of collection of solid waste from the premises and the size and number of commercial or multifamily residential bins required.

     D.    In order to protect residents’ quiet enjoyment of their residential premises, collection from residential premises, both single-family and multifamily, shall not be made after the hour of six p.m. or before the hour of six a.m. of any day. Collection from commercial premises shall not be made between the hours of six p.m. and six a.m. in areas of the city in which noise from collection vehicles is audible in residential areas. Subject to the foregoing requirements, collections shall be made by arrangement between the person in charge of day-to-day operation of commercial premises and multifamily residential premises and the solid waste collector.

     E.     Solid waste collectors shall design their routes and times for collection in a manner which minimizes air pollution, traffic, noise and wear and tear on public and private streets and other problems with the potential to adversely affect public health, safety or the environment and in a manner consistent with the city’s traffic demand management plan. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.105 Use of receptacles.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being and to control the spread of vectors, no person shall keep solid waste in containers or commercial bins other than those approved by a solid waste collector; nor shall any person accumulate solid waste, except for construction and demolition waste, for more than thirteen (13) consecutive days; nor shall any person keep upon any premises in the city any solid waste which is offensive, obnoxious or unsanitary. All of the foregoing is unlawful, constitutes a public nuisance and may be abated in the manner now or hereafter provided by law for the abatement of nuisances. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.110 Removal of solid waste.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being, and to control the spread of vectors, no person, other than the person in charge of any premises or a solid waste collector authorized by the city or the person in charge of the premises, shall remove any container from the location where the container was placed for storage or collection by the person in charge of the premises, or remove any solid waste from any container or move the container from the location in which it was placed for storage or collection, or apply any paint or markings (commonly known as “graffiti” or “tagging”) to any container without the prior written approval of the owner of the container. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.115 Bulky goods.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being and to minimize interference with public rights of way, no person shall place bulky goods adjacent to a street or public right-of-way without first having made arrangements with a solid waste collector for the pickup of the bulky goods. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.120 Civic litter container— Institutional, commercial or industrial solid waste prohibited.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being, no person shall place or deposit institutional, commercial, industrial, special or hazardous waste in any civic litter container. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.125 Solid waste burning and burial prohibited.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being, no person shall burn any solid waste within the city, except in an approved incinerator or transformation facility or other device for which a permit has been issued by the building official and which complies with all applicable permit and other regulations of air pollution control authorities and provided any such act of burning in all respects complies with all other laws, rules and regulations. No person shall bury solid waste at any place within the city. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.130 Unauthorized removal of recyclable solid wastes prohibited by state law.
     The unauthorized removal of recyclable solid wastes and recyclable materials placed at designated recycling collection locations is prohibited by California Public Resources Code Sections 41950-51. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.135 Collection of solid waste without permit prohibited.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being, no person except for a self-hauler or gardener shall collect any solid waste from any commercial premises or residential premises within the city, nor shall any person place a commercial bin or any construction bin, at any premises within the city, without a city-issued written franchise or written solid waste collector’s permit. Each day any person other than a self-hauler or gardener shall collect any solid waste from any commercial premises or residential premises within the city, or place a commercial bin or construction bin for the accumulation of solid waste at any premises within the city, or permit or suffer a commercial bin or construction bin to remain in any place within the city, without a city solid waste collector’s permit shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.137 Placement of unauthorized bins, dumpsters, and other waste receptacles prohibited.
     Any dumpster, drop-off box, bin or other container (as defined in Section 8.12.010), which is unlawfully deposited in the city by any person engaging in solid waste handling services in violation of this section, shall be subject to removal and impound pursuant to Section 8.12.138. The owner or lessor of a container removed and impounded pursuant to this chapter shall be liable to the city for payment of all fees and charges established by resolution of the city council and levied in connection with the removal, transportation, storage and handling of the container, in addition to the payment of any other fees or expenses incurred for the safe disposal of the contents thereof. All fees and charges due shall be paid before the equipment may be returned to its owner or lessor. Such amounts shall constitute a debt owed by the owner or lessor to the city or other person or company which has removed and impounded the container, and the owner or lessor shall be liable to the city or such other person or company in an action for the recovery of such amounts. (Ord. 08-01 § 1, 2008)

 

8.12.138 Removal of unauthorized bins and containers on public property.
     A.    The city manager, public works director, police chief, their respective designees, or the city’s solid waste franchisee pursuant to Section 8.12.139, by notice may require the removal of any bin or container placed in violation of Section 8.12.135. The form of notice shall be determined by the city manager or his or her designee. Any such notice shall specify the nature of the violation, and shall state that the bin or container must be removed within twenty-four (24) hours or it may be removed and stored by the city or its solid waste franchisee, and the contents disposed of, at the expense of the owner.

     B.     The city shall provide such written notice by posting a copy of the notice prominently upon the bin or container, provided that if the bin or container is not in the driveway of a residential property or in an area open to the public of a commercial or industrial property, the written consent of the owner or occupant of any private property where a bin or container is placed, or an appropriate warrant, shall be obtained prior to going on the property to give notice. If the bin or container is identified with the name and telephone number of the solid waste enterprise servicing or owning it, the city shall endeavor to contact such enterprise by telephone. However, failure to notify the owner telephonically shall not invalidate the notice. If notice is provided by the city’s solid waste franchisee under a delegation of authority pursuant to Section 8.12.139, the franchisee may provide notice to the owner or occupant by certified mail, return receipt requested, shall promptly provide the city with a copy of the notice, and shall not enter onto private property to provide such notice.

     C.     The city may impound or cause to be impounded any bin or container located, in violation of Section 8.12.135, on city property or located on private property with the written consent of the owner or occupant of the property where the receptacle is located, if the same is not permanently removed from its location within the time set forth in the notice, which time shall not be less than twenty-four (24) hours after posting of the notice, or receipt of notice if notice is provided by certified mail, or not less than six business hours after telephonic notification, if such notification is provided. If the bin, container, or receptacle is impounded by the city’s solid waste franchisee under a delegation of authority pursuant to Section 8.12.139, the franchisee shall immediately inform the city in writing of the impoundment, promptly dispose of the contents of the bin, container, or receptacle at a permitted disposal facility and shall store the bin, container, or receptacle in a legally permitted storage area that complies with all applicable local land use regulations. For purposes of this section, “business hours” shall mean the hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:30 p.m., Monday through Friday, and Saturday 7:00 a.m. to 3:00 p.m.

     D.    Upon posting of a written notice of violation upon an unauthorized bin, container, or waste receptacle, the customer using the same shall immediately cease placing solid waste therein.

     E.     If the identity of the owner of a bin or container that has been removed pursuant to this section is known to the city or the city’s solid waste franchisee, the city or its solid waste franchisee shall promptly cause notice to be mailed to the owner to claim the stored property. If the bin or container is not claimed within thirty (30) days after removal and notice to the owner, or thirty (30) days after removal if the identity of the owner is unknown to the city or its solid waste franchisee, the bin or container and its contents shall be deemed abandoned property and may be disposed of accordingly.

     F.     The bin, container, or receptacle impounded shall be retrieved by the owner or representative thereof immediately after any applicable fees and charges established pursuant to Section 8.12.137 of this code have been paid.

     G.    After a bin or container has once been removed by the city or its solid waste franchisee pursuant to a notice to remove posted in accordance with this section, the owner thereof shall be deemed to have actual notice of the provisions of this chapter, including the prohibition against the deposit, placement, or leaving of unauthorized bins or containers on property in the city. Future placement of a trash bin or container within the city by a person or company that has been previously notified of such violation shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter and such notice shall not be required to be posted on said trash bin or container.

     H.    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, the city manager, public works director or police chief is authorized to direct the immediate removal by the city or its solid waste franchisee, without notice, of any bin or container placed on public property within the city in violation of this chapter where the owner of the bin or container is unidentified and cannot be ascertained by an inspection of the bin or container, or by cannot be ascertained from the business owner or operator adjacent to whose premises the bin or container is located. (Ord. 08-01 § 2, 2008)

 

8.12.139 Delegation of enforcement authority to solid waste franchisee.
     The city manager may delegate to the city’s solid waste franchisee the authority to provide the notice required by Section 8.12.138, impound and/or store unauthorized bins, containers, and/or waste receptacles, in accordance with the provisions of this section, and to collect the fees and charges levied by the city pursuant to Section 8.12.137. Where the franchisee is unable to deliver the notice due to the inability to enter onto private property, it is authorized to provide the notice to the owner or occupant by certified mail, return receipt requested. Prior to the franchisee’s exercise of any such delegated authority, the franchisee shall provide the city with a written agreement in a form satisfactory to the city indemnifying and holding harmless the city against all claims and causes of action arising out of the franchisee’s actions to impound and/or store bins, containers, and waste receptacles, and amending the solid waste franchise agreement to reflect that impoundments performed without full compliance with this section, and failures to provide notice as required by this section, shall be deemed violations of the franchise agreement. The city manager may revoke this delegation of authority at any time in his or her sole discretion, and the agreement provided by the franchisee shall acknowledge that any such revocation shall not be deemed a breach of the franchise agreement. (Ord. 08-01 § 3, 2008)

 

8.12.140 Public nuisance.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being and to prevent the spread of vectors, it is unlawful and a public nuisance, for any person to occupy, inhabit, maintain or to be in day-to-day control of any premises within the city for which arrangements have not been made for regular collection and removal services for solid wastes, including recyclable solid wastes or green waste, and any other violation of this chapter is unlawful and may be enjoined as a nuisance. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.145 Unauthorized disposal prohibited.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being and to prevent the contamination of solid waste and recyclable solid wastes, no person shall place solid waste in, or to otherwise use the solid waste or recyclable solid waste or green waste containers of another, without the permission of such other person. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.150 Solid waste spills and releases prohibited.
     To protect public health, safety and well-being, no person transporting solid waste, recyclable solid wastes or green waste within the city shall fail to immediately clean up, or arrange for the immediate cleanup, of any solid waste released, spilled or dumped into the environment during removal or transport within the city by such person. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.155 Unlawful dumping prohibited.
     No person shall dump, deposit, release, spill, leak, pump, pour, emit, empty, discharge, inject, bury or dispose into the environment (including by abandonment or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever) any solid or liquid waste upon any premises within the city, or to cause, suffer or permit any solid or liquid waste to come to be located upon any premises in the city, except in an authorized or permitted solid waste container or at an authorized or permitted solid waste facility. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.160 Enforcement.
     Pursuant to California Penal Code Section 836.5, the city manager and city code enforcement officers are authorized to enforce the provisions of this chapter and as well as those of California Penal Code Sections 374, 374a, 374.2, 374.3, 374.4, 374d, 374.7 and 375; California Government Code Sections 68055 et seq.; and California Vehicle Code Sections 23111 and 23112. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.165 Enforcement by designees.
     Wherever in this chapter enforcement authority is given to any city employee or officer, such authority may be exercised by designees of the officers and employees. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.170 Abatement of nuisances.
     The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of a restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisances. (Ord. 08-01 § 4, 2008; Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.175 Offenses and penalties.
     Any person, firm, partnership or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Each person, firm, partnership, or corporation shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or any portion, thereof during which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, firm, partnership or corporation, and shall be deemed punishable therefor as provided in this code. (Ord. 08-01 § 5, 2008; Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.180 Enforcement authority.
     The city manager or the city manager’s designee(s) shall have the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. This authority shall be in addition to the authority granted to police officers pursuant to this code. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.185 Civil actions.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to limit the right of any solid waste enterprise to bring a civil action against any person who violates California Public Resources Code Sections 41950-51, or to seek injunctive relief from unlicensed solid waste enterprises which collect or attempt to collect solid waste in violation of any permit requirement or exclusive franchise, nor shall a conviction for such violation exempt any person from a civil action brought by a solid waste enterprise. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.190 Special collections.
     Subscribers to a solid waste collection service may order: special collections of such things as bulky goods, brown goods, white goods, holiday trees and other items too large to fit in standard containers; and pickup of household hazardous wastes (from service providers authorized by the state of California to collect household hazardous wastes), subject to the payment of rates authorized by the city council. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.195 Collection equipment.
     A.    To protect public health, safety and well-being, any truck used for the collection or transportation of solid waste within the city shall be leak proof and equipped with a close-fitting cover which shall be affixed in a manner that will prevent spilling, dropping or blowing of any waste upon the public right-of-way during collection or transportation.

     B.     Each solid waste collector shall maintain its commercial bins and construction bins within the city in a manner to protect public health and safety and prevent the spread of vectors.

     C.     Each solid waste collector shall maintain its commercial bins and construction bins in the city free from exterior paint or markings commonly referred to as “graffiti” or “tagging.” Each day a solid waste collector permits a commercial bin or any construction bin to remain in this city with conspicuous graffiti or tagging shall be a separate offense.

     D.    No person shall place any commercial bin or any construction bin in this city, or maintain or collect solid waste from any commercial bin or any construction bin in this city without conspicuous warnings on the commercial or construction bin that the commercial bin or construction bin is not to be used for the disposal of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste. Each day a commercial bin or any construction bin remains in this city without conspicuous warnings on the commercial or construction bin that the commercial bin or construction bin is not to be used for the disposal of any hazardous substances or hazardous waste shall be a separate offense.

     E.     No person shall park, or cause to be parked within the city any vehicle containing solid waste unless the vehicle is free from odor and in a sanitary condition. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.200 Collection trucks—Noise.
     To protect the public health, safety and quiet enjoyment of the residents of the city, the noise level for the collection vehicles during the stationary compaction process shall not exceed seventy-five (75) Db(A) at a distance of twenty-five (25) feet from the collection vehicle and at an elevation of five feet from the horizontal base place of such vehicles. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

 

8.12.205 Cleanup responsibility.
     A.    Until solid waste has been picked up by a solid waste collector or authorized recycling agent, the owner, operator, occupant or other person in charge of the day-to-day operation of each premises in the city shall be responsible for the cleanup of any and all solid waste generated, deposited, released, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, emptied, discharged, injected, dumped or disposed into the environment, or which otherwise has come to be located outside an authorized container on, at, or in the premises of which the person is the owner, operator, occupant or is otherwise in charge. This cleanup responsibility includes the cleanup of solid waste, recyclable solid wastes and green waste which has come to be located outside an authorized container for the collection of such solid waste notwithstanding human or animal interference with commercial bins or containers, wind or other natural forces and whether during storage, collection, removal or transfer. For purposes of this section, the term “disposed into the environment” shall include, but is not limited to, the abandonment of or discarding of barrels, containers and other closed receptacles of solid or liquid waste of any kind whatsoever.

     B.     Each solid waste collector or authorized recycling agent shall clean up any solid waste spilled or otherwise released or discharged into the environment during its collection, removal or transfer. (Ord. 599 § 1, 1996)

Chapter 8.13 CONSTRUCTION AND DEMOLITION WASTE
8.13.010 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to reduce the amount of waste generated within the city of Los Alamitos which is ultimately disposed of in landfills by requiring the project applicant for every project covered by this chapter to divert a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the construction and demolition debris resulting from that project, in compliance with state and local statutory goals and policies, and to create a mechanism to secure compliance with the stated diversion requirements. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.020 Definitions.
     Except where the context otherwise requires, the definitions given in this section shall govern the construction of this chapter:

     “Applicant” means any individual, firm, limited liability company, association, partnership, political subdivision, government agency, municipality, industry, public or private corporation, or any other entity or person whatsoever who applies to the city for any permit, as defined in this chapter, and who is, therefore, responsible for meeting the requirements of this chapter.

     “Building official” means the chief building official of the city.

     “Construction” means the building or enlargement of any facility or structure, or any portion thereof, including but not limited to tenant improvements, to any new or existing facility or structure in the city.

     “Construction and demolition waste” or “(C & D)” means any solid waste, materials, or debris used, discarded, or generated as the result of construction, renovation, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations, including without limitation, discarded packaging or containers and waste construction materials, whether brought on site for fabrication or used in construction or resulting from demolition, excluding liquid waste and hazardous waste.

     “Conversion rate” means the rate set forth in the standardized conversion rate table approved by the city pursuant to this chapter for use in estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in a waste management plan.

     “Covered project” is any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city in which the total square footage is, or is projected to be, greater than or equal to two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet which requires an application for a building or demolition permit or any similar permit from the city.

     “Deconstruction” is to disassemble any facility, structure, or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior, piece-by-piece in order to salvage the parts.

     “Demolition” means the decimating, razing, ruining, tearing down or wrecking of any facility, structure, pavement, or building, whether in whole or in part, whether interior or exterior.

     “Divert” means to use material for any purpose other than in disposal in a landfill or transformation facility.

     “Diversion requirement” means the diversion of at least fifty (50) percent of the total construction and demolition debris generated by a project via reuse or recycling, unless the applicant has been granted an exemption pursuant to Section 8.13.060, in which the diversion requirement shall be the maximum feasible diversion rate established by the waste management plan compliance official for the project.

     “Non-covered project” means any construction, demolition, or renovation project within the city in which the total square footage is less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

     “Permit” means any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project.

     “Renovation” means any change, addition, or modification to an existing structure.

     “Salvage” means the controlled removal of construction or demolition debris from a permitted building or demolition site for the purpose of recycling, reuse, or storage for later recycling or reuse.

     “Waste management plan” or “WMP” means a completed WMP form, approved by the city for the purpose of compliance with this chapter, submitted by the applicant for any covered project.

     “WMP compliance official” means the assistant to the city manager or staff person(s) authorized and responsible for implementing this chapter. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.030 Waste management plan requirements.
     A.    Covered Projects. Prior to beginning any construction or demolition activities, the applicant shall submit a waste management plan to the WMP compliance official and shall comply with all provisions included in this chapter.

     B.     Non-covered Projects. Applicants for non-covered projects shall be encouraged to divert at least fifty (50) percent of all project-related construction and demolition debris, but shall not be required to submit a waste management plan to the WMP compliance official.

     C.     Compliance as a Condition of Approval. Compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be listed as a condition of approval on any building or demolition permit issued for a covered project. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.040 Submission of waste management plan.
     A.    WMP Forms. Applicants for building or demolition permits involving any covered project shall complete and submit a WMP on a WMP form approved by the city for this purpose, as part of the application packet for the building or demolition permit. The completed WMP shall indicate the following at a minimum:

     1.     Estimated volume or weight of project C & D debris, by material type, to be generated;

     2.     Maximum volume or weight of such materials that can feasibly be diverted via reuse or recycling; and

     3.     Documentation from the city’s franchise waste hauler to collect and receive the material; and

     4.     Estimated volume or weight of C & D materials that will be land filled; and

     5.     Special or specific activities that the applicant will use to comply with the provisions of this section.

     B.     Calculating Volume and Weight of Debris. In estimating the volume or weight of materials identified in the WMP, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

     C.     Deconstruction. In preparing the WMP, applicants for building or demolition permits involving the removal of all or part of an existing structure shall consider deconstruction, to the maximum extent feasible, and shall make the materials generated thereby available for salvage rather than land filled. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.050 Review of waste management plan.
     A.    Approval. Notwithstanding any other provision of this code, no building or demolition permit shall be issued for any covered project unless and until the WMP compliance official has approved the WMP. Approval shall not be required, however, where an emergency demolition is required to protect public health or safety as determined by the building official. The WMP compliance official shall only approve a WMP if the official first determines that all of the following conditions have been met:

     1.     The WMP provides all the information set forth in Section 8.13.040; and

     2.     The WMP indicates that at least fifty (50) percent of all C & D debris generated by the project will be diverted.

     If the WMP compliance official determines that these conditions have been met, the WMP compliance official shall mark the WMP “Approved,” return a copy of the WMP to the applicant, and notify the building official that the WMP has been approved.

     B.     Nonapproval.

     1.     In the event that the WMP fails to indicate that at least fifty (50) percent of all C & D debris generated by the covered project will be reused or recycled or is otherwise exempt from this chapter pursuant to Section 8.13.070, the WMP official shall return the WMP to the applicant marked “Denied,” and shall include a statement of reasons in support of the denial, and so notify the building official who shall then immediately stop processing the building or demolition permit application.

     2.     In the event that the WMP is incomplete, the WMP official shall return the WMP to the applicant marked “Further Information Required” and allow the applicant to re-submit a complete WMP. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.060 Compliance with waste management plan.
     A.    Documentation. Prior to the completion of any covered project, the applicant shall submit to the WMP compliance official documentation that the diversion requirement has been met. This documentation shall include all of the following:

     1.     Documentation from the city’s franchise waster hauler showing the actual weight or volume of the material; and

     2.     A copy of the previously approved WMP for the project adding the actual volume or weight of each material diverted and land filled; and

     3.     Any additional information the applicant believes is relevant to determining its efforts to comply in good faith with the approved WMP for the project.

     B.     Weighing of Wastes. Applicant shall make reasonable efforts to ensure that all C & D debris, diverted or land filled, are measured and recorded using the most accurate method of measurement available. To the extent practical, all C & D debris shall be weighed. Regarding C & D debris for which weighing is not practical due to small size or other considerations, a volumetric measurement shall be used. For conversion of volumetric measurements to weight, the applicant shall use the standardized conversion rates approved by the city for this purpose.

     C.     Determination of Compliance and Release of Building Permit. The WMP compliance official shall review the information submitted by the applicant and determine whether the applicant has complied with the diversion requirement. If the diversion requirement has been met, the official shall authorize release of the building permit(s) to the applicant. If the official determines that the diversion requirement has not been met, no building permit(s) shall be issued until such time that the applicant submits an acceptable WMP or can otherwise show, to the WMP official’s satisfaction, that the applicant is otherwise exempt pursuant to Section 8.13.070. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.070 Exemption to waste management plan.
     A.    Application. If an applicant for a covered project experiences unique circumstances that the applicant believes makes it unfeasible to comply with the diversion requirement, the applicant may apply for an exemption at the time the WMP is submitted as required under Section 8.13.040. The applicant shall indicate on the WMP the maximum rate of diversion believed feasible for each material and the specific circumstances that make it unfeasible to comply with the diversion requirement.

     B.     Meeting with the WMP Compliance Official. The WMP compliance official shall review the information supplied by the applicant and may meet with the applicant to discuss possible ways of meeting the diversion requirement. Based on the information supplied by the applicant, the WMP compliance official shall determine whether it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement.

     C.     Granting of Exemption. If the WMP official determines that it is unfeasible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement due to unique circumstances, the WMP official shall determine the maximum feasible diversion rate for each material and shall indicate this rate on the WMP submitted by the applicant. The WMP compliance official shall return a copy of the WMP to the applicant marked “Approved for Exemption” and shall notify the building official that the WMP has been approved.

     D.    Denial of Exemption. If the WMP official determines that it is possible for the applicant to meet the diversion requirement, the WMP official shall so inform the applicant in writing and shall not grant an exemption. The applicant shall resubmit a WMP form in full compliance with Section 8.13.040. If the applicant fails to resubmit the WMP, or if the resubmitted WMP does not comply with Section 8.13.040, the WMP official shall deny the WMP. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

 

8.13.080 Appeal.
     A.    The applicant shall have the right to appeal any decision made by the WMP compliance official to the community development director, or his or her designee.

     B.     The decision made by the community development director, or his or her designee, shall be final. (Ord. 07-03 § 1)

Chapter 8.16 INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISPOSAL
8.16.010 Enforcement and administration.
     The county of Orange and all of its officers, employees and agents are authorized and empowered to enforce and administer the provisions of this chapter within the city. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.020 Director’s authority.
     The director shall enforce this chapter and shall, upon his own initiative, or may upon the complaint of a third person, investigate any violation of this chapter, or of any permit issued hereunder. For such purpose, he shall have the powers of a peace officer. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.030 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise requires:

     “Board of supervisors” means the board of supervisors of the county of Orange, California.

     “Department” means any department of the city or the county of Orange.

     “Director” means the duly appointed administrator of Orange County Ordinance No. 703, appointed by the board of supervisors of the county of Orange.

     “Industrial waste” means any and all liquid or solid waste substance, not sewage from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature. It includes sewage mixed with industrial waste; however, it shall not include domestic sewage from residences, business buildings and institutions, containing only waste from water closets, wash water, baths and kitchens.

     “Pollution of underground or surface waters” means any condition resulting from the depositing or discharging of industrial waste which impairs or contributes to the impairment of the usefulness of waters for human or animal consumption or domestic, agricultural, industrial or recreational purposes, or any other useful purposes.

     “Public agency” means and includes the United States or any department or agency thereof, the state of California or any department or agency thereof, county, city, public corporation, municipal corporation or public district.

     “Public sewer” means the main line sewer, publicly owned or maintained, constructed in a street, highway, alley, place or right-of-way dedicated to public use.

     “Sewage” means any waste, liquid or otherwise associated with human occupancy of buildings including sewage effluent and water contaminated with offal, filth and feculent matter.

     “Underground” or “surface water” means any surface or subterranean stream watercourse, lake or other body of water, and shall include water wells and any underground or surface storage reservoir, whether natural or artificial. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.040 Pollution of water prohibited.
     No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be discharged or deposited from any source any industrial waste in a manner which will or may cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface waters. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.050 Disposal of industrial waste— Permit required.
     No person shall discharge or deposit or cause or suffer to be deposited or discharged any industrial waste into or upon any area in the city, or into any underground or surface waters in the city where such industrial waste is or may be deposited upon or may be carried through or over any area of the city except in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and unless he shall have first secured, in the manner hereinafter provided, a permit so to do from the director; provided, however, a permit shall not be required for the discharge of industrial waste into a public sewer with an ocean outfall. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.060 Permit application.
     Applications for permits required hereunder shall be filed with the director upon printed forms to be prescribed and supplied by him. The director may require any additional information, including plans and specifications, which he may deem necessary for the proper disposition of the application. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.070 Permit application—Time frame for action.
     Within thirty (30) days after receipt of all of the information requested of an applicant, the director shall either grant or deny the permit and immediately shall notify the applicant by first class mail of the action taken. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.080 Permit issuance.
     A.    The director shall issue a permit for industrial waste disposal if he determines that:

     1.     The material to be discharged or deposited in the manner proposed will not cause or result in the pollution of any underground or surface waters, as herein prohibited; and

     2.     Under existing circumstances and conditions, it is reasonable and necessary to dispose of the waste in the manner proposed.

     B.     The director may incorporate in any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, such limitations or conditions as may be reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of this chapter and may, from time to time, review the limitations or conditions which have been incorporated in any permit theretofore issued, given consideration to changed conditions, and may, whenever in his judgment, it is advisable or required in order to maintain the waters of the city and county free from pollution, alter, revise, modify, delete or add further limitations or conditions applicable to any permit theretofore issued. No such alterations, revision, modification, deletion or addition of limitations or conditions shall be effective, however, until notice in writing thereof shall have been served upon the permittee in the manner provided by this chapter. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.090 Permit limitations.
     A permit issued under this chapter does not authorize any act or acts forbidden by any law, rule, regulation or order of any public agency or department and such fact shall be so stated on the face of all permits issued. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.100 Term of permits.
     A permit for the disposal of industrial waste shall be valid until suspended or revoked in the manner hereinafter provided. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.110 Transfer of permits.
     The director may transfer a permit to the successor in interest of a permittee upon the filing by the successor in interest of a written application therefor, together with such evidence of transfer of title or interest as the director may require provided, however, a permit shall not be transferable from one location to another. The director shall immediately notify, by first class mail, the person requesting a transfer of a permit of the action taken. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.120 Tests and inspections.
     For the purpose of securing compliance with this chapter, the director shall make periodic tests of samples of industrial waste obtained from the place or places of discharge or deposit, and such other tests deemed necessary for proper administration hereof. For the purpose of making such tests or inspections, the director or his duly authorized deputies or agent shall be permitted at all reasonable hours to enter any premises or place where industrial waste is being or is proposed to be discharged or deposited, or where there may be a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.130 Cooperation by other departments.
     In carrying out the duties imposed upon him, the director may request and receive the aid of any other city or county department. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.140 Notice of violation.
     Whenever the director finds that any person is acting in violation of any provisions of this chapter or of any permit issued hereunder, he shall serve upon the person causing or suffering such violation to be committed, including the permittee, if a permit has been issued, a notice of violation. The notice shall state the act or acts constituting the violation and shall direct that the violation be corrected within such time to be specified in the notice as the director may deem reasonable. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.150 Notice—Procedure.
     A.    Unless otherwise expressly provided, any notice under the chapter required to be given by the county of Orange or the director shall be in writing and may be served either in the manner provided in the Code of Civil Procedure for the service of process or by registered mail. When service is by registered mail, the notice shall be sent to the last address given to the director.

     B.     The failure to comply with a notice of violation issued and served pursuant to this chapter shall constitute a wilful violation of this section and each day of wilful violation shall constitute a separate offense punishable as provided for in this code. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.160 Continued violation—Cessation of activities.
     Whenever the director finds that the continued violation of any provision of this chapter or of the conditions of any permit issued hereunder is so aggravated that the prevention of pollution of underground or surface waters requires the immediate cessation of the activities causing the violation, he may so direct in the notice of violation. A person who has been so notified shall immediately cease all such activities and shall not resume them until the director determines that all of the violations charged in the notice have been corrected. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.170 Suspension of permit.
     A.    The director may suspend a permit by giving notice thereof to the permittee:

     1.     When a permittee fails to rectify a violation within the time specified in a notice thereof; or

     2.     When a violation is so aggravated as to require cessation of activities as provided in the preceding section.

     B.     A permit suspended by the director shall be reinstated by him when all of the violations charged in a notice thereof have been corrected. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.180 Revocation of permit.
     The board of supervisors may, after notice and hearing as hereinafter provided, revoke a permit on any one or more of the following grounds:

     A.    Fraud or deceit in obtaining a permit;

     B.     Failure of a permittee to correct a violation within the time prescribed in a notice of violation;

     C.     Wilful violation of any provisions of this chapter of a condition or limitation of a permit, or of any lawful order of the director. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.190 Revocation of permit— Proceedings.
     Proceedings for the revocation of a permit may be initiated:

     A.    By the director by serving upon the permittee a copy of and filing with the county clerk, a written recommendation of revocation setting forth the grounds therefor and requesting a hearing thereon before the board of supervisors; or

     B.     By the board of supervisors, on its own motion or upon the complaint of a third person, by servicing or causing to be served upon the permittee and the director a notice of intention to revoke, setting forth the grounds therefor and designating a time and place for hearing thereon. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.200 Request for hearing.
     A.    A person who is dissatisfied with an action of the director may request a hearing before the board of supervisors.

     B.     Any person who feels him or herself aggrieved by an action of the director:

     1.     Denying an application for a permit or incorporating limitations or conditions in a permit;

     2.     Denying an application for the transfer of a permit;

     3.     Ordering the correction of a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of a condition or limitation of a permit issued hereunder;

     4.     Directing the cessation of operations pending the correction of a violation; or

     5.     Suspending or refusing to reinstate a permit suspended by him or her;

may, within thirty (30) days after receipt of a notice of the action complained of; serve upon the director a copy of and file with the county clerk a written request for a hearing before the board of supervisors. The request shall set forth in concise language the particular action or actions complained of and the reasons why the person or permittee feels him or herself aggrieved thereby. Failure to file a request for hearing within the time prescribed herein shall constitute a waiver of any objection to the action of the director and his action shall be final. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.210 Notice of hearing.
     When a request for hearing is filed with the county clerk, the board of supervisors shall set the matter for hearing and give notice of the time and place thereof to the person requesting the hearing, the director and any other person or public agency requesting notice thereof. The hearing shall be held not more than thirty (30) days after a written request therefor has been filed with the county clerk and not less than ten days after the issuance of the notice thereof. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.220 Hearing—Persons to attend.
     At the time and place set for hearing, the person requesting the hearing, the director, and any interested person or public agency may appear and be heard either in person or by council. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

 

8.16.230 Decision.
     The board of supervisors shall, within thirty (30) days after conclusion of the hearing, render its decision. The board of supervisors may:

     A.    Confirm the action of the director;

     B.     Direct the director to issue a permit with or without such conditions or limitations as the board of supervisors may deem appropriate;

     C.     Vacate or modify the suspension of permit;

     D.    Cancel a notice of violation or modify such notice in such particulars as the board of supervisors may deem appropriate;

     E.     Direct the director to transfer a permit;

     F.     Revoke a permit on any of the grounds specified in Section 8.16.180;

     G.    Make such other disposition of the matter heard as may be appropriate and in conformity with this chapter. (Ord. 472 § 1, 1985)

Chapter 8.20 HAZARDOUS MATERIALS DISCLOSURE
8.20.010 Intent and purpose.
The city council finds and declares that:

     A.    Emergency service personnel in the city have a need to know of the use and dangers of hazardous materials in the community in order to plan for and respond to potential emergencies and exposure to such materials.

     B.     Basic information on the location, type and the health risks of hazardous materials used or stored in the city is not now available to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and other emergency response personnel.

     C.     It is intended that the system of disclosure set forth in this chapter shall provide that information essential to firefighters, health officials, planners, elected officials and other emergency service personnel in meeting their responsibilities for the health and welfare of the community in such a fashion that trade secrecy is not abridged.

     D.    It is further intended that this ordinance implement the community’s right and need for basic information on the use and disposal of hazardous materials in the city and provide for an orderly system for the provision of such information. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the terms listed in this section shall be defined as follows; provided, however, references to statutes or regulations in existence at the time this chapter is adopted shall also include references to such statutes or regulations as they may be amended or changed in the future:

     “Carcinogen” refers to a substance which causes cancer. For purposes of this chapter, carcinogens are those substances specified on the list developed by the United States Department of Health and Human Services on its Second Annual Report on Carcinogens.

     “CAS number” means the unique identification name as assigned by the Chemical Abstracts Services to specific chemical substances.

     “Chemical name” means the scientific designation of a substance in accordance with the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry or the system developed by the Chemical Abstracts Services.

     “Common name” means a designation of identification such as code name, code number, trade name or brand name used to identify a substance other than by its chemical name.

     “County” means county of Orange, a political subdivision of the state of California.

     “Director of fire services” means the director of fire   services for the county. “Disclosure form” means the written request for information prepared pursuant to Sections 8.20.040 and 8.20.050.

     “Handle” means to generate, treat or dispose of a hazardous material in any fashion.

     “Handler” means any person who handles a hazardous substance.

     “Hazardous material” means any substance or hazardous waste as defined in this section, or any material designated pursuant to this chapter.

     “Hazardous material” means any substance or product:

     1.     For which the manufacturer or producer is required to prepare a MSDS for the substance or product pursuant to the Hazardous Substances Information and Training Act (commencing with Section 6360, Chapter 2.5, Part 1 of Division 5 California Labor Code) or pursuant to any applicable federal law or regulation; or

     2.     Listed in Section 25316 of the Health and Safety Code; or

     3.     Which is listed as a radioactive material set forth in Chapter 1, Title 10, Appendix B, Code of Federal Regulations; or

     4.     Which is listed as a legal carcinogen from the California Administrative Code, Title 8, Subchapter 7, Group 16 and those substances specified in the second paragraph of this Section; or

     5.     Which the Director of the Department of Food and Agriculture classifies as pesticides; or

     6.     Which the EPA classifies as priority organic pollutants.

     “Hazardous waste” or “extremely hazardous waste” means any material that is identified in:

     1.     Sections 25115 or 25117 of the California Health and Safety Code as set forth in Section 66680 and 66684 of Title 22 of the California Administrative Code; or

     2.     The Code of Federal Regulations, Title 40, Sections 261.31 — 261.33.

     “Health official” means the health officer of the county of Orange or his deputy.

     “MSDS” means a Material Safety Data Sheet prepared pursuant to Section 6390 of the California Labor Code or pursuant to the regulations of the Occupational Safety and Health Administration of the United States Department of Labor.

     “Person” means an individual, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation, partnership or association.

     “Physician” means any person who holds a valid certificate from the state of California to practice the healing arts.

     “SIC code” means the identification number assigned by the Standard Industrial Classification Code to specific types of businesses.

     “Storage” or “storing” means the containment of substances or materials in such manner as not to constitute disposal of such substances or materials.

     “Use” includes the handling, processing or storage of a hazardous substance.

     “User” means any person who uses a hazardous substance or handles a hazardous waste. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.030 Additional designation of hazardous materials.
     A substance may be deemed a hazardous material or hazardous waste upon a finding by the director of fire services that the substance, because of its quantity, concentration or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the community. The director of fire services may use the Uniform Fire Code published by the Western Fire Chiefs Association to assist in requiring the types and amounts of such substances to be disclosed. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.040 Hazardous material disclosure form.
     A.    Any person who uses or handles a hazardous material must semi-annually, during the months of January and July, submit a completed disclosure form to the Orange County fire department.

     B.     Any person who, during the calendar year, for the first time becomes a user or handler of any hazardous material must submit a completed disclosure form to the Orange County fire department within thirty (30) days of becoming a user or handler. Thereafter any such user or handler shall comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section.

     C.     The Orange County fire department may, upon thirty (30) days written notice, require the submittal of a disclosure form of any user or handler.

     D.    Any person required to submit a disclosure form pursuant to this section shall file with the fire department of Orange County an updated disclosure form within fifteen (15) days of any of the following:

     1.     A change in business address;

     2.     A change in business ownership;

     3.     A change of business name;

     4.     Cessation of business operations;

     5.     The use or handling of a previously undisclosed hazardous material;

     6.     A significant change in the use or handling of a hazardous material for which disclosure has been previously made. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.050 Required disclosure form—Contents.
     A.    The disclosure form shall be developed by the director of fire services, and shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     A copy of the MSDS for every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form as required by the fire department;

     2.     CAS number as may be required by the fire department;

     3.     SIC code as may be required by the fire department;

     4.     U.N. identification number as may be required by the fire department;

     5.     A listing of the chemical name and any common names of every hazardous material used by the person completing the disclosure form;

     6.     The maximum amount of each hazardous material which is handled or used at any one time by the user over the course of the year;

     7.     Specific information on how and where the hazardous materials are handled or used by the user so as to allow fire and safety personnel to prepare adequate emergency response plans to potential releases of the hazardous materials;

     8.     The names and phone numbers of at least two persons representing the business and who would be able to assist emergency personnel in the event of an emergency involving the business during business and nonbusiness hours;

     9.     The hazard characteristics of every hazardous material disclosed, including, but not limited to, toxicity, flammability, reactivity, and corrosivity as may be required by the fire department.

     B.     Upon request all users must provide the following information:

     1.     To the fire department, any information determined by the fire department to be necessary to protect the public health, safety or the environment;

     2.     To any physician, where the physician determines that such information is necessary to the medical treatment of his or her patient. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.060 Exemptions from disclosure requirements.
     A.    The following materials or persons are exempt from the disclosure requirements of Section 8.20.040:

     1.     A material designated as a hazardous material by this chapter solely by its presence on the Nuclear Regulatory Commission list of radioactive materials shall be exempt from the requirement that a MSDS be submitted with the disclosure form;

     2.     Hazardous materials or substances contained in food, drug, cosmetic or tobacco products;

     3.     Any person using or handling less than five hundred (500) pounds or fifty-five (55) gallons per year, whichever is the lesser, of a hazardous material shall be exempted from the requirement of disclosure of that use or handling unless the fire chief has provided notice that the weight or volume limits of this exemption for a specific hazardous material has been lowered in response to public health concerns or to meet the intent and requirements of the Uniform Fire Code;

     4.     Hazardous materials contained solely in consumer products packaged for use by and distributed to the general public unless the product is repackaged or altered in any way; provided however, the manufacture and distribution of these products are not exempt;

     5.     Any person, while engaged in the transportation of hazardous materials, including storage directly incident thereto, provided that such materials are accompanied by shipping papers prepared in accordance with the provisions of 49 Code of Federal Regulations, Subchapter c, as now in existence or as hereafter amended or changed;

     6.     Infectious waste generated by hospitals, medical centers, clinics and other health care facilities that are regulated under Title 22 of the California Administrative Code.

     B.     The exemptions contained in this section shall not apply to the using or handling of carcinogens, except to the extent that such carcinogens are handled or used solely for personal purposes.

     C.     No MSDS shall be required for any hazardous material for which an MSDS is not available at the time disclosure is required, however, that such MSDS shall be submitted to the fire department within fifteen (15) days after receipt by the user of the MSDS. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.070 Information regarding hazardous waste—Availability.
     The health official will make information available to fire departments and emergency response personnel, upon request, regarding hazardous wastes, extremely hazardous wastes, and underground tanks, when the information is obtained by the health official. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.080 Identification of areas.
     A.    When required by the director of fire services, work areas in which any person uses or handles hazardous materials shall be identified as such by such measures as the director of fire services may specify including, but not limited to, signs, color coding, posting lists of material and MSDS or other notices.

     B.     When required by the director of fire services, any person submitting a disclosure form may be required to install an approved key box for emergency utilization of MSDS, floor plans, site plans and access keys. The location of the required key box shall be as designated by the director of fire services. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.090 Fees.
     The county board of supervisors shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees to be paid by persons subject to this chapter which is sufficient to cover the costs of administration resulting from this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.100 Trade secrets.
     A.    A user may designate some, or all, of the information on the disclosure form as a trade secret. Any information designated as a trade secret contained on the disclosure form shall not be disclosed to anyone except:

     1.     An officer or employee of a governmental entity in connection with the official duties of such officer or employee under any law for the protection of health;

     2.     Contractors of governmental entities when, in the opinion of the director of fire services, disclosure is necessary and required for the protection of health and the performance of a contract;

     3.     Any physician where the physician determines that such information is necessary for the medical treatment of his or her patient.

     B.     Any officer or employee of the city, or former officer or employee, who by virtue of such employment or official position has obtained possession of or has access to information, the disclosure of which is prohibited by this section, and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses the information in any manner to any person not entitled to receive it, shall be in violation of this section. For purposes of determining a violation of this section, a contractor who has been furnished information pursuant to this section shall be deemed an employee of the city. Any physician who has been furnished information or who has obtained information pursuant to this section and who, knowing that disclosure of the information is prohibited, knowingly and wilfully discloses this information, shall be in violation of this section.

     C.     Upon receipt of a request for the release of information to the public which includes information which the user has notified the fire department is a trade secret pursuant to subsection (A) of this section, the fire department shall notify the user in writing of the request by certified mail. The fire department shall release the information thirty (30) days after the day of mailing the notice, unless, prior to the expiration of the thirty (30) days, the user institutes an action in an appropriate court for a declaratory judgment that the information is subject to protection under subsection (B) of this section and/or an injunction prohibiting disclosure of the information to the general public.

     D.    The provisions of this section shall not permit a user to refuse to disclose information required to be disclosed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.110 Rules and regulations.
     The director of fire services shall make such rules and regulations as may be necessary to implement this chapter including, but not limited to, the maintenance of a comprehensive list of substances which would be classified as hazardous materials under this chapter. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

 

8.20.120 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor. (Ord. 483 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 8.24 LITTER
8.24.010 Short title.
     This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the city of Los Alamitos anti-litter ordinance. (Ord. 201 § 1, 1970)

 

8.24.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words used in the plural number include the singular number, and words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not merely directory.

     “Aircraft” is any contrivance now known or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The word “aircraft” includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons.

     “Authorized private receptacle” is a litter storage and collection receptacle.

     “City” is the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Commercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature:

     1.     Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; or

     2.     Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof by sales; or

     3.     Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this state, or under any ordinance of the city; or

     4.     Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes, or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distributor.

     “Garbage” is putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.

     “Litter” is “garbage,” “refuse” and “rubbish” as defined herein and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.

     “Newspaper” is any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the post office department of the United States, in accordance with federal statute or regulations, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, means and includes any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four issues per year, and sold to the public.

     “Noncommercial handbill” is any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.

     “Park” is a park, reservation, playground, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation.

     “Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.

     “Private premises” is any dwelling, house, building or other private structure, designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes, whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously inhabited or vacant, and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or other structure.

     “Public place” is any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and buildings.

     “Refuse” is all putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, abandoned automobiles, and solid market and industrial wastes.

     “Rubbish” is nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials.

     “Vehicle” is every device in, upon or by which any person of property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 201 § 2, 1970)

 

8.24.030 Litter in public places.
     No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk or other public place within the city except in public receptacles, in authorized private receptacles for collection, or in official city dumps. (Ord. 201 § 3, 1970)

 

8.24.040 Placement of litter in receptacles.
     Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized private receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. 201 § 4, 1970)

 

8.24.050 Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
     No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (Ord. 201 § 5, 1970)

 

8.24.060 Merchants’ duty to keep sidewalks free of litter.
     No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (Ord. 201 § 6, 1970)

 

8.24.070 Litter thrown by persons in vehicles.
     No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city, or upon private property. (Ord. 201 § 7, 1970)

 

8.24.080 Truck loads causing litter.
     No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (Ord. 201 § 8, 1970)

 

8.24.090 Litter in parks.
     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and property disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (Ord. 201 § 9, 1970)

 

8.24.100 Litter in ponds and fountains.
     No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. (Ord. 201 § 10, 1970)

 

8.24.110 Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places.
     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public places within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (Ord. 201 § 11, 1970)

 

8.24.120 Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles.
     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof, a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (Ord. 201 § 12, 1970)

 

8.24.130 Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises.
     No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (Ord. 201 § 13, 1970)

 

8.24.140 Prohibiting distribution of handbills where properly posted.
     No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill upon any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on the premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof, a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing,” “No Peddlers or Agents,” “No Advertisement” or any similar notice indicating in any matter that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or have their right of privacy disturbed, or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. (Ord. 201 § 14, 1970)

 

8.24.150 Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises.
     No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, that in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises, if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations.

     Exemption for Mail and Newspapers. The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers (as defined herein) except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. (Ord. 201 § 15, 1970)

 

8.24.160 Dropping litter from aircraft.
     No person in an aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit within the city any litter, handbill or any other objects. (Ord. 201 § 16, 1970)

 

8.24.170 Posting notices prohibited.
     No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (Ord. 201 § 17, 1970)

 

8.24.180 Litter on occupied private property.
     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. (Ord. 201 § 18, 1970)

 

8.24.190 Owner to maintain premises free of litter.
     The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized private receptacles for collection. (Ord. 201 § 19, 1970)

 

8.24.200 Litter on vacant lots.
     No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city whether owned by such person or not. (Ord. 201 § 20, 1970)

 

8.24.210 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined in an amount not exceeding five hundred ($500.00) dollars or be imprisoned in the county jail for a period not exceeding ninety (90) days, or be both so fined and imprisoned. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder. (Ord. 201 § 21, 1970)

Chapter 8.28 MOBILE SOURCE AIR POLLUTION
8.28.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter:

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Fee administrator” means the director of administrative services or his designee.

     “Mobile source air pollution reduction programs” means any program or project implemented by the city to reduce air pollution from motor vehicles which it determines will be consistent with the California Clean Air Act of 1988 or the plan proposed pursuant to Article 5 (commencing with Section 40460) of Chapter 5.5 of Part 3 of the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 545 § 1, 1991)

 

8.28.020 Administration of vehicle registration fee.
     A.    Receipt of Fee. The additional vehicle registration fees disbursed by the SCAQMD and remitted to the city, pursuant to this chapter, shall be accepted by the fee administrator or his designee.

     B.     Establishment of Air Quality Improvement Trust Fund. The fee administrator or his designee shall establish a separate interest-bearing trust fund account in a financial institution authorized to receive deposits of city funds.

     C.     Transfer of Funds. Upon receipt of vehicle registration fees, the fee administrator or his designee shall deposit such funds into the separate account established pursuant to subsection B of this section. All interest earned by the trust fund account shall be credited only to that account.

     D.    Expenditure of Air Quality Trust Fund Revenues. All revenues received from the SCAQMD and deposited in the trust fund account shall be exclusively expended on mobile source emission reduction programs as defined in Section 8.28.010. Such revenue and any interest earned on the revenues shall be expended within one year of the completion of the programs.

     E.     Audits. The city consents to an audit of all programs and projects funded by vehicle registration fee revenues received from the SCAQMD pursuant to Section 44223 of the Health and Safety Code. The audit shall be conducted by an independent auditor selected by the SCAQMD as provided Sections 44244 and 4244.1(a) of the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 545 § 1, 1991)

Chapter 8.32 NUISANCE ABATEMENT
8.32.010 Purpose.
     A.    In order to further the stated goals of the city and to protect its citizens and their property from conditions which are offensive or annoying to the senses, detrimental to property values and community appearance, or injurious to the health, safety or welfare of the general public in such ways as to be a nuisance, the city council has determined that an ordinance is necessary to effectively abate or prevent such conditions in this community.

     B.     It is the intention of the city council, in adopting the ordinance codified in this chapter, to set forth guidelines for determining what conditions constitute a nuisance; to establish a method for giving notice of the conditions and an opportunity to correct them; and finally, in the event the nuisance is not corrected, to provide a procedure for a hearing and determination of the facts and manner in which the conditions shall be corrected or removed.

     C.     It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter to provide a just, equitable and practical method, to be cumulative with and in addition to any other remedy available at law, whereby lands or buildings which are dilapidated, unsafe, dangerous, unsanitary, cluttered with weeds, debris, or abandoned machinery or equipment, or are menace to life, limb, health, morals, property, safety and the general welfare of the people of this city or which tend to constitute a fire hazard or a nuisance may be required to be repaired, vacated, demolished, made safe or cleaned up by removal of the offensive conditions.

     D.    In addition to the abatement procedures provided herein, this chapter declares certain conditions to be public nuisances and provides that such conditions are unlawful and that violations are a misdemeanor or infraction. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.020 Declaration of nuisance.
     A.    Each of the following conditions is declared to constitute a public nuisance, and whenever the city manager or his designee, acting as the hearing officer, or the city council, determines that any of such conditions exist upon any premises, they may require or provide for the abatement thereof pursuant to this chapter and make the costs of abatement a lien upon the property:

     1.     Any public nuisance known in law or in equity;

     2.     Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed or unsafe as defined in the adopted Uniform Building Code, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction. An “unreasonable state of partial construction” is defined as any unfinished building or structure which has been in the course of construction one year or more, and where the appearance and other conditions of the unfinished building or structure substantially detracts from the appearance of the immediate neighborhood or reduces the property values in the immediate neighborhood; and where completion of construction is not being diligently pursued;

     3.     Unpainted buildings and those having dry rot, warping or termite infestation. Buildings on which the condition of the paint has become so deteriorated as to permit decay, excessive checking, cracking, peeling, chalking, dry rot, warping or termite infestation so as to render the buildings unsightly and in a state of disrepair;

     4.     Broken windows constituting hazardous conditions and inviting trespassers and malicious mischief;

     5.     Building exteriors, walls, fences, driveways, sidewalks and walkways which are maintained in such condition as to become so defective, unsightly or in such condition of deterioration or disrepair that the same causes depreciation of the values of surrounding property or is materially detrimental to nearby properties and improvements;

     6.     The accumulation of dirt, litter, equipment or debris in vestibules, doorways or on the adjoining sidewalks or driveways;

     7.     Lumber, junk, trash, garbage, salvage materials, rubbish, refuse, rubble, broken asphalt, concrete, containers, scrap metal or other debris stored or deposited on a property such that they are visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property;

     8.     Attractive nuisances dangerous to individuals, including abandoned, broken or neglected equipment and machinery; hazardous pools, ponds and excavations; abandoned refrigerators or motor vehicles; any structurally unsound fence or structure; or any other lumber, trash, garbage, rubbish, refuse, debris or vegetation which may prove a hazard;

     9.     Abandoned, discarded or unused furniture, stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets or other household appliances or fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible at ground level from a public street or alley or from an adjoining property;

     10.   Construction equipment, supplies, materials or machinery of any type or description parked or stored, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit and/or grading permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property;

     11.   Improper maintenance of signs relating to uses no longer conducted or products no longer sold on the property;

     12.   Maintenance of property that is so out of harmony or conformity with the maintenance standards of adjacent properties as to cause substantial diminution of the enjoyment, use or property values of such adjacent properties;

     13.   Vehicles parked in the residential front, side or rear yards in violation of the provisions of Section 17.36.050;

     14.   Property maintained in relation to others so as to establish a prevalence of depreciated values, impaired investments, and social and economic maladjustments to such an extent that the capacity to pay taxes is reduced and tax receipts from such particular areas are inadequate for the cost of public services rendered therein;

     15.   Maintenance of property in such condition as to be detrimental to the public health, safety or general welfare or in such manner as to constitute a public nuisance as defined in California Civil Code Section 3479 and 3480, including, but not limited to, anything dangerous to human life or detrimental to human health, or any habitation that is overcrowded with occupants or that lacks adequate ventilation, sanitation or plumbing facilities, or that constitutes a fire hazard;

     16.   Dead, decayed, diseased, overgrown or hazardous trees, weeds, and vegetation, cultivated or uncultivated, which is likely to harbor rodents or vermin, or constitute an unsightly appearance, or is detrimental to neighboring properties or property values;

     17.   Any wall, fence or hedge maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property or to cause depreciation in the value of any adjacent or neighboring property;

     18.   Any property with pooled oil accumulation, oil or other hazardous material flowing onto public rights-of-way, or excessive accumulations of grease, oil or other hazardous material on paved or unpaved surfaces, buildings, walls or fences, or on any public street or property;

     19.   Any yard which contains excessive weeds, debris, uncultivated dirt or other condition which creates an unkempt appearance or which lacks appropriate decorative healthy planted matter or required landscaping;

     20.   Insufficient ventilation or illumination;

     21.   Inadequate or unsanitary sewerage or plumbing facilities;

     22.   Any condition of vegetation overgrowth or any impervious object which encroaches into, over or upon any public right-of-way including, but not limited to, streets, alleys or sidewalks, so as to constitute either a danger to the public safety or property or an impediment to public travel;

     23.   A swimming pool, pond or other body of water which is unfiltered, or not otherwise maintained, resulting in the water becoming polluted. “Polluted water” means water which contains bacterial growth, algae, insects, animal life, rubbish, refuse, dirt, debris, papers, chemicals or other matter or material which, because of its magnitude, nature or location, constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition.

     24.   The keeping of any animal, other than a household pet, as defined herein. “Household pets” means animals, birds or fowl ordinarily permitted in a dwelling and kept only for the company or pleasure provided to the occupants. Household pets include birds kept in an enclosed aviary which shall be no closer than thirty (30) feet from any residence other than that of the owner of the aviary. Pigeons banded with the American Racing Pigeon Union official band shall be the only birds allowed to be loose. The number of birds in an aviary shall not exceed ten for each full six thousand (6,000) square foot of premises of the owner. Such an aviary shall be an allowed use only in the R-1 zone. Household pets shall not include horses, cows, goats, sheep, other equine, bovine, ovine or ruminant animals, pigs (except potbellied pigs), predatory wild animals, chickens, ducks, geese, turkeys, game birds and fowl which normally constitute an agricultural use (except pigeons, which shall be deemed household pets);

     25.   Any violation of the zoning code of the city;

     26.   Any violation of any ordinance or code section of the city or county including but not limited to the adopted Uniform Construction Codes, the Fire Code or violation of any other such sections dealing with conditions, uses, matters or items on or about real property in the city. (Ord. 564 § 1, 1993; Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.030 Unlawful property nuisances.
     It is unlawful for any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city to maintain such property in such a manner that any of the conditions set forth in Section 8.32.020. The procedures for abatement set forth in this chapter shall not be the exclusive means by which such conditions may be abated and shall not in any manner limit or restrict the city from enforcing other city ordinances or provisions of the Municipal Code or from abating public nuisances in any other manner provided by law. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.040 Summary abatement.
     A.    Whenever a condition of property in the city is brought to the attention of the city manager which clearly constitutes an immediate danger or hazard to persons or property, then the city manager, may immediately take steps to secure the condition so as to mitigate or eliminate the potential for injury to persons or property.

     B.     In such instance the city manager shall first make a reasonable attempt to contact the owner, occupant or tenant of the property and give such person notification of the dangerous or hazardous condition. If such attempt is unsuccessful, or if the owner, occupant, or tenant fails or refuses to act then the city manager or a designated representative may proceed as set forth in subsection A of this section.

     C.     After compliance with subsections A and B of this section, the costs of the steps taken pursuant to subsection A of this section shall be assessed as a lien against the property in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.

     D.    The procedures set forth in this section are an alternative to the procedure described in Section 8.32.070; provided, however, this procedure may be followed when circumstances require immediate action as to part of a nuisance situation. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.050 Abandoned defined.
     For purposes of this chapter the term “abandoned” means, in addition to such other definitions as may be provided by law, any property, real or personal, which has ceased to be used for its designed and intended purpose. The following factors, among others, may be considered in determining whether or not an item has been abandoned:

     A.    Present operability and functional utility;

     B.     The date of last effective use;

     C.     The condition of disrepair or damage;

     D.    The last time an effort was made to repair or rehabilitate the property;

     E.     The status of registration or licensing, if applicable of the property;

     F.     The age of the property and degree of obsolescence;

     G.    The cost of rehabilitation or repair of the property versus its market value; or

     H.    The nature of the area and location of the property. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.060 Owner defined.
     The terms “owner” and “property owner” as used in this chapter, and unless otherwise required by the context, shall be deemed to include any person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge or possession of any property in the city. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.070 Initiation of proceedings.
     Whenever the city manager reasonably believes that any premises within the city are being maintained in such a manner as to constitute a public nuisance, then the city manager may give notice as provided herein and direct that a public hearing be conducted to ascertain whether the same constitutes a public nuisance. The notice shall describe the premise(s) involved by street address or legal description or assessor’s parcel number, shall give a brief description of the conditions constituting the nuisance, and may contain a brief statement of the proposed methods of abatement. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.080 Notice of hearing.
     A.    The city clerk shall cause the notice of the hearing to be served upon the owner of the affected premises by providing a copy of the notice of the time, date and place of the hearing.

     B.     Such service shall be made by registered or certified mail, addressed to the owner at the owner’s last known address as shown upon city records or the last equalized tax roll, whichever appears to be the more reliable address. The city clerk shall also cause the property to be conspicuously posted with the notice, and such posting shall constitute adequate service in the event that mailed notice is not received for any reason.

     C.     The notice shall be mailed or posted so as to give at least ten days notice of the hearing. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.090 Form of notice.
     Notice given shall be on a form as prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.100 Hearing.
     A.    By resolution, the city council shall establish the process for designation of a hearing officer for matters commenced pursuant to this chapter.

     B.     At the time stated in the notice, the hearing officer shall hear and consider all relevant evidence relating to the condition of the property; the hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The hearing may be continued from time to time.

     C.     Upon the conclusion of the hearing, the hearing officer shall determine whether the premises or conditions thereon constitute a public nuisance. If the hearing officer determines that a public nuisance exists, the hearing officer shall declare such premises to be a public nuisance and order the abatement of the same by the property owner within a specified time. Such declaration shall contain a detailed list of needed corrections or abatement methods.

     D.    A copy of the declaration shall be served upon the owner in the same manner as the notice of hearing.

     E.     When a judicial arbitration service conducts the hearing and a determination is made that nuisance conditions exist on the property, the hearing officer shall impose the obligation to pay the hearing costs and expenses on the property and such costs and expenses shall be added to the cost accounting. (Ord. 564 § 2, 1993; Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.110 Appeal.
     A.    Any person entitled to notice of the hearing or who has participated in that hearing and who is dissatisfied by the determination of the hearing officer may appeal the determination by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within ten days of the date of the order and by paying the appeal fee set by a resolution of the city council. The appeal shall specify:

     1.     A description of the property;

     2.     The abatement proceedings appealed;

     3.     A statement specifying that portion of the proceedings that are being appealed, together with any evidentiary or supporting materials that would support the appeal; and

     4.     A verification of the truth of all matters asserted.

     B.     The city council, in its sole discretion, may determine whether or not to grant an appeal. If an appeal is not requested or granted, the decision of the hearing officer shall be considered the final action on the matter and the appellant shall be so notified.

     C.     If the city council determines to grant an appeal, the appeal shall be limited to the record produced before the hearing officer. If the city council determines to grant an appeal, it shall provide the appellant with a notice utilizing substantially the same procedure as required for the hearing before the hearing officer. In the notice the appellant will be apprised of the scope of the appeal. If an appeal is allowed, the decision of city council shall be the final action and the property owner shall be so notified of its determination. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.120 Abatement of nuisance by city.
     If the nuisance is not completely abated by the date specified in the hearing officer’s declaration, or in the city council’s determination, as appropriate, the hearing officer may immediately cause the same to be abated by city personnel or under private contract. The hearing officer or city council are also authorized to grant reasonable extensions on the time period for abatement based on a proper showing by the property owner of extenuating circumstances made before the date of city abatement. The owner of the premises shall be liable to the city for all costs of such abatement, including administrative costs. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.130 Cost accounting—Notification.
     A.    City personnel or any private contractor authorized to abate the nuisance, shall keep an account of the cost, including incidental and administrative expenses, of abating the nuisance on each separate lot or parcel of land where the work is done and shall render an itemized report in writing to the city council by showing the cost of abatement by removal, rehabilitation, demolition or repair of the property, buildings or structure, including any salvage value relating thereto. A copy of the report shall be posted at city hall or other official location for posting city notices for at least five days before it is considered by the city council. Proof of posting shall be made by affidavit of the city clerk or deputy city clerk. A copy of the cost accounting shall be served upon the owner in accordance with Section 38773.1 of the Government Code. The term “incidental and administrative expenses” includes, but is not limited to, the actual expenses and costs of the city, including labor and material, in the preparation of notices, specifications and contracts, and in inspecting the work and the costs of printing and mailing required hereunder.

     B.     At a regular, special or adjourned meeting the city council shall consider the cost accounting together with any protests or objections thereto. After such consideration the city council may confirm the cost accounting as presented, or modify the same, and then by resolution confirm the cost as a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land to which it relates. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.140 Assessment lien.
     A.    The total cost for abating the nuisance, as confirmed by the city council, shall constitute a special assessment against the lot or parcel of land to which it relates. Recordation in the office of the county recorder of a notice of lien, shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment.

     B.     After confirmation and recordation, a copy of the notice of lien may be turned over to the tax collector to add the amounts of the assessments to the next regular tax bills levied against the respective lot and parcel of land. Thereafter the assessment amounts shall be collected at the same time and in the same manner as ordinary property taxes are collected and shall be subject to the same penalties and the same procedure for foreclosure and sale in case of delinquency as provided for ordinary property taxes. After recordation, the lien may be foreclosed by judicial or other sale in manner and means provided by law. The notice of lien for recordation shall be provided on a form prescribed by the city manager. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.150 Alternative actions available.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing a civil or criminal proceeding to abate a public nuisance or from pursuing any other means available to it under provisions of applicable ordinances or state law to correct hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings herein set forth. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.160 Owner’s responsibility.
     All property owners within the city have the primary responsibility of keeping the property free of public nuisances. Tenants and occupants of the premises, for the purposes of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the agents of the owner. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.170 Abandoned and stored vehicles.
     The following procedures are adopted pursuant to California Vehicle Code, Section 22660 et seq., and are established as the procedures for the abatement and removal as public nuisances of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof from private property or public property not including highways and for the recovery or assumption by the city, of costs of administration and removal. The following procedures are to be used compatibility and in conjunction with the foregoing sections of this chapter, but shall take precedence if a conflict occurs.

     A.    In addition to the notice provided in Sections 8.32.070 and 8.32.080 at least ten days’ notice shall also be sent to the last registered and legal owner of record, by registered or certified mail, unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership.

     B.     The notice of determination and declaration set forth in Sections 8.32.070, 8.32.080 and 8.32.090 shall include a description of the vehicle, the correct identification and license number of the vehicle insofar as they are available. The notice of determination shall be served on both the owner of the premises and the registered and legal owners of the vehicle, if known, as provided above.

     C.     The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land along with his reasons for such denial. If it is determined at the hearing that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he or she has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, then the city shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from the owner.

     1.     Vehicles or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard, automobile dismantler’s yard or any suitable site operated by the city for processing scrap or by any other final disposition consistent with these provisions.

     2.     Any person authorized by the city to administer this chapter may enter upon private property for the purposes specified in this chapter to examine vehicles or parts thereof, obtain information as to the identity of the vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of any vehicle or part thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. When such entry would violate any person’s reasonable expectation of privacy, an inspection warrant shall first be obtained.

     3.     A certified copy of the order of disposition of the vehicle or parts thereof shall be given to and retained by any person or commercial organization making a final disposition of the vehicle or parts thereof and order shall be retained by them in their business records.

     D.    After a vehicle has been removed as a public nuisance, it shall be destroyed and under no circumstances shall the vehicle be reconstructed or made operable.

     E.     This chapter shall not apply to a vehicle or other personal property mentioned herein which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property, or a vehicle or other personal property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer or a junk yard; provided, however, that this exception shall not authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under the provisions of this chapter or any other law.

     F.     This chapter shall be administered by regularly salaried, full-time employees of the city except that actual abatement of the nuisance and removal of any and all items constituting a nuisance hereunder may be by any other duly authorized person.

     G.    Within five days after removal of any motor vehicle under this chapter, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the date of removal, disposition thereof and identity of the vehicle or parts. In addition, all evidence of registration available including registration certificate, license plates and certificates of title shall be forwarded to the Department of Motor Vehicles as soon as possible. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.180 Violations—Misdemeanor or infraction.
     A.    The owner or other person having charge or control of any buildings or property who maintains any public nuisance defined in this chapter or who violates any order of abatement made pursuant to this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor or infraction and may be charged according to the provisions of this code.

     B.     Any unauthorized person who removes any notice or order posted as required in this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor.

     C.     No person shall obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city or with any person who owns or holds any estate or interest in the property which has been ordered to be vacated, repaired, rehabilitated or demolished and removed whenever any such representative of the city or person having any estate or interest in such property is engaged in vacating, repairing, rehabilitating or demolishing and removing any such property pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or in performing any necessary act preliminary to or incidental to such work as authorized or directed pursuant thereto. (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

 

8.32.190 Second or subsequent judgment— Treble damages.
     Upon entry of a second or subsequent civil or criminal judgment within a two-year period finding that an owner of property is responsible for a condition that may be, or has been abated in accordance with this chapter, the owner may be required to pay treble the costs of the abatement. (See Govt. code Section 38773.7). (Ord. 562 § 3, 1992)

Chapter 8.36 SMOKING
8.36.010 Smoking in public places.
     A.    Legislative Finding. The city council finds and declares that tobacco smoking is a hazard to the health of the general public.

     B.     Definition. “Smoke or smoking,” as used in this chapter, shall include the carrying, holding, possession or smoking of a lighted pipe or cigar or cigarette of any kind, or the lighting of a pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind.

     C.     Smoking Prohibited — Buildings Owned or Leased by City.

     1.     Smoking shall be prohibited in all buildings and enclosed areas, including workplaces, offices, rooms, chambers, dining areas, enclosed areas used by the general public, including hallways and places of meeting or public assembly and vehicles, which are owned or leased by the city, or any agency thereof. However, this section shall not apply to buildings or facilities which are owned or leased by the city if an exemption to the terms hereof is granted pursuant to subdivision (2) of this subsection.

     2.     The city manager or his designee may grant an exemption from the provisions of subdivision (1) of this subsection for the areas known as Activity Rooms A and B in the city’s community center building during the hours when specified scheduled events are being conducted. The city manager or his designee shall post signs in the exempt rooms notifying the public that smoking will be permitted during the designated hours.

     D.    Prohibition in Certain Places Open to the Public. Smoking shall be prohibited in the following places within the city:

     1.     Elevators open to and in use by the public;

     2.     Waiting rooms, public hallways and patients’ rooms of every private or public health care facility including, but not limited to, hospitals except rooms limited to a single patient and not open to the general public;

     3.     Within every room, chamber, place of meeting or public assembly, during such time as a meeting required by law to be open to the general public is in progress;

     4.     Within any building or room not open to the sky, except the lobby, when that building or room is open to the public for the purpose of exhibiting any motion picture, stage drama, lecture, musical recital or other similar performance (except when smoking is part of the stage production);

     5.     In rooms having an occupancy capacity of fifty (50) or more persons, in areas posted by the management to that effect, within any establishment where food is being served to the general public; provided, however, that this prohibition against smoking shall not apply within an establishment wherein a no smoking area of not less than forty (40) percent of the floor space and of the seating capacity in which customers are served is maintained; and further, management shall increase the no smoking area whenever patrons are waiting to be seated in a no smoking area, there is no seating available in such area and there is seating in the smoking area;

     6.     In the halls, reading and viewing rooms of museums and libraries when open to the public;

     7.     Within retail stores doing business with the general public in areas posted by the management to that effect, except in areas not open to the public.

     E.     Duty to Post Signs. No smoking signs as adopted by the city council shall be conspicuously posted in every room, building or other place where smoking is prohibited by this chapter, by the department head, operator, manager or other person having control of such room, building or other place. (Ord. 576 § 1, 1994; Ord. 515 § 1, 1989)

 

8.36.020 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    Permitting Violations. It is unlawful for any person who manages or otherwise controls the use of any premises which are subject to the restrictions of this chapter to knowingly permit a violation thereof.

     B.     Penalties. Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction, shall be punished by a fine not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100.00) per violation. (Ord. 515 § 1, 1989)

Chapter 8.40 MOBILE X-RAY UNITS
8.40.010 Additional state regulations.
     All mobile X-ray units shall comply with the requirements of the Radiation Control Law, Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code, together with regulations enacted pursuant thereto. (Ord. 192 § 1, 1970)

 

8.40.020 Definitions.
     “Mobile X-ray operator” means any person, or other entity, who owns or legally possesses, or operates, a mobile X-ray unit.

     “Mobile X-ray unit” means any X-ray generator which is, or can be, used for the purpose of making medical diagnostic photofluorographic films of persons, and which is installed in or upon a motor vehicle or trailer so that it may be transported from place to place. (Ord. 192 § 2, 1970)

 

8.40.030 Application required— Investigation.
     Any person or entity desiring to operate a mobile X-ray unit within the city shall make application to the county health officer on forms prescribed by him for issuance of a license. The county health officer shall cause to be conducted an investigation of the applicant for a license to determine, among other things, the following items of information:

     A.    Whether or not the unit has a valid state registration as provided by Division 20, Chapter 7.6, California Health and Safety Code;

     B.     Whether or not the applicant has complied with applicable laws, ordinances and regulations, including those relating to the reporting to the health officer of abnormal X-ray findings pursuant to regulations of the State Department of Public Health;

     C.     Whether the proper public notices, as required by state law, regulations enacted pursuant thereto, and local ordinances, have been posted in or upon the mobile unit;

     D.    The location and mailing address of all film files to be maintained by the mobile unit as hereinafter provided;

     E.     Whether the applicant and his specified personnel are qualified by reason of training and experience to operate a mobile X-ray unit in such a manner as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

     F.     Whether the applicant’s equipment, facilities, proposed uses and procedures are such as to provide reasonable assurance of protection to health, life and property;

     G.    Such other information as shall be required by the county health officer. (Ord. 192 § 3, 1970)

 

8.40.040 License issuance.
     No license shall be granted, renewed, or reinstated unless the county health officer determines, upon completing his investigation, that the mobile X-ray unit is, or can be, operated in compliance with applicable laws, ordinances and administrative regulations, and in a manner not detrimental to the health of the patrons, employees and the general public and that all operations of mobile X-ray equipment have been certified by the county health officer to operate same. (Ord. 192 § 4, 1970)

 

8.40.050 License expiration.
     Licenses may be granted at any time during the year, but all licenses shall expire at the end of the calendar year. (Ord. 192 § 5, 1970)

 

8.40.060 Conditions required for operation.
     All mobile X-ray units shall be operated so as to comply with the following conditions:

     A.    No person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test and presents a written statement, signed by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts, showing the method and the date of such positive skin test. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location of the mobile X-ray unit stating that no person under the age of fifteen (15) years is to be X-rayed unless such person has had a positive tuberculin skin test.

     B.     No pregnant woman shall be X-rayed in a mobile X-ray unit unless so ordered in writing by a licensed practitioner of the healing arts. A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating that no pregnant woman shall be X-rayed.

     C.     The mobile X-ray operator shall require all persons, before being X-rayed, to complete an information form showing the following: name, age, sex, address, telephone number, the person’s physician’s name and address, if a female, whether pregnant, if under fifteen (15) years of age, whether the person has had a positive tuberculin skin test, and the date of such test.

     D.    All X-ray films shall be retained by the operator for at least ten years. Each patient shall receive from the mobile X-ray operator a report of his X-ray findings within thirty (30) days. Every thirty (30) days, the operator shall submit to the health officer a report of the total number of X-ray films taken during the preceding calendar month.

     E.     The mobile X-ray operator shall make X-ray films available for use by the physician of the person X-rayed, provided said person gives his consent in writing. The operator may make a reasonable charge for such service.

     F.     A sign shall be posted in a prominent location on the mobile X-ray unit stating essentially the following: “A chest X-ray film is a useful aid to the physician in diagnosing chest disease. It is not a complete examination. See your family doctor for an examination at least once a year.” The county health officer shall have the right to determine the location, size and working of all required signs.

     G.    The mobile X-ray operator shall give the county health officer notice at least fourteen (14) calendar days in advance concerning proposed dates, times and places of use of the unit. All such information will be forwarded by the county health officer to the city.

     H.    The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall be plainly printed on each side of the exterior of the vehicle or trailer in letters at least three inches high. The name and address of the mobile X-ray operator shall appear on all forms, letters, pamphlets, or other printed matter used in conjunction with the unit. Neither sign nor printed matter shall contain any statements expressed or implied that the mobile X-ray unit is associated with any health department or other public or private health agency.

     I.      The mobile X-ray operation shall comply with all applicable city ordinances and resolutions while operating within the city. (Ord. 192 § 6, 1970)

Chapter 8.44 STORMWATER AND URBAN RUNOFF POLLUTION CONTROLS
Note
*      Prior ordinance history; Ord. 586

 

8.44.010 Title.
     This chapter shall be entitled “stormwater and urban runoff pollution control” and shall be known as such throughout the code. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.020 Purpose and intent.
     The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health and safety of the waters of the state and the United States, those who recreate in and consume food from those waters, and to protect marine habitats and ecosystems existing therein by:

     A.    Effectively prohibiting nonstormwater discharges into the stormwater drainage system; and

     B.     Reducing pollutant loads in stormwater and urban runoff to the maximum extent practicable.

     The intent of this chapter is to enhance and protect water quality of receiving waters of the state and the United States in a manner that is consistent with the Clean Water Act. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.030 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section:

     “Authorized inspector” means the city engineer and any person designated by the engineer and under the engineer’s instruction and supervision, who is assigned to investigate compliance and detect violations of this chapter.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, California.

     “Co-permittee” means the county of Orange, the Orange County Flood Control District, and/or any one of the municipalities, including the city of Los Alamitos, which is responsible for compliance with the terms of the NPDES permit.

     “DAMP” means the Orange County drainage area management plan, as the same may be amended from time to time.

     “Development project guidance” means DAMP Chapter VII and the Appendix thereto, entitled “Best Management Practices for New Development including Non-Residential Construction Projects.”

     “Director” means the director of community development or his or her designee.

     “Discharge” means any release, spill, leak, pump, flow, escape, leaching (including subsurface migration or deposition to groundwater), dumping or disposal of any pollutant.

     “Discharge exception” means the group of activities not restricted or prohibited by this chapter, including only:

     Discharges composed entirely of stormwater; discharges covered under current EPA or regional water quality control board issued NPDES permits; or other waivers, permits or approvals granted by an appropriate government agency; discharges to the stormwater drainage system from potable water line flushing and other potable water sources; discharges to the stormwater drainage system from passive foundations drains; air conditioning condensation; water from crawl space pumps; passive footing drains; landscape irrigation; lawn garden watering and other irrigation waters; noncommercial vehicle washing at residences; flows from riparian habitats and wetlands; dechlorinated swimming pool discharges; diverted stream flows; rising ground waters and natural springs; ground water infiltration as defined in 40 CFR 35.2005(20); uncontaminated pumped groundwater; emergency fire fighting flows; waters not otherwise containing wastes as defined in California Water Code section 13050(d) and other types of discharges identified and recommended by the co-permittees and approved by the regional board.

     “Enforcing attorney” means the city attorney, the district attorney acting as counsel to the city of Los Alamitos, or the designee of either of them, which counsel is authorized to take enforcement action as described in this chapter. For purposes of criminal prosecution, only the district attorney and/or city attorney shall act as the enforcing agency.

     “EPA” means the United States Environmental Protection Agency.

     “Hearing officer” means the director of community development, or the director’s designee, who shall preside at the administrative hearings authorized by this chapter and issue final decisions on the matters raised therein:

     “Illicit connection” means any device or conveyance or drainage system, pipeline, conduit, inlet or outlet through or by which the discharge of any pollutant to the stormwater drainage system occurs or may occur, including, but not limited, to floor drains, pipes or any fabricated or natural conduits. The term illicit connection shall not include legal nonconforming connections or connections to the stormwater drainage system that are hereinafter authorized by the agency with jurisdiction over the system at the location at which the connection is made.

     “Invoice for costs” means the actual costs and expenses of the city including, but not limited to, administrative overhead, salaries and other expenses recoverable under state law, incurred during any inspection conducted pursuant to Section 8.44.060, where a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order or other enforcement option under Section 8.44.070 is utilized to obtain compliance with this chapter.

     “Legal nonconforming connection” means connections to the stormwater drainage system existing as of the adoption of this chapter that were in compliance with all federal, state and local rules, regulations, statutes and administrative requirements in effect at the time the connection was established, including, but not limited to, any discharge permitted pursuant to the terms and conditions of an individual discharge permit issued pursuant to county ordinance number 703.

     “New development” means, for purposes of this chapter, all public and private residential (whether single family, multi-unit or planned unit development), industrial, commercial, retail, and other non-residential construction projects, or grading for future construction, for which either a discretionary land use approval, grading permit, building permits or nonresidential plumbing permit is required.

     “NPDES” means the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.

     “NPDES permit” means the municipal discharge permit issued by the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Board and entitled “Waste Discharge Requirements for the County of Orange, Orange County Flood Control District and the Incorporated Cities of Orange County Within the Santa Ana Region Area-wide Urban Storm Water Runoff, Orange County, Order No. R8-2002-0010 (NPDES No. CAS618030),” as that permit currently exists or may hereinafter be amended.

     “Person” means any natural person as well as any corporation, partnership, government entity or subdivision, trust, estate, cooperative association, joint venture, business entity, or other similar entity, or the agent, employee or representative of any of the above.

     “Pollutant” means any liquid, solid or semi-solid substances, or combination thereof, including and not limited to:

     1.     Artificial materials, chips or pieces of natural or manmade materials (such as floatable plastics, wood or metal shavings);

     2.     Solid waste, including, but not limited to municipal waste, residential (household) waste (such as trash, paper, plastics, lawn clippings and yard wastes; animal fecal materials; excessive pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers; used oil or other fluids from motor vehicles, lawn mowers and other common household equipment);

     3.     Metals, such as cadmium, lead, zinc, copper, silver, nickel, chromium, and non-metals, such as phosphors and arsenic;

     4.     Petroleum hydrocarbons (such as fuels, lubricants, surfactants, waste oils, solvents, coolants and grease);

     5.     Excessive eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials;

     6.     Animal wastes (such as discharges from confinement facilities, kennels, pens and recreational facilities, including, stables, show facilities, or polo fields);

     7.     Substances having a pH less than 6.5 or greater than 8.5, or which cause receiving waters to have unusual coloration, turbidity or excessive levels of fecal coliform, fecal streptococcus or enterococcus;

     8.     Waste materials and wastewater generated on construction sites and by construction activities (including, but not limited to, paint, paint flakes, stain, sealants, glues, limes, pesticides, fertilizers, herbicides, wood preservatives, solvents, asbestos, or stucco fragments, oils, lubricants, hydraulic fluid, radiator fluid, battery fluids, construction equipment wash water, concrete pouring and cleanup wash water, concrete detergents, steam cleaning and sand blasting residues, chemical degreasing or diluting agents, and super chlorinated water generated by potable water line flushing);

     9.     Materials causing an increase in biochemical oxygen demand, chemical oxygen demand or total organic carbon;

     10.   Materials which contain base/neutral or acid extractable organic compounds;

     11.   Those pollutants defined in Section 1362(6) of the Clean Water Act, including solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste discharged into water, and

     12.   Any other constituent or material discharged from a point source that may interfere with or adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, flora or fauna of the state.

     The term pollutant shall not include uncontaminated stormwater, potable water or reclaimed water generated by a lawfully permitted water treatment facility.

     Standards for determining excessive levels of pesticides, herbicides and fertilizers and excessive levels of eroded soils, sediment and particulate materials shall be those levels specified by the county of Orange environmental management agency, the California Regional Water Quality Control Board for the Santa Ana Region, the State Water Resources Control Board, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or any other federal, state or local agency with jurisdiction. In the event of a conflict in the definitions employed by two or more agencies having jurisdiction, the term definition of excessive levels shall be the definition with the lower, more protective, threshold.

     “Private property” means any real property, irrespective of ownership, which is not open to the general public.

     “Prohibited discharge” means any discharge, which is not composed entirely of stormwater or which contains any pollutant, from public or private water to: (1) the stormwater drainage system; (2) any upstream flow which is tributary to the stormwater drainage system; (3) any groundwater, river, stream, creek, wash or dry weather arroyo, wetlands area, marsh, coastal sloughs; or (4) any coastal harbor, bay or the Pacific Ocean. The term prohibited discharge shall not include discharges allowable under the discharge exception.

     “Responsible party” means the persons identified in and responsible for compliance with the provisions of a water quality management plan to be submitted to and approved by the community development department.

     “Significant redevelopment” means the addition of five thousand (5,000) or more square feet of impervious surface on an already developed site. This includes additional buildings and/or structures, extension of existing footprint of a building, construction of parking lots or similar impervious surfaces.

     “State general permit” means the state general industrial stormwater permit, the state general construction permit and the terms and requirements of either or both. In the event the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency revokes the in-lieu permitting authority of the state water resources control board, then the term state general permit shall also refer to any EPA-administered stormwater control program for industrial and construction activities.

     “Stormwater discharge system” means streets, gutters, channels, stone drains, constructed drains, lined diversion structures, wash areas, inlets, outlets or other facilities, which are a part of or tributary to the county-wide stormwater runoff system and owned, operated, maintained or controlled by the city or any co-permittee and used for the purpose of collecting, storing, transporting or disposing of stormwater.

     “Water quality management plan” means a plan for the control of stormwater prepared in accordance with the development project guidance.

     “Water quality manual” means the rules, procedures, and interpretations thereof formulated by the director of community development or his or her designee to implement this chapter. The term water quality manual includes the city’s local implementation plan, the DAMP and the NPDES permit. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.040 Prohibition on illicit connections and prohibited discharges.
     A.    No person shall:

     1.     Construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection;

     2.     Cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

     3.     Act, cause, permit or suffer any agent, employee or independent contractor to construct, maintain, operate or utilize any illicit connection, or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge;

     4.     Construct, maintain or operate a new development or significant redevelopment project without compliance with the water quality manual;

     5.     Fail to comply with the minimum best management practices (“BMPs”) identified in Section 8.44.060.

     B.     The prohibition against illicit connections shall apply irrespective of whether the illicit connection was established prior to the date of enactment of this chapter; however, legal nonconforming connections shall not become illicit connections until the earlier of the following:

     1.     For all structural improvements to private property installed for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of five years from the adoption of this chapter; or

     2.     For all nonstructural improvements to private property (including natural surface flow patterns, depressions or channels traversing one or more properties) existing for the purpose of discharge to the stormwater conveyance system, the expiration of six months following delivery of a notice to the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of the property, which states a legal nonconforming connection has been identified. The notice of a legal nonconforming connection shall state the date of expiration of use under this chapter.

     C.     A civil or administrative violation of subsection A of this section shall occur irrespective of the negligence or intent of the violator to construct, maintain, operate or utilize an illicit connection or cause, allow or facilitate any prohibited discharge.

     D.    If an authorized inspector reasonably determines that a discharge which is otherwise within the discharge exception may adversely affect the beneficial uses of receiving waters, then the authorized inspector may give written notice to the owner of the private property or facility that the discharge exception shall not apply to the subject discharge following expiration of the thirty (30) day period commencing upon delivery of the notice. Upon expiration of the thirty (30) day period any such discharge shall constitute a violation of subsection A of this section.

     E.     The owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of private property on which a legal nonconforming connection exists may request an administrative hearing, pursuant to the procedures set forth in Section 8.44.070(A)(6) through (10) for an extension of the period allowed for continued use of the connection. A reasonable extension of use may be authorized by the city manager upon consideration of the following factors:

     1.     The potential adverse effects of the continued use of the connection upon the beneficial uses of receiving waters;

     2.     The economic investment of the discharges in the legal nonconforming connection; and

     3.     The financial effect upon the discharges of a termination of the legal nonconforming connection. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.050 Control of urban runoff.
     A.    New Development and Significant Redevelopment.

     1.     All new development and significant redevelopment within the city shall be undertaken in accordance with:

     a.     A water quality management plan, which shall be prepared in accordance with the development project guidance;

     b.     The water qualify manual; and

     c.     Any conditions and requirements established by the director, which are reasonably related to the reduction or elimination of pollutants in stormwater runoff from the project site.

     2.     Prior to the issuance by the city of a grading permit, building permit and/or safety permit for any new development or significant redevelopment, the applicant shall submit to and obtain the approval of the city engineer for a water quality management plan. If the new development or significant redevelopment will be approved without application for a grading permit, building permit or safety permit, the applicant shall submit to and obtain the approval of the city engineer of a water quality management plan prior to the issuance of a discretionary land use approval or, at the city’s discretion, prior to recordation of a subdivision map.

     3.     Notwithstanding the foregoing subsections (A)(1) and (2) of this section, a water quality management plan shall not be required for construction of a single-family detached residence unless the city engineer determines that the construction may result in the discharge of significant levels of a pollutant into a tributary to the stormwater drainage system.

     4.     Compliance with the conditions and requirements of a water quality management plan shall not exempt any person from the requirement to independently comply with each provision of this chapter.

     5.     If the city engineer determines that the project will have a de minimis impact on the quality of stormwater runoff, then it may issue a written waiver of the requirement for preparation and approval of a water quality management plan.

     6.     Each water quality management plan shall name a responsible party for the project.

     7.     The owner of a new development or significant redevelopment project, their successors and assigns, and each named responsible party, shall implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of the approved water quality management plan.

     Each failure by the owner of the private property, their successors or assigns, or a named responsible party, to implement and adhere to the terms, conditions and requirements of an approved water quality management plan shall constitute a violation of this chapter.

     8.     The city engineer may require the water quality management plan be recorded with the county recorder’s office by the private property owner. The signature of the owner of the private property, any successive owner or the named responsible party shall be sufficient for the recording of the plan or any revised plan, and a signature on behalf of the city shall not be required for recordation.

     B.     Cost Recovery. The costs and expenses of the city engineering department incurred in the review, approval, or revision of any water quality management plan (or in the approval or revision of any such plan) shall be assessed to the private property owner or responsible party and shall be due and payable to the city. The director of community development may elect to require a deposit of estimated costs and expenses, and the actual costs and expenses shall be deducted from the deposit, and the balance, if any, refunded to the private property owner or responsible party.

     C.     Litter Control. No person shall discard any solid waste, including, but not limited to, common household rubbish or garbage of any kind (whether generated or accumulated at a residence, business or other location), upon any public or private property, whether occupied, open or vacant, including, but not limited to, any street, sidewalk, alley, right-of-way, open area or point of entry to the stormwater drainage system.

     Every person occupying or having charge and control of private property on which a prohibited disposal of solid waste occurs shall cause the proper collection and disposal of same.

     A prohibited disposal of solid waste creates a danger to public health, safety and welfare and otherwise threatens the environment, surface waters and groundwater; therefore, any owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of private property who fails to remove waste material within a reasonable time may be charged with creating a nuisance upon the private property. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.060 BMPs—Monitoring—Inspections.
     A.    Scope of Inspections and Monitoring.

     1.     Right to Inspect. Except for annual inspections of high priority industrial facilities, prior to commencing any inspection as described in this section, the authorized inspector shall obtain either the consent of the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of the private property, or shall obtain an administrative inspection warrant or criminal search warrant. As to high priority industrial facilities, because high priority industrial facilities are identified under the NPDES permit as creating increased threats to water quality, the authorized inspector is authorized to inspect each such high priority industrial facility once annually, during normal business hours upon twenty-four (24) hours notice to the owner, operator, or person responsible for the day to day activities of such facility.

     2.     Entry to Inspect. The authorized inspector may enter private property to investigate the source of any discharge of a pollutant to any public street, inlet, gutter, storm drain or the stormwater drainage system located within the jurisdiction of the city.

     3.     Compliance Assessments. The authorized inspector may inspect private property for the purpose of verifying compliance with this chapter.

     4.     Portable Equipment. For purposes of verifying compliance with this chapter, the authorized inspector may inspect any vehicle, truck, trailer, tank truck or other mobile equipment.

     5.     Records Review. The authorized inspector may inspect all records of the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of private property relating to chemicals or processes presently or previously occurring on-site, including material and/or chemical inventories, facilities maps or schematics and diagrams, material safety data sheets, hazardous waste manifests, business plans, pollution prevention plans, state general permits, stormwater pollution prevention plans, monitoring program plans and any other record(s) relating to illicit connections, illicit discharges, prohibited discharges, a legal nonconforming connection or any other source of discharge or potential discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system.

     6.     Sampling and Testing. The authorized inspector may inspect, sample and test any area runoff, soils area (including groundwater testing), process discharge, materials within any waste storage area (including any contained contents) and/or treatment system discharge for the purpose of determining the potential for the discharge of pollutants to the stormwater drainage system. The authorized inspector may investigate the integrity of all storm drain and sanitary sewer systems, any legal nonconforming connection or other pipelines on the private property using appropriate tests, including, but not limited to, smoke and dye tests or video surveys. The authorized inspector may take photographs or video tapes, make measurements or drawings and create any other record reasonably necessary to document conditions on the private property.

     7.     Monitoring. The authorized inspector may erect and maintain monitoring devices for the purpose of measuring any discharge or potential source of discharge to the stormwater drainage system.

     8.     Test Results. The owner, operator, or person in charge of the day to day activities of private property subject to inspection shall, on submission of a written request, be provided copies of all monitoring and test results conducted by the authorized inspector.

     B.     Industrial Sites—BMPs, Monitoring.

     1.     BMP Implementation. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day to day activities of each industrial site in the city shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the director. For those industrial sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within ESAs, such BMPs shall include such additional controls that the director may require.

     2.     Monitoring. All high priority industrial sites shall implement a monitoring program as required by the director. Such monitoring program shall include a program that provides quantitative data from two storm events per year for the following constituents:

     a.     Any pollutant listed in effluent guidelines subcategories where applicable;

     b.     Any pollutant for which an effluent limit has been established in an existing NPDES permit for the facility;

     c.     Oil and grease or total organic carbon (TOC);

     d.     pH;

     e.     Total suspended solids (TSS);

     f.      Specific conductance;

     g.     Toxic chemicals and other pollutants that are likely to be present in stormwater discharges; and

     h.     Any pollutant that may be used, stored, or generated at a facility for which is a tributary of an impaired water body (where the water body is impaired for that pollutant), unless the facility can demonstrate approval of a no exposure certification.

     C.     Commercial Sites—BMPs. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day to day operations of a high priority commercial site in the city shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the director. For those commercial sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within ESAs, BMPs shall include such additional controls as the director may require.

     D.    Residential Areas and Activities—BMPs. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day to day operations of each high priority residential area and activity in the city shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the director. For those high priority residential areas and activities that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within ESAs, BMPs shall include such additional controls as the director may require.

     E.     Common Interest Areas and Homeowners’ Associations. Each person who owns, operates, or is in charge of day to day activities of common interest areas on private property in the city shall ensure that runoff within common interest areas from private roads, drainage facilities, and other components of the stormwater conveyance system, including those managed by homeowners’ associations, meets the objectives of the NPDES permit, as may be required by the director.

     F.     Construction Sites—Permit Approvals, BMPs, Inspections.

     1.     Construction and Grading Permits. Prior to issuance of any construction or grading permit, the director may require, as a condition to such permit, the implementation of BMPs to ensure that the discharge of pollutants from the site will be reduced to the maximum extent practicable and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. Each construction site shall implement such BMPs to ensure that discharges of pollutants are reduced to the maximum extent practicable and will not cause or contribute to an exceedance of water quality standards. All construction and grading activities shall comply with applicable laws, including all applicable city ordinances and the NPDES permit. Construction and grading permit requirements to be implemented by the project proponent include the following requirements or their equivalent:

     a.     Developing and implementing a plan to manage stormwater and nonstormwater discharges from the site at all times;

     b.     Implementing BMPs for any rain events, as necessary to comply with the NPDES permit;

     c.     Emphasizing erosion prevention as the most important measure for keeping sediment on-site during construction;

     d.     Utilizing sediment controls as a supplement to erosion prevention for keeping sediment on-site during construction, but not as the single or primary method;

     e.     Minimizing areas that are cleared and graded to only the portion of the site that is necessary for construction;

     f.      Minimizing exposure time of disturbed soil areas;

     g.     Temporarily stabilizing and reseeding disturbed soil areas as rapidly as possible;

     h.     Permanently revegetating or landscaping as early as feasible;

     i.      Stabilizing all slopes; and

     j.      For each project proponent subject to the statewide general construction stormwater permit, providing evidence of existing coverage under such permit.

     2.     BMP Implementation. Each owner, operator, or person in charge of day to day activities of each construction and/or grading site in the city shall implement those minimum BMPs as may be designated by the director. For those construction sites that are tributary to impaired water bodies and/or that are within or directly adjacent to or discharging directly to receiving waters within ESAs, such BMPs shall include such additional controls as the director may require.

     3.     Inspections. Construction and grading sites, and discharges from such sites and operations, are identified under the NPDES permit as creating increased threats to water quality during the rainy season. The authorized inspector is authorized to inspect each high priority construction site at least once weekly during the rainy season, during normal business hours. The authorized inspector may further inspect each medium/low priority construction site, at least twice during the rainy season, during normal business hours upon twenty-four (24) hours notice to the owner, operator, or person responsible for the day to day operations of such site. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.070 Enforcement.
     In addition to the provisions of Chapter 8.23, this chapter may be enforced as follows:

     A.    Administrative Remedies.

     1.     Notice of Noncompliance. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of any private property, or to any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge a notice of noncompliance. The notice of noncompliance shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (A)(5) of this section.

     a.     The notice of noncompliance shall identify the provisions of this chapter, the applicable water quality management plan, water quality manual provision or permit which has been violated. The notice of noncompliance shall state that continued noncompliance may result in additional enforcement actions against the owner, person in charge of the day to day activities and/or person.

     b.     The notice of noncompliance shall state a compliance date that must be met by the owner, person in charge of the day to day activities and/or person; provided, however, that the compliance days may not exceed ninety (90) days unless the authorized inspector extends the compliance deadline an additional ninety (90) days where good cause exists for the extension.

     2.     Administrative Compliance Orders.

     a.     The authorized inspector may issue an administrative compliance order. The administrative compliance order shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (A)(5) of this section. The administrative compliance order may be issued to:

     i.      The owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of any private property requiring abatement of conditions that cause or may cause a prohibited discharge or an illicit connection in violation of this chapter;

     ii.     The owner of private property or a responsible party subject to the requirements of any water quality management plan to ensure implementation of and adherence to the terms, conditions and requirements of the plan;

     iii.    Any person responsible for an illicit connection or prohibited discharge.

     b.     The administrative compliance order may include the following terms and requirements:

     i.      Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to prevent threatened or future unauthorized discharges, including, but not limited to, the threat of a prohibited discharge from any pond, pit, well, surface impoundment, holding or storage area;

     ii.     Specific steps and time schedules for compliance as reasonably necessary to discontinue any illicit connection;

     iii.    Specific requirements for containment, clean-up, removal, storage, installation of overhead covering, or proper disposal of any pollutant having the potential to contact stormwater runoff;

     iv.    Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to prevent continued or threatened violations of this chapter, including, but not limited to, requirements for compliance with best management practices guidance documents promulgated by any federal, state or regional agency;

     v.     Any other terms or requirements reasonably calculated to achieve full compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of any water quality management plan, the water quality manual or permit issued pursuant hereto.

     3.     Cease and Desist Orders.

     a.     The authorized inspector may issue a cease and desist order. A cease and desist order shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (A)(5) of this section. A cease and desist order may direct the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of any private property and/or other person responsible for a violation of this chapter to:

     i.      Immediately discontinue any illicit connection or prohibited discharge to the stormwater drainage system;

     ii.     Immediately contain or divert any flow of water off the private property, where the flow is occurring in violation of any provision of this chapter;

     iii.    Immediately discontinue any other violation of this chapter;

     iv.    Clean up the area affected by the violation.

     b.     The authorized inspector, by cease and desist order, may direct that the owner of any private property, or the responsible party subject to the terms and conditions of any water quality management plan immediately cease any activity not in compliance with the terms, conditions and requirements of the applicable water quality management plan, water quality manual or permit.

     4.     Recovery of Costs. The authorized inspector may deliver to the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of any private property, any permittee or any responsible party, or any other person who becomes subject to a notice of noncompliance or administrative order, an invoice for costs. An invoice for costs shall be delivered in accordance with subsection (A)(5) of this section. An invoice for costs shall be immediately due and payable to the city for the actual costs incurred by the city in issuing and enforcing any notice or order.

     If any owner or person in charge of the day to day activities, permittee or responsible party, or any other person fails to either pay the invoice for costs or appeal successfully the invoice for costs in accordance with subsection (A)(6) of this section, then the enforcing attorney may institute collection proceedings.

     5.     Delivery of Notice. Any notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, cease and desist order or invoice for costs to be delivered pursuant to the requirements of this chapter shall be subject to the following:

     a.     The notice shall state that the recipient has a right to appeal the matter as set forth in subsections (A)(6) through (A)(10) of this section.

     b.     Delivery shall be deemed complete upon: (1) a personal service to the recipient; (2) deposit in the U.S. mail, postage prepaid for first class delivery; or (3) facsimile service with confirmation of receipt.

     c.     If the recipient of notice is the owner of the private property, the address for notice shall be the address from the most recently issued equalized assessment roll for the private property or as otherwise appears in the current records of the city.

     d.     If the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities of any private property cannot be located after the reasonable efforts of the authorized inspector, a notice of noncompliance or cease and desist order shall be deemed delivered after posting on the private property for a period of ten business days.

     6.     Administrative Hearing for Notices of Noncompliance, Administrative Compliance Orders, Invoices for Costs and Adverse Determinations. Except as set forth in subsection (A)(8) of this section, any person receiving a notice of noncompliance, administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs, or any person who is subject to any adverse determination made pursuant to this chapter, may appeal the matter by requesting an administrative hearing.

     7.     Request for Administrative Hearing. Any person appealing a notice of noncompliance, an administrative compliance order, a notice of legal nonconforming connection, an invoice for costs or an adverse determination shall, within thirty (30) days of receipt thereof, file a written request for an administrative hearing, accompanied by an administrative hearing fee as established by separate resolution, with the office of the city clerk with copies of the request for administrative hearing mailed on the date of filing to the city engineer. Thereafter, a hearing on the matter shall be held before the hearing officer within forty-five (45) business days of the date of filing of the written request unless, in the reasonable discretion of the hearing officer and pursuant to a written request by the appealing party, a continuance of the hearing is granted.

     8.     Administrative Hearing for Cease and Desist Orders and Emergency Abatement Actions. An administrative hearing on the issuance of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be held within five business days following the issuance of the order or the action of abatement, unless the hearing (or the time requirement for the hearing) is waived in writing by the party subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement. A request for an administrative hearing shall not be required from the person subject to the cease and desist order or the emergency abatement action.

     9.     Hearing Proceedings. The authorized inspector shall appear in support of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs or emergency abatement action, and the appealing party shall appear in support of withdrawal of the notice, order, determination, invoice for costs, or in opposition to the emergency abatement action. The city shall have the burden of supporting any enforcement or other action by a preponderance of the evidence. Each party shall have the right to present testimony and other documentary evidence as necessary for explanation of the case.

     10.   Final Decision and Appeal. The final decision of the hearing officer shall issue within ten business days of the conclusion of the hearing and shall be delivered by first class mail, postage prepaid, to the appealing party. The final decision shall include notice that any legal challenge to the final decision shall be made pursuant to the provisions of Code of Civil Procedure Sections 1094.5 and 1094.6 and shall be commenced within ninety (90) days following issuance of the final decision.

     Notwithstanding this subsection, the final decision of the hearing officer in any proceeding determining the validity of a cease and desist order or following an emergency abatement action shall be mailed within five business days following the conclusion of the hearing.

     11.   City Abatement. In the event the owner of private property, the operator of a facility, a permittee, a responsible party, or any other person fails to comply with any provision of a compliance schedule issued pursuant to this chapter, the authorized inspector may request the enforcing attorney to obtain an abatement warrant or other appropriate judicial authorization to enter the private property, abate the condition and restore the area. Any costs incurred by the city in obtaining and carrying out an abatement warrant or other judicial authorization may be recovered pursuant to subsection (B)(4) of this section.

     B.     Nuisance. Any condition in violation of the prohibitions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, the maintenance or use of any illicit connection or the occurrence of any prohibited discharge, shall constitute a threat to the public health, safety and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance pursuant to Government Code Section 38771.

     1.     Court Order to Enjoin or Abatement. At the request of the city council, the enforcing attorney may seek a court order to enjoin and/or abate the nuisance.

     2.     Notice to Owner and Person in Charge of the Day to Day Activities. Prior to seeking any court order to enjoin or abate a nuisance or threatened nuisance, the city manager shall provide notice of the proposed injunction or abatement to the owner and person in charge of the day to day activities, if any, of the private property where the nuisance or threatened nuisance is occurring.

     3.     Emergency Abatement. In the event the nuisance constitutes an imminent danger to public safety or the environment, the city manager or his or her designee may enter the private property from which the nuisance emanates, abate the nuisance and restore any private property affected by the nuisance, without prior notice to or consent from the owner or person in charge of the day to day activities thereof and without judicial warrant.

     a.     An imminent danger shall include, but is not limited to, exigent circumstances created by the dispersal of pollutants, where the same presents a significant and immediate threat to the public safety or the environment.

     b.     Notwithstanding the authority of the city to conduct an emergency abatement action, an administrative hearing pursuant to subsection (A)(8) of this section shall follow the abatement action.

     4.     Reimbursement of Costs. All costs incurred by the city in responding to any nuisance, all administrative expenses and all other expenses recoverable under state law, shall be recoverable from the persons creating, causing, committing or maintaining the nuisance.

     5.     Nuisance Lien. All costs shall become a lien against the private property from which the nuisance emanated and a personal obligation against the owner thereof in accordance with Government Code Section 38773.1 and Section 38773.5. The owner of record of the private property subject to any lien shall be given notice of the lien prior to recording as required by Government Code Section 38773.1.

     At the direction of the city council, the enforcing attorney is authorized to collect nuisance abatement costs or enforce a nuisance lien in an action brought for a money judgment or by delivery to the county assessor of a special assessment against the private property in accord with the conditions and requirements of Government Code Section 39773.5.

     C.     Criminal Sanctions.

     1.     Prosecutor. The enforcing attorney may act on the request of the city council to pursue enforcement actions in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.

     2.     Infractions. Any person who may otherwise be charged with a misdemeanor under this chapter may be charged, at the discretion of the prosecuting attorney, with an infraction punishable by a fine of not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation, two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation, and a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation occurring within one year.

     3.     Misdemeanors. Any person who negligently or knowingly violates any provision of this chapter, undertakes to conceal any violation of this chapter, continues any violation of this chapter after notice thereof, or violates the terms, conditions and requirements of any water quality management plan or permit, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for a period of not more than six months, or both.

     D.    Consecutive Violations. Each day in which a violation occurs, and each failure to comply with any provision of this chapter, an administrative compliance order, a cease and desist order, an applicable water quality management plan, or any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.

     E.     Nonexclusive Remedies. Each remedy available for the enforcement of this chapter shall be nonexclusive. It is within the discretion of the authorized inspector or enforcing attorney to seek cumulative remedies, except that multiple monetary fines or penalties shall not be available for any single violation of this chapter.

     F.     Citations. Pursuant to Penal Code Section 836.5, the authorized inspector shall have the authority to cause the arrest of any natural person committing a violation of this chapter. The person shall be released and issued a citation to appear before a magistrate in accordance with Penal Code Section 853.5, Section 853.6, and Section 853.9, unless the person demands to be taken before a magistrate. Following issuance of any citation the authorized inspector shall refer the matter to the enforcing attorney.

     Each citation to appear shall state the name and address of the alleged violator, the provisions of this chapter violated, and the time and place of appearance before the court, which shall be at least ten business days after the date of violation. The person cited shall sign the citation giving his or her written promise to appear as stated therein. If the person cited fails to appear, the enforcing attorney may request issuance of a warrant for the arrest of the person cited.

     G.    Violations of Other Laws. Any person acting in violation of this chapter also may be acting in violation of the Clean Water Act or the State Porter Cologne Act and other laws and also may be subject to sanctions including civil liability. Accordingly, the enforcing attorney is authorized to file a citizen suit pursuant to Section 505 of the Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. Section 1365, seeking penalties, damages and orders compelling compliance, and other appropriate relief. The enforcing attorney may notify EPA Region IX, the attorney general of California, the Santa Ana or San Diego regional water quality control boards, or any other appropriate state or local agency, of any alleged violation of this chapter.

     H.    Injunctions. At the request of the city council, the enforcing attorney may cause the filing in a court of competent jurisdiction, of a civil action seeking an injunction against any threatened or continuing noncompliance with the provisions of this chapter.

     Order for reimbursement. Any temporary, preliminary or permanent injunction issued pursuant hereto may include an order for reimbursement to the city of all costs incurred in enforcing this chapter, including costs of inspection, investigation and monitoring, the costs of abatement undertaken at the expense of the city, costs relating to restoration of the environment and all other expenses as authorized by law.

     I.      Other Civil Remedies.

     1.     The city council may ask the enforcing attorney to file an action for civil damages in a court of competent jurisdiction seeking recovery of: (1) all costs incurred in enforcement of the chapter, including, but not limited to, costs relating to investigation, sampling, monitoring, inspection, administrative expenses, all other expenses as authorized by law, and consequential damages; (2) all costs incurred in mitigating harm to the environment or reducing the threat to human health; and (3) damages for irreparable harm to the environment.

     2.     The enforcing attorney is authorized to file actions for civil damages resulting from any trespass or nuisance occurring on public land or to the stormwater drainage system from any violation of this chapter where the same has caused damage, contamination or harm to the environment, public property or the stormwater drainage system.

     3.     The remedies available to the city pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall not limit the right of the city to seek any other remedy that may be available by law. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.080 Interagency cooperation.
     A.    The Clean Water Act authorizes the NPDES permit for the Orange County area and provides for cooperative implementation of requirements and interagency allocations of program resources and burdens. The coordinated effort of the county and the co-permittees is reflected in the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit Implementation Agreement Santa Ana/San Diego Regions, the NPDES permit, the DAMP, this chapter, the Appendices to the DAMP, including, but not limited to, the Development Project Guidance, monitoring and data collection cooperation and regular emergency and spill response planning activities.

     B.     The city may elect to contract for the services of any public agency or private enterprise to carry out the planning approvals, inspections, permits and enforcement authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003) 8.44.080

 

8.44.090 Miscellaneous.
     A.    Compliance Disclaimer. Full compliance by any person with the provisions of this chapter shall not preclude the need to comply with other local, state or federal statutory or regulatory requirements, which may be required for the control of the discharge of pollutants into stormwater and/or the protection of stormwater quality.

     B.     Severability. If any provision of this chapter or the application of the chapter to any circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the chapter or the application of the chapter to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected.

     C.     Repeal of Prior Ordinance. The enactment of the ordinance codified in this chapter by city shall repeal the provisions of county ordinance number 703 enacted for the permitting of discharges of industrial waste to ground or surface waters and no new discharge permits shall be issued thereunder, provided, however, that connection to discharge under the terms and conditions of any individual discharge permit issued prior to the date of enactment of the water quality ordinance shall be allowed hereunder as a legal nonconforming connection. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

 

8.44.100 Judicial review.
     The provisions of Section 1094.5 and Section 1094.6 of the Code of Civil Procedure set forth the procedure for judicial review of any act taken pursuant to this chapter. Parties seeking judicial review of any action taken pursuant to this chapter shall file such an action within (90) days of the occurrence of the event for which review is sought. (Ord. 674 § 1, 2003)

Chapter 8.48 LIGHTING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
8.48.010 Outdoor lighting performance standards.
     A.    The intent of these standards is to focus on the physical effects of outdoor lighting, as well as the effect lighting may have on surrounding neighborhoods. Exterior lighting shall be evaluated in the development review process to ensure that the functional and security needs of the project are met in a way that will not adversely affect the adjacent properties or surrounding neighborhoods. The degree to which exterior night lighting affects a property owner or neighborhood will be examined based upon the light source, level of illumination, hours of illumination, and the need for illumination in relation to the effects of lighting on adjacent property owners and the neighborhood.

     B.     All outdoor artificial illuminating devices shall be installed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, and applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and this code. Where there is a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance or this code, the most restrictive shall govern. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.020 Approved materials and methods of installation.
     The provisions of this chapter are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of installation not specifically prescribed by this chapter, provided any such alternate has been approved in advance by the city as described below. The community development director or his or her designee, or, for street lighting within the right-of-way, the public works director or his or her designee, may approve any such alternate material or method provided that the proposed design, material or method (a) provides approximate equivalence to the specific requirements of this chapter; or (b) is otherwise satisfactory and complies with the intent of this chapter. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.030 Definitions.
     “Color rendering index” (“CRI”) means the measured effect of light on objects. To determine the CRI of a lamp, the color appearances of a set of standard color chips are measured with special equipment under a reference light source with the same correlated color temperature as the lamp being evaluated. If the lamp renders the color of the chips identical to the reference light source, the CRI is one hundred (100). If the color rendering differs from the reference light source, the CRI is less than one hundred (100) a low CRI indicates that some color may appear unnatural when illuminated by the lamp.

     “Community development director” means the director of community development or his or her designee.

     “Fixture” means the same as “luminaire” as provided in this section.

     “Outdoor light fixtures” means outdoor artificial illuminating devices, outdoor fixtures, lamps and other devices, permanent or portable, used for illumination or advertisement. Such devices shall include, but are not necessarily limited to, searchlights, spotlights, or floodlights for:

     1.     Buildings and/or structures, including canopies and overhangs;

     2.     Recreational areas;

     3.     Parking lot lighting;

     4.     Landscape lighting;

     5.     Billboards and signs;

     6.     Street lighting; or

     7.     Display and/or service areas.

     “Foot-candle” means a unit of measure for a light source equivalent to the light from one candle at a distance of one foot. A candlepower is equal to one lumen per square foot.

     “Full cut-off type fixture” means a luminaire or light fixture that, by design of the fixture housing, does not allow any light dispersion or direct glare to shine above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane from the base of the fixture.

     “Glare” means the direct light emitting from a luminaire that causes reduced vision or momentary blindness.

     “High pressure sodium” (“HPS”) means a high intensity discharge lamp where radiation is produced from sodium vapor at relatively high partial pressures. HPS is considered a point source.

     “Horizontal luminance” means the measurement of brightness from a light source, usually measured in foot-candles or lumens, which is taken through a light meter’s sensor at a horizontal position.

     “Installed” means the initial installation of outdoor light fixtures defined herein.

     “Lamp” or “bulb” means the light-producing source installed in the socket portion of the luminaire.

     “Light trespass” means light emitted by a luminaire that shines beyond the boundaries of the property on which the luminaire is located.

     “Low-pressure sodium” (“LPS”) means a discharge lamp where the light is produced by radiation from sodium vapor at a relatively low partial pressure. LPS is a tube source and is a monochromatic light.

     “Luminaire” means the lamp, base, fixture, and shading and/or shielding device, if any.

     “Metal-halide lamp” means a high intensity discharge lamp where the light is produced by radiation from metal-halide vapors.

     “Mounting height” means the overall height of the fixture or lamp above the ground.

     “Photometry” means the quantitative measurement of light level and distribution.

     “Public works director” means the director of public works or his or her designee.

     “Security purpose lighting” means reduced lighting levels which do not exceed .5 foot-candles.

     Shielded, Fully. “Fully shielded” means fixtures that are shielded in such a manner that light rays emitted by the fixture, either directly from the lamp or indirectly from the fixture, are projected below a horizontal plane running through the lowest point on the fixture where light is emitted.

     “Sky glow” means the result of scattered light in the atmosphere above urban areas and the haze or glow of light that currently surrounds populated areas and reduces the ability to review the night-time sky.

     “Uplighting” means any source that distributes illumination above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane.

     “Uniformity (U) ratio” means the average level of illumination in relation to the lowest level of illumination for a given area. Example U. ratio = 4:1 for the given area, the lowest level of illumination, one, should be no more than four times the average level of illumination. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.040 Applications.
     A.    Any person applying for a building, electrical or sign permit to install outdoor lighting fixtures shall as a part of the application submit evidence that the proposed work will comply with this chapter.

     B.     The application shall contain, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the following:

     1.     Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, other devices; and

     2.     Description of the illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports and other devices. This description may include but is not limited to manufacturers catalog cuts, and drawings including sections where required.

     C.     The above required plans and descriptions shall be sufficiently complete to enable the community development director to readily determine whether compliance with the requirements of this article will be secured. If such plans and descriptions cannot enable this ready determination, by reason of the nature or configuration, of the devices, fixtures or lamps proposed, the applicant shall submit evidence of compliance by certified test reports as performed by a recognized testing lab. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.050 Issuance of permit for lighting on private property.
     Prior to issuance of a building, electrical or sign permit, the community development director shall determine that the submitted plans and details for the permit are in conformance with this chapter. In order to be in conformance and be deemed complete, the plans must contain, at a minimum, the following:

     A.    The approval stamp of the community development director;

     B.     The signature of the community development director; and

     C.     The date of execution by the community development director. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.060 Amendment to permit for lighting on private property.
     Should the applicant desire to substitute outdoor light fixtures or lamps to be installed on private property after a permit has been issued, the applicant shall submit all changes to the community development director for approval, with adequate information to assure compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.070 Appeals.
     Except for street lighting within the right-of-way and for temporary exemptions as provided herein, the appeal procedures contained in Los Alamitos Municipal Code Chapter 17.68 shall apply. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.080 Lighting guidelines.
     Pursuant to this chapter, lighting in the city shall at all times:

     A.    Be designed, located, installed, and directed in such a manner to prevent objectionable light at and across the property lines, and to prevent glare at any location on or off the property;

     B.     Be of a white light, such as metal halide, incandescent or a lamp with a color rendering index above seventy (70);

     C.     Not exceed the maintained horizontal illuminance recommendations set by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America (IES) and an average illumination level of 1.5 foot-candles for the illuminated area;

     D.    Not exceed one-tenth (0.1) foot-candle as a direct result of the on-site lighting measured twenty (20) feet beyond the property line of the development site;

     E.     Be full cut-off style fixtures for all parking area lighting;

     F.     Be illuminated with flush mounted, flat lens light fixtures for all under-canopy fueling areas;

     G.    Be shielded to prevent glare and/or light trespass from all building, site and aesthetic lighting;

     H.    Not include uplighting of any kind unless included as part of a monument sign of less than six feet in overall height and which otherwise complies with all applicable provisions of this code;

     I.      Be full cut-off or a shielded type fixture (wallpack style fixtures are not acceptable) for all building lighting for security or aesthetics. Floodlighting is discouraged, however, if used, it shall be shielded to prevent the following:

     1.     Disabling glare for pedestrians or drivers;

     2.     Light trespass beyond the property line; and

     3.     Light above a ninety (90) degree horizontal plane.

     J.      Be turned off after business hours, leaving only the necessary lighting for site and building security for all non-essential lighting. For purposes of this subsection, nonessential lighting shall include display, aesthetic and sign lighting, and may include parking lot lighting. Outdoor display lots for vehicle sales and leasing shall also comply with the requirements of this subsection by reducing the light levels within one hour after closing to illumination levels sufficient for security purposes only;

     K.    Not be installed, illuminated or maintained with a permanent beacon or searchlight;

     L.     Have a maximum mounting height of (1) twenty-four (24) feet when the fixture is located within seventy-five (75) feet of the site’s boundary line; or (2) forty (40) feet when the fixture is located beyond seventy-five (75) feet from the site’s boundary line; and

     M.    Not be constructed with wooden poles. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.090 Prohibitions.
     No outdoor recreational facility, public or private, shall be illuminated after eleven p.m. except to conclude any recreational or sporting event or other activity conducted at a ball park, outdoor amphitheater, arena, or similar facility in progress prior to eleven p.m., and all lighting shall be shut off within one hour of completion of the game or event.

     At no time shall floodlights be aimed above sixty-two (62) degrees.

     At no time shall lights have poles and/or a mounting height that exceed seventy (70) feet.

     The unshielded outdoor illumination of any building or landscaping is prohibited except with incandescent fixtures with lamps of one hundred (100) watts or less. Lighting fixtures used to illuminate an outdoor advertisement sign shall be mounted on the top of the sign structure and shall comply with the shielding requirements contained herein. All illuminated outdoor advertising signs shall be equipped with an automatic time controller that prevents the operation of the lighting fixtures between the hours of eleven p.m. and sunrise.

     The installation of mercury vapor fixtures is prohibited. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.100 Exemptions.
     The following are exempt from this chapter:

     A.    Nonconforming Fixtures. Outdoor light fixtures installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are exempt from the provisions of this chapter, provided, however, that no change in use, replacement, structural alteration, or restoration of outdoor light fixtures shall be made unless it thereafter conforms to the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Fossil Fuel Light. Fossil fuel light produced directly or indirectly by the combustion of natural gas or other utility-type fossil fuels is exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

     C.     Construction and Emergency Lighting. Lighting necessary for construction or emergencies is exempt from the provisions of this chapter provided such lighting is temporary and is discontinued immediately upon completion of the construction work or abatement of the emergency necessitating the lighting.

     D.    Searchlights. Searchlights shall be subject to the provisions of this code.

     E.     Seasonal Decorations. Seasonal decorations with individual lights shall be displayed no longer than sixty (60) days per calendar year.

     F.     Residential Incandescent Lighting. Residential incandescent lighting of one hundred fifty (150) watts or fewer for each light fixture, and/or fluorescent lights of twenty (20) watts or fewer per fixture.

     G.    Temporary Lighting. Temporary lighting for fire, police, emergency, or repair workers. Also, temporary lighting for construction activity, periodic events (such as fairs, carnivals, and similar temporary uses) is exempt only if approved in advance by the public works director or his or her designee.

     H.    Special Conditions. The community development director or, for street lighting within the right-of-way, the public works director, may grant a special or temporary exemption to the requirements of this chapter pursuant to this section and Section 8.48.120 only upon a written finding by the community development director and/or public works director, as the case may as provided for herein, that there are conditions warranting the exemption and that there are no conforming fixtures that would suffice. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.110 Lighting plan submission requirements.
     The following information must be submitted as part of a lighting plan pursuant to this chapter:

     A.    Plans must be submitted to the community development director and/or public works director as required herein indicating the location, type, and height of the luminaries, including both building and ground mounted;

     B.     A description of the luminaries, including lamps, poles or other supports, and shielding devices which may be provided as catalogue cut sheets from the manufacturer;

     C.     Photometric data, such as that furnished by the manufacturer, showing the angle of the light emissions; and

     D.    Additional information as may be required by the public works director in order to determinate compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.120 Request for temporary exemptions.
     A.    Any person may submit a written request on a form prepared by the community development department or, if in the right-of-way, the public works department, for a temporary exemption to the requirements of this chapter.

     B.     The request for temporary exemption shall contain at a minimum the following information:

     1.     The specific exemptions requested;

     2.     The type and use of exterior light involved;

     3.     The duration of time for requested exemption;

     4.     The type of lamp and calculated lumens;

     5.     The total wattage of lamp or lamps;

     6.     The proposed location of exterior light;

     7.     The previous temporary exemptions, if any; and

     8.     The physical size of exterior light and type of shielding provided.

     C.     In addition to the above data, the community development director or, if in the right-of-way, the public works director, may request any additional information which would enable him or her to make a reasonable evaluation of the request for temporary exemption.

     D.    The fee for a temporary exemption shall be a non-refundable amount as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

 

8.48.130 Penalties.
     Any person, firm, corporation, agency, or other entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, which shall be punishable by a maximum penalty of a five hundred dollar ($500.00) fine and/or six months in jail, as specified in Section 1.20.010 of this code, and each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day or portion thereof during which a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted to continue. (Ord. 692 § 1, 2006)

Chapter 8.52 UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS
8.52.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to provide regulations which will maintain the quality of life to residents, businesses, and visitors, through education and enforcement of unmanned aircraft system (UAS) operation within the city limits. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth below, unless another or different meaning is clearly intended from the context in which the phrase or words are used.

     “Drone” refers to any UAS.

     “FAA” means the Federal Aviation Administration.

     “Person” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or joint venture, including those set forth in Title 1, Chapter 1.24 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

     “Public UAS” means a UAS that is used or operated on behalf of any government agency that meets the qualifications as defined in Section 40102 of Title 49 of the United States Code to operate a public aircraft.

     “Unmanned aircraft system (UAS)” shall mean an aircraft, without a human pilot on board, that is controlled from an operator on the ground, to include, but not be limited to, any communication links and components that control the UA, and operates without the possibility of direct human intervention from within or on the aircraft.

     “Visual line of sight” means that the operator has an unobstructed view of the UAS. The operator must use his or her own natural vision (which includes vision corrected by standard eyeglasses or contact lenses) to observe the UAS. People other than the operator may not be used in lieu of the operator for maintaining visual line of sight. The use of vision-enhancing devices, such as binoculars, night vision goggles, powered vision magnifying devices, and goggles or other devices designed to provide a “first-person view” from the UAS do not constitute visual line of sight of the operator. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.030 Local regulations of UAS.
     A.    No person shall takeoff or land a UAS outside of the person’s visual line of sight.

     B.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within twenty-five (25) feet of another individual, except the operator or the operator’s designee.

     C.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS on private property without the consent of the property owner.

     D.    No person shall takeoff or land a UAS during permitted public events unless granted written or electronic permission by the city.

     E.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within one thousand five hundred (1,500) horizontal feet of any aircraft.

     F.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS that has any type of weapon attached to it. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.040 No reckless endangerment.
     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS in a reckless manner so as to create a substantial risk of serious physical injury to any person or substantial risk of damage to the property of another. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.050 Time, place, and manner restrictions.
     A.    No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any emergency vehicle that is operating with lights and/or sirens.

     B.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any active law enforcement or emergency response incident.

     C.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS in violation of any temporary flight restriction or notice to airmen issued by the FAA.

     D.    No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within one hundred (100) feet of a school facility without prior notification and authorization of school officials.

     E.     No person shall takeoff or land a UAS within five hundred (500) feet of any county or city owned jails, holding facilities, law enforcement facility, or within one hundred (100) feet of any designated publicly owned building chosen by the city. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.060 Exemptions.
     A.    This chapter shall not apply to any publicly owned UAS.

     B.     This chapter shall not apply to any UAS weighing less than 0.55 pounds. (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

 

8.52.070 Violations—Penalties.
     A.    Any violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be a misdemeanor.

     B.     All violations of the Code of Federal Regulations defined in Title 14 C.F.R. Part 101 and Title 14 C.F.R. Part 107 will be reported to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). (Ord. 2017-11 § 1, 2017)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE AND WELFARE
Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
Chapter 9.12 CURFEW
Chapter 9.16 GAMBLING
Chapter 9.20 WEAPONS

Chapter 9.04 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY
9.04.010 Graffiti prohibited.
     A.    Intent and Purpose. The city council finds and declares that graffiti on public or private property creates a condition tending to reduce the value of such property, promotes blight and deterioration of surrounding property inviting further vandalism and loss of pride in affected neighborhoods and loss of business to neighboring commercial enterprises.

     B.     Graffiti Defined. For the purposes of this section, “graffiti” means the unauthorized spraying of paint or marking of ink, chalk, dye or other similar substances depicting letters, numbers, words, symbols or insignia on public or private buildings, structures, fences, walls, signs, sidewalks, streets or other places.

     C.     Prohibition. It is unlawful for any person to paint, chalk, or otherwise apply graffiti on public or privately owned structures located on public or privately owned property within the city.

     D.    Removal of Graffiti. Graffiti may be removed by any of the following methods:

     1.     Any person who applies graffiti within the city shall have the duty to remove the same within twenty-four (24) hours after notice by the city or the public or private owner of the property involved. The failure of any person to so remove the graffiti shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by juveniles, the parent or parents shall be responsible for such removal or for the payment therefor.

     2.     Whenever the superintendent of public services or his/her designated representative determines that graffiti is located on public or privately owned real property within the city, so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, the superintendent or his/her designated representative is authorized to provide for the removal of the graffiti at the city’s sole expense, without reimbursement from the property owner upon whose property the graffiti has been applied, upon the following conditions:

     a.     In removing the graffiti, the painting or repair of a more extensive area than necessary to remove the graffiti shall not be authorized.

     b.     When a structure is owned by a public entity other than the city, the removal of the graffiti may be authorized only after securing the consent of the public entity which own the structures.

     c.     Where a structure is privately owned, the removal of the graffiti by city forces or by a private contractor under the direction of the city, may be authorized only after securing the consent of the owner or person having legal control over the property.

     3.     Graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned real property within the city, so as to be capable of being viewed by a person utilizing any public right-of-way in the city, may be removed by the city as a public nuisance, at the owner’s expense, pursuant to the following provisions:

     a.     Whenever the director of economic and community development or the director’s designated representative is apprised of the presence of graffiti located on privately owned structures on privately owned real property within the city, the director or his/her designated representative may cause a written notice to be served upon the owner of the affected premises as such owner’s name and address appear on the last equalized assessment roll, by depositing a copy of the notice with the U.S. Postal Service enclosed in a sealed envelope and with the postage thereon fully prepaid. The notice shall be registered or certified and addressed to the owner at the last known address of the owner, and if there is no known address, then in care of the property address. The service is complete at the time of such deposit. “Owner,” as used in this section, means any person in possession as well as any person having or claiming to have any legal or equitable interest in the premises as described by a preliminary title search from any accredited title company. The failure of any person to receive such notice shall not affect the validity of any proceeding hereunder. The property owner shall have seven days after the date appearing on the notice to remove the graffiti and assessment of the costs of such removal as a lien on the subject property.

     b.     The notice shall be substantially in the following form:

 

NOTICE OF INTENT TO REMOVE

GRAFFITI

 

     Date:

 

             NOTICE IS HEREBY GIVEN that you are required at your expense to remove or paint over the graffiti located on the property commonly known as ______________, Los Alamitos, California, within seven (7) days after the date appearing on this notice. Said graffiti is visible to public view and, therefore, constitutes a public nuisance. If you fail to comply with this order, City employees or private City contractors will enter upon your property and abate the public nuisance by removal or painting over of the graffiti. The cost of the abatement by the City or its private contractors will be assessed against your property and such costs will constitute a lien upon the land until paid.

 

             All persons having any objection to, or interest in, said matters are hereby notified to submit any objections or comments to the Director of Economic and Community Development for the City of Los Alamitos or his/her designated representative within seven (7) days from the date appearing on this notice. At the conclusion of this seven (7) day period the City may proceed with the abatement of the graffiti inscribed on your property at your expense without further notice.

 

     The service of this notice shall be made on the day the notice is dated and by affidavit filed with the city clerk.

     c.     If any objections are submitted to the director of economic and community development within seven days after the date appearing on the notice of intent to remove graffiti, the director shall schedule and hold a hearing on the matter which shall be substantially in accordance with the city council hearings described in Chapter 8.32 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

     d.     The cost of abatement by the city shall be recovered pursuant to Chapter 8.32 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

     E.     Rewards. The city council may, by resolution, establish a reward for information leading to the identification, apprehension and conviction of any property in the city. The resolution may require the convicted offender reimburse the city for any reward paid, and place responsibility for reimbursement upon the parent(s) or legal guardian(s) of any minor so convicted.

     F.     Alternate Actions. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to prevent the city from commencing from pursuing any other means available to it under hazards or deficiencies in real property in addition to or as alternatives to the proceedings herein set forth. (Ord. 532 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE
9.08.010 Drinking in public prohibited.
     No person shall drink or consume any alcoholic beverage on any public street or alley; public sidewalk; public or private parking lot; public restroom; public park; or any vacant lot or from within or upon any vehicle parked or being driven in any such place in the city. (Ord. 405 § 2 (1), 1980)

 

9.08.020 Unreasonable noise.
     No person shall make any loud or unreasonable noise, din or clamor, or any loud or unreasonable shouting on the public streets or in public places in the city. (Ord. 405 § 2 (2), 1980)

 

9.08.030 Urination or defecation in public prohibited.
     No person shall urinate or defecate on public property in an area exposed to public view or on any public street, sidewalk, alley, park or other public place except in a toilet receptacle within the structure of a restroom facility. (Ord. 405 § 2 (3), 1980)

 

9.08.040 Public school premises— Loitering unlawful.
     A.    It is unlawful for any person or persons to remain, stay or loiter in or upon the premises of any public school in the city between the hours of ten thirty p.m. and five a.m. of the following day unless authorized in writing to remain on such public school premises by the school principal or his authorized representative.

     B.     As used in this section, “loiter” means to delay, linger, or to idle about without lawful purpose for being present on such school premises. (Ord. 297 § 1, 1975)

 

9.08.050 Charging admission to a party in residential zone—Prohibited.
     A.    Legislative Purpose. The city council finds and declares that charging admission to a party in a residential zone of the city creates a situation that may lead to danger to life and or property.

     B.     Definitions.

     Charge Admission. “Charge admission” means the demand and receipt of a tangible benefit, monetary or otherwise, which is a motivating influence for admission to the party. The customary courtesies and clearly noncommercial activity such as gifts by guests, sharing of expenses for dinner and beverages or reciprocal hospitality shall not be considered to be charge for admission. “Charge admission” does not include a donation for a political, charitable or religious purpose.

     Party. For purposes of this chapter, “party” means a group of persons meeting together for social, recreational or amusement purposes.

     Residential Zone. “Residential zone” means all residential zones as defined in Title 17.

     C.     Prohibition. It is unlawful to charge admission to any party conducted in a residential zone of the city.

     D.    Punishment. Violation of this section is punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the county jail not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     E.     Costs for Police Services. When police have received advance notice of an event that would be in violation of this section and have notified the person in charge of the premises and/or the person responsible for the event of its unlawfulness, any subsequent costs of providing police services at that location relating to an unlawful event as defined in this section will qualify as a second response under Section 2.28.150. (Ord. 534 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 9.12 CURFEW
9.12.010 Loitering of minors prohibited.
     A.    It is unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places or trespass on private property between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a minor accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.

     B.     Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 10 § 1, 1960)

 

9.12.020 Responsibility of parents.
     A.    It is unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to knowingly permit such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places and public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places, or trespass on private property between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply when the minor is accompanied by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor or when the minor is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.

     B.     Each violation of the provisions of this section shall constitute a separate offense.

     C.     It shall not constitute a defense hereto that such parent, guardian or other person having the care and custody of a minor coming within the provisions of this chapter, did not have knowledge of the presence of the minor in or upon any streets, alleys, highways, roads, public places, vacant lots or other unsupervised places in violation of Section 9.12.010. (Ord. 10 § 2, 1960)

 

9.12.030 Enforcement authority.
     Every law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to demand from any person whom he or she has reasonable cause to believe comes within the provisions of this chapter and who is found loitering, idling, wandering, strolling or playing in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public ground, public places, public buildings, places of amusement and entertainment, vacant lots or other unsupervised places or trespass on private property without his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day, that such person give his or her name, address, parents’ names and furnish proof of his or her age or proof that he or she is upon an emergency errand or legitimate business directed by his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person, and upon the failure of such person to give or furnish any or all of the information any such officer is authorized and empowered to take such person into custody and take him or her to his or her home, or communicate with his or her parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such person and demand the information hereinabove required to be given. If such person so taken into custody is a person coming within the provisions of this chapter, any such law enforcement officer is authorized and empowered to demand of the parents, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor, that they take such minor to his or her home.

     The failure of any such parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor to furnish the information hereinabove required or to take such minor home when so demanded by any such law enforcement officer is declared to be misdemeanor and shall be punished as hereinafter provided. Further provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply to a parent, guardian or other adult person where the minor is legally married, but the minor, nevertheless, shall remain subject to the provisions of this section. (Ord. 10 § 3, 1960)

 

9.12.040 Minors to be supervised during certain hours.
     It is unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of any minor under the age of fourteen (14) years to leave the minor at home or any other place without the supervision of a competent and responsible person between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. of the following day. (Ord. 10 § 4, 1960)

 

9.12.050 Exemptions.
     Provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any minor in the military service of the United States. (Ord. 10 § 5, 1960)

 

9.12.060 Minor defined.
     For the purpose of this chapter, any person under the age of eighteen (18) years shall be deemed a minor irrespective of the marital status of the person. (Ord. 10 § 6, 1960)

 

9.12.070 Violation—Penalty.
     Any minor violating any of the provisions of Section 9.12.010 shall be remanded to the juvenile court. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor coming within the provisions of this chapter who violates any of the provisions hereof shall be fined not more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) or confined in the county jail for not more than fifty (50) days or punished by both such fine and imprisonment for each offense. (Ord. 10 § 7, 1960)

Chapter 9.16 GAMBLING
9.16.010 General prohibition.
     Every person who for profit, or for anything of value, or for commercial purposes of any nature, keeps, operates, conducts or maintains, either directly or indirectly, in the city, any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place where any game, gambling or gaming not mentioned or included in Section 330 or 330A of the Penal Code of the state of California is played, conducted, dealt or carried on whether with cards, dice or any other device of whatsoever nature for money, checks, credit, merchandise or other representative of value shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00), or by imprisonment in the County Jail, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.

     Every person either as owner, lessor, lessee, principal, agent, employee or participant or otherwise who maintains or keeps or operates or conducts directly or indirectly in whole or in part, or who directly or indirectly is in possession in whole or in part of any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place upon or in which any gambling, games or gaming prohibited in this section are played, conducted, dealt or carried on, and who imposes or collects a fee or anything of value for the privilege or participating in any way whatsoever in any such games, gambling or gaming, or who directly or indirectly gains or receives anything of value or any financial profit from playing, conducting or dealing of any such games, gambling or gaming shall for the purposes of this chapter be deemed to be keeping, conducting, operating and maintaining the same for profit or commercial purposes. (Ord. 12 § 1, 1960)

 

9.16.020 Permitting or allowing gambling unlawful.
     Every person who knowingly permits any of the games, gambling or gaming which by Section 9.16.010 are made unlawful to be played, maintained, operated, conducted or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place owned or rented by such person in whole or in part is punishable as provided in Section 9.16.010. (Ord. 12 § 2, 1960)

 

9.16.030 Participating in gambling unlawful.
     Every person who visits, frequents, participates in or knowingly permits any games, gambling or gaming which by Section 9.16.010 is or are made unlawful to be played, operated, maintained, conducted or dealt in any house, room, apartment, dwelling place or other place, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail, not exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 12 § 3, 1960)

 

9.16.040 Betting unlawful.
     Every person who shall place or bet at or against any of the games, gambling or gaming which by Section 9.16.010 are made unlawful shall be punishable as provided in Section 9.16.010. (Ord. 12 § 4, 1960)

Chapter 9.20 WEAPONS
9.20.010 Discharge of firearms—Unlawful.
     It is unlawful for any person, other than a peace officer acting in his or her official line of duty to shoot, fire or discharge, or for any person, firm or corporation to cause or permit to be shot, fired or discharged within the city limits, any rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, BB gun, air gun, firearm or bow and arrow, except when it may be necessary to do so to protect life or property or to destroy or kill any predatory or dangerous animal, or at an approved pistol range, rifle range or archery range. (Ord. 111 § 1, 1964)

 

9.20.020 Violation—Penalty.
     Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period not to exceed six months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 111 § 2, 1964)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 10.12 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Chapter 10.20 TRUCK ROUTES AND WEIGHT LIMITS
Chapter 10.24 PARKING
Chapter 10.28 ABANDONED VEHICLES
Chapter 10.32 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERSKATING
Chapter 10.36 BICYCLES
Chapter 10.40 TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
Chapter 10.44 ROTATIONAL TOWING SERVICES

Chapter 10.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS
10.04.010 Applicability.
     The definitions contained in this chapter shall govern the construction of this title. Whenever any words or phrases used in this title are not defined herein, but are now defined in the Vehicle Code of the state, such definitions are incorporated herein and shall be deemed to apply to such words and phrases as though set forth herein in full. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.020 City engineer.
     The “city engineer” is a person duly appointed as such by the city council. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.030 Director of community development.
     The director of community development is a person duly appointed as such by the city manager. (Ord. 487 § 1, 1986; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.040 Police officer.
     A “police officer” is any officer of the police department of this city or any officer authorized to regulate traffic or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.050 Chief of police.
     The “chief of police” is a person duly appointed as provided by the city code of the police department of the city. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.060 Vehicle Code.
     The “vehicle code” is the Vehicle Code of the state of California. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.070 Official time standard.
     Whenever certain hours are named in this title, they shall mean standard time or daylight savings time as may be in current use in this city. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.080 Holidays.
     For the purposes of this title, holidays include the following:

     New Year’s Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veterans’ Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day. If any holiday falls on Sunday, the Monday following is a holiday. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.090 Effect of city council resolutions.
     All resolutions passed and adopted by the city council pursuant to the provisions of this title, and pursuant to the provisions of the California Vehicle Code, affecting subjects covered by this title, shall be deemed to be a part of this title, and any violations of any of the provisions of any such resolution shall be deemed to be a violation of this title, to the same effect as if the resolution were fully set out in this title. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.100 Enforcement authority— Responsibility of police officers.
     It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, to enforce all traffic laws of this city, and all of the Vehicle Code sections applicable in this city. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.110 Authority to direct traffic— Emergency authority of police officers.
     Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are authorized to direct all traffic by voice, signals or other devices in conformance with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of fire or other emergency, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions require, notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.120 Authority to direct traffic—Fire department officials.
     Officers of the fire department, while they are at the scene of a fire, in the course of their duties, protecting personnel or equipment of the fire department, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.130 Authority to direct traffic— Flagman.
     A person designated as a flagman by a contractor working on the city streets under a permit or contract issued by the city, or a city employee designated as a flagman by the director of public services or his representative, during construction or repair of, or in, streets, may direct traffic by use of hand signals or warning flags if the operation of special highway construction equipment, trucks, concrete mixers, mobile cranes or other construction equipment might interfere with the safe movement of traffic. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.140 Authority to direct traffic— Persons other than officials.
     No person other than officers of the police department, of a person appointed or directed by the chief of police, or his officer, or persons authorized by law, shall direct traffic by voice, hand or other signal, except in an emergency until an officer arrives, and except that a person may operate, when or as herein provided, a push-button signal erected by the provisions of this title. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.04.150 Obstruction or interference with officers.
     No person shall interfere with, or obstruct in any way, any police officers or employee of this city in their enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. The removal, obliteration or concealment of any chalk mark or other distinguishing mark used by any police officer or other employee or officer of this city in connection with the enforcement of the parking regulations shall, if done for the purpose of evading the provisions of this chapter, constitute such interference or obstruction. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.08 TRAFFIC ADMINISTRATION
10.08.010 Police department duties.
     It shall be the duty of the police department of the city to:

     A.    Enforce the traffic regulations of this city and all applicable Vehicle Code sections;

     B.     Investigate traffic accidents;

     C.     Cooperate with the city engineer and other officers of the city in the administration of traffic laws; and

     D.    Develop ways and means to improve traffic conditions. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.020 Traffic accident reports.
     The police department shall maintain a system of filing traffic accident reports. Such reports shall be available for the use and information of the city engineer. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.030 City engineer powers and duties.
     It shall be the general duty of the city engineer to:

     A.    Determine the installation and proper timing and maintenance of traffic control devices and signals;

     B.     Conduct engineering analyses of traffic accidents and devise remedial measures;

     C.     Conduct engineering and traffic investigations of traffic conditions;

     D.    Cooperate with other city officials in the development of ways and means to improve traffic conditions;

     E.     Carry out the additional powers and duties imposed by ordinances of this city; and

     F.     Maintain a permanent record of departmental traffic orders issued pursuant to this title.

     Whenever, by the provisions of this title a power is granted to the city engineer or a duty imposed upon him, the power may be exercised or the duty performed by his deputy or by a person authorized in writing by him. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.040 One-way streets and alleys.
     The city council may, by resolution, designate those streets or alleys where one-way movement only is permitted and traffic movement in the opposite direction is prohibited. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.050 Through streets.
     The city council may, by resolution, designate any street or portion thereof as a through street. Any vehicle shall be required to stop before entering a through street at any intersection not controlled by a traffic signal. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.060 Stop intersections.
     The city council may, by resolution, designate any intersection where traffic from one or more directions shall stop before entering the intersection. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.070 Yield intersections.
     The city engineer may designate those intersections where traffic moving on one or more directions shall yield the right-of-way before entering the intersection. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.080 Crosswalks.
     The city engineer may order the marking of any crosswalk at an intersection where there is a particular hazard to pedestrians. The city engineer also may order signs at any crosswalk directing that pedestrians shall not cross in the crosswalk so indicated. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.090 Mid-block crosswalks.
     The city council may, by resolution, establish crosswalks at other than intersections in any block which is more than four hundred (400) feet in length. Such crosswalk shall be located as near as practicable to the middle of the block. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.08.100 Speed limits.
     The city council may, by resolution, designate prima facie speed limits upon streets in the city based upon engineering and traffic surveys as authorized by the State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.12 MISCELLANEOUS DRIVING RULES
10.12.010 Funeral procession.
     No person shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral procession while it is in motion and when such vehicles are identified as part of such procession by the display upon the outside of each vehicle of a pennant or other identifying insignia or by such other method as may be determined and designated by the chief of police. This provision shall not apply at intersections where traffic is controlled by traffic-control signals or police officers. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.12.020 Driving over sidewalk.
     No person shall drive any motor vehicle within or over any sidewalk area or any parkway except when entering or exiting a driveway. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.12.030 Driving over new pavement or markings.
     No person shall drive over or across any new pavement or freshly-painted pavement marking when street barriers, signs, cones or other markers are in place notifying drivers of the new paving or painting. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.12.040 Driving contrary to barriers or signs.
     No person shall drive or operate a vehicle contrary to the directions or provisions of any barrier or sign erected pursuant to the provisions of any ordinance or resolution of the city, or by any public utility or agency, or by any department of the city, or by any other person pursuant to law or contract with the city, and no unauthorized person shall move or alter the position of any such barrier or sign. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.12.050 Driving into congested intersection or crosswalk.
     No person shall drive a vehicle into an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the opposite side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians in such intersection or crosswalk, notwithstanding any official traffic-control device or signal indication to proceed. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.12.060 Obstructions to vision— Prohibited at corners.
     On property at any corner formed by intersecting streets, it is unlawful to install, set out, maintain or allow the installation, setting out or maintenance of any tree, hedge, shrubbery, natural growth or other obstruction to the eye, higher than two and one-half feet above the top of the sidewalk, or, where no sidewalks exist, higher than three feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, within the triangular area between the property line and a diagonal line joining points on the property lines twenty-five feet from the point of their intersection. Trees within the triangular area trimmed to the trunk from grade level for a vertical distance of at least seven feet above the top of the sidewalk, or where there are no sidewalks, eight feet above the level of the center of the adjacent intersection, are exempt from the requirements of this section. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.16 TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
10.16.010 Lane marking.
     The city engineer is authorized to mark centerlines and lane lines upon the surface of the roadway to indicate the course to be traveled by vehicles and may place signs temporarily designating lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the centerline of the highway. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.16.020 Unauthorized painting of curbs and streets.
     No person, unless authorized in writing by this city, shall paint any curb or street surface. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.16.030 Restricted turn signs.
     The city engineer is authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers shall not make a right, left or U-turn. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.16.040 Right turn on red light.
     The city engineer is authorized to determine those signal-controlled intersections where drivers shall not make a right turn on a red light. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours as determined by the city engineer. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.20 TRUCK ROUTES AND WEIGHT LIMITS
10.20.010 Truck routes.
     A.    Whenever any resolution of this city designates and describes any street or portion thereof as a street the use of which is permitted by any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons, the city engineer is authorized to designate such street or streets by appropriate signs as “truck routes” for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons.

     B.     When any such truck route or routes are established and designated by appropriate signs, the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight limit of four tons shall drive on such route or routes and none other except that nothing in this section shall prohibit the operator of any vehicle exceeding a maximum gross weight of four tons coming from a “truck route” having ingress and egress by direct route to and from restricted streets when necessary for the purpose of making pickups or deliveries of goods, wares and merchandise from or to any building or structure located on such restricted streets or for the purpose of delivering materials to be used in the actual and bona fide repair, alteration, remodeling or construction of any building or structure upon such restricted streets for which a building permit has previously been obtained therefor.

     C.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to: (1) passenger buses under the jurisdiction of the public utilities commission; or to (2) any vehicle owned by a public utility while necessarily in use in the construction, installation or repair of any public utility.

     D.    Those streets and parts of streets established by resolution of the council are declared to be truck routes for the movement of vehicles exceeding a maximum gross weight of four tons. (Ord. 481 § 1, 1986; Ord. 487 § 1, 1986; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.20.020 Overload permits.
     Upon receipt of application in writing and if good cause appears, the city manager, or his or her designee, after review by the city engineer, is authorized to issue permits for transporting loads on city streets exceeding the weight and size limits established in the Vehicle Code. The fees for such permits shall be as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 640 § 1, 2001; Ord. 487 § 1, 1986; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.24 PARKING
10.24.010 Parking over seventy-two (72) hours prohibited.
     No person shall park or store any vehicle upon any street or alley for more than seventy-two (72) hours. Vehicles parked in violation of this section are subject to removal by the chief of police. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.020 Parking inoperable vehicles for longer than twelve (12) hours prohibited.
     No person shall park or leave standing any vehicle for a period of time longer than twelve (12) hours on any public street or highway in the city unless such vehicle is in a condition to be lawfully operated upon the public highways. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.030 Departmental traffic orders.
     A.    City Engineer Authorized to Issue Departmental Traffic Orders. The city engineer is authorized to issue departmental traffic orders to regulate parking at certain locations and during certain hours as described below. All departmental traffic orders shall specifically describe the affected area and the type of regulation to be imposed.

     1.     Intersections. Within twenty (20) feet of an intersection, or if there is no curb return, then within twenty (20) feet of where the private property line intersects with the intersection.

     2.     Green Loading Zones—Twenty-Four (24) Minute Parking. Between the hours of nine a.m. and six p.m. of any day, except Saturdays, Sundays or holidays, for a period of time not longer than twenty-four (24) minutes.

     3.     Blue Curb Zone—Disabled Persons. In spaces designated for disabled persons only.

     4.     Red Curb Zone—No Parking at Any Time (One Hundred Fifty (150) Feet or Less). At any single location on or along a public roadway for a distance of up to one hundred fifty (150) feet.

     5.     Yellow Curb (Freight) Loading Zones. Between seven a.m. and six p.m. of any day, in a freight loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or materials and then not more than three minutes for loading or unloading passengers nor more than twenty (20) minutes for loading or unloading materials.

     6.     White Curb (Passenger) Loading Zones. In a passenger loading zone for any purpose other than loading or unloading passengers or depositing mail in an adjacent mailbox and then not more than three minutes.

     7.     Bus Zones. At locations where buses stop.

     8.     Parking Space Markings. Within a single space as indicated by lines on the pavement.

     9.     Construction Zone—Temporary No Parking at Any Time. At any location(s) on or along a public roadway for a distance determined by the city engineer.

     10.   Temporary Events—No Parking Restriction. At any location(s) on or along any public roadway which have been authorized by the city to be used for a purpose other than the normal flow of traffic or for the movement of equipment, articles or structures of unusual size, and it has been determined that the parking of a vehicle would prohibit or interfere with that use or movement. This subsection may be authorized by the city engineer or the police chief, and they shall cause signs to be erected or placed at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the removal of any vehicle giving notice that any vehicles violating this prohibition may be removed.

     B.     Violation of Departmental Traffic Order. When the city engineer or police chief, as authorized, has issued a departmental traffic order and the area affected thereby has been properly signed, marked or posted, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in violation thereof. The police chief, or designee, shall have the authority to cite and/or tow any vehicle that is in violation of such traffic order. (Ord. 08-02 § 1, 2008; Ord. 614 § 1, 1997; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.040 City council resolutions regulating parking.
     A.    The city council may regulate parking on streets and city owned property by resolution in the following instances:

     1.     Limited Parking. Limiting parking to a specified number of hours.

     2.     No Parking Any Time. Prohibit parking at any time.

     3.     No Stopping (Tow-Away) Zones. Prohibit stopping or parking during specified days, or during specified times on specified days, and providing for tow-away in the event of violation.

     4.     Specified Days or Hours. Prohibit parking on specified days or at specified times on specified days.

     5.     Angle Parking. To allow angle parking at specified locations.

     B.     When the city council has adopted a resolution regulating or prohibiting parking, and the area(s) affected thereby have been properly signed, marked or posted, no person shall park or leave standing any vehicle in violation thereof. The police chief, or designee, shall have the authority to cite and/or tow any vehicle that is in violation of this section. (Ord. 13-09 § 2, 2013; Ord. 08-02 § 2, 2008; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.050 Commercial vehicle, truck exceeding certain width—Parking for longer than two hours.
     No person shall park any commercial vehicle, truck, trailer or truck-trailer combination which exceeds a width of eighty (80) inches on any public street or thoroughfare in the city for a period of two hours or longer, except:

     A.    While loading or unloading property when more than two hours is necessary to complete such work;

     B.     When such vehicle is parked in connection with, and in aid of, the performance of a service to or on property in the block in which such vehicle is parked and more than two hours is reasonably necessary to complete such service;

     C.     When the city council finds, by resolution, that it is in the legitimate interests of the city to permit the parking of a commercial vehicle, truck, trailer or truck-trailer combination which exceeds a width of eighty (80) inches on a particular public street or thoroughfare, and that such parking will not create significant traffic or circulation impacts. (Ord. 676 § 1, 2003; Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.060 Parking prohibited in alleys.
     No person shall park any vehicle in any alley for any purpose other than the loading or unloading of passengers or materials. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.070 Permit parking.
     The city council, after holding a public hearing, may determine by resolution that certain streets shall be restricted to permit parking only. Such action shall be taken only to preserve and protect residential neighborhoods from excessive intrusion of parked vehicles owned by persons residing outside the neighborhood. The chief of police shall issue permits to residents of the streets involved and such permits shall be affixed to automobiles in a location prescribed by the chief of police. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.080 Enforcement of Vehicle Code on private parking facilities.
     A.    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 21107.8 of the California Vehicle Code, the police department of the city is authorized to enforce certain Vehicle Code violations on designated privately owned and maintained off-street parking facilities which are generally held open for use by the public for vehicular parking.

     B.     Before the city designates such facilities, the owner or person in lawful possession thereof shall be notified by written notice ten days prior to a public hearing to be held regarding the enforcement of Vehicle Code violations on such off-street parking facilities.

     C.     The privately owned and maintained parking facilities where such enforcement is authorized shall be designated by the city council after such hearing in a resolution or resolutions adopted pursuant to the provisions of this title and the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.24.090 Parking of vehicle and recreational items.
     No person shall park any vehicle of twenty-two (22) feet or more in length, or any recreational item, upon any street or alley between the hours of two a.m. and six a.m. (Ord. 502 § 3, 1987)

 

10.24.100 Parking for purpose of advertisement or display.
     A.    No person shall park a vehicle upon a public or private street, parking lot or any public or private property for the purpose of displaying such vehicle thereon for the sale, hire or rental, unless the property is duly licensed and zoned by the city to transact that type of business at that location.

     B.     Subsection A of this section shall not prohibit persons from parking vehicles on private residential property belonging to the owner of the vehicle nor on the public street immediately adjacent to the private residential property. (Ord. 491 § 1, 1986)

Chapter 10.28 ABANDONED VEHICLES
10.28.010 Findings—Declaration of nuisance.
     In addition to and in accordance with the determination made and the authority granted by the state under Section 22660 of the Vehicle Code of the state to remove abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof as public nuisances, the city council makes the following findings and declarations:

     The accumulation and storage of one or more abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or parts thereof on private or public property, not including highways, is found to create a condition tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare. Therefore, the presence of one or more abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles or part thereof, on private or public property not including highways, except as expressly hereinafter permitted, is declared to constitute a public nuisance which may be abated as such in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (C.V.C. 22660, et seq.) (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.020 Exemptions.
     This chapter shall not apply to:

     A.    A vehicle or part thereof which is completely enclosed within a building in a lawful manner where it is not visible from the street or other public or private property; or

     B.     A vehicle or part thereof which is stored or parked in a lawful manner on private property in connection with the business of a licensed dismantler, licensed vehicle dealer, a junk dealer or when such storage or parking is necessary to the operation of a lawfully conducted business or commercial enterprise.

     Nothing in this section shall authorize the maintenance of a public or private nuisance as defined under provisions of law other than Chapter 10 (commencing with Section 22650) of Division 11 of the Vehicle Code of the state and this chapter. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.030 Chapter provisions not exclusive.
     This chapter is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall supplement and be in addition to the other regulatory codes, statutes and ordinances heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.040 Administration and enforcement.
     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this chapter, such officer and his deputies may enter upon private or public property to examine a vehicle or parts thereof, or obtain information as to the identity of a vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.050 Authority of franchised person to enter upon private property to remove vehicles.
     When the city council has contracted with or granted a franchise to any person, such person shall be authorized to enter upon private property or public property to remove or cause the removal of a vehicle or parts thereof declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.060 Establishment of amount to be assessed as cost of removal.
     The city council shall from time to time determine and fix an amount to be assessed as administrative costs (excluding the actual cost of removal of any vehicle or part thereof) under this chapter. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.070 Public hearings on removal and notice required.
     A.    A public hearing shall be held on the question of abatement and removal of a vehicle or part thereof as an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle and the assessment of the administrative costs and the cost of removal of the vehicle or part thereof against the property on which it is located. Notice of hearing shall be mailed at least ten days before the hearing by certified mail, with a five-day return requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the vehicle unless the vehicle is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If any of the foregoing notices are returned undelivered by the United States Post Office, the hearing shall be continued to a date not less than ten days from the date of such return.

     B.     Notice of such hearing shall also be given to the California Highway Patrol, identifying the vehicle or part thereof proposed for removal, such notice to be mailed at least ten days prior to the public hearing. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.080 Hearing—Procedure—Findings.
     A.    All hearings under this chapter shall be held before the city manager, acting as hearing officer, who shall hear all facts and testimony he deems pertinent. Such facts and testimony may include testimony on the condition of the vehicle or part thereof and the circumstances concerning its location on such private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The owner of the land on which the vehicle is located may appear in person at the hearing or present a written statement in time for consideration at the hearing, and deny responsibility for the presence of the vehicle on the land, with his reasons for such denial.

     B.     The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this chapter. He may delay the time for removal of the vehicle or part thereof if, in his opinion, the circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the hearing officer may find that a vehicle or part thereof has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and disposed of. as hereinafter provided and determine the administrative cost of removal to be charged against the owner of the parcel of land on which the vehicle or part thereof is located. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the vehicle or part thereof and the correct identification number and license number of the vehicle, if available at the site.

     C.     If it is determined that the vehicle was placed on the land without the consent of the land owner and that he has not subsequently acquiesced in its presence, the hearing officer shall not assess costs of administration or removal of the vehicle against the property upon which the vehicle is located or otherwise attempt to collect such costs from such land owner.

     D.    If an interested party makes a written presentation to the hearing officer but does not appear, he shall be notified in writing of the decision. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.090 Appeals from decisions of hearing officer.
     A.    Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the hearing officer within five days after his decision. Such appeal shall be heard by the city council, which may affirm, amend or reverse the order or take other action deemed appropriate.

     B.     The city clerk shall give written notice of the time and place of the hearing to the appellant and those persons specified in Section 10.28.070. In conducting the hearing, the city council shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.100 Disposal of vehicles—Removed vehicles not to be made operable.
     Five days after adoption of the order declaring the vehicle or parts thereof to be a public nuisance, five days from the date of mailing of notice of the decision, if such notice is required by Section 10.28.080, or fifteen (15) days after such action of the city council authorizing removal following appeal, the vehicle or parts thereof may be disposed of by removal to a scrap yard or automobile dismantler’s yard. After a vehicle has been removed, it shall not thereafter be reconstructed or made operable. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.110 Notice of removal to be given State Department of Motor Vehicles—Transmittal of tags, title, etc.
     Within five days after the date of removal of the vehicle or part thereof, notice shall be given to the Department of Motor Vehicles of the state, identifying the vehicle or part thereof removed. At the same time, there shall be transmitted to the Department of Motor Vehicles any evidence of registration available, including registration certificates of title and license plates. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.120 Failure of land owner to pay costs of removal.
     If the administrative costs and cost of removal which are charged against the owner of a parcel of land pursuant to Section 10.28.080 are not paid within thirty (30) days of the date of the order or the final disposition of an appeal therefrom, such costs shall be assessed against the parcel of land pursuant to Section 38773.5 of the Government Code of the state, and shall be transmitted to the tax collector for collection. Such assessment shall have the same priority as other city taxes. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

 

10.28.130 Failure to remove vehicles.
     It is unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to remove an abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicle or part thereof or refuse to abate such nuisance when ordered to do so in accordance with the abatement provisions of this chapter or state law where such state law is applicable. (Ord. 409 § 2, 1981)

Chapter 10.32 SKATEBOARDING AND ROLLERSKATING
10.32.010 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the meanings ascribed below:

     “Private property” means real property owned or operated by a person or persons and which is used primarily for business, industrial, commercial or recreational purposes.

     “Public property” means any property owned or maintained by the city or any other government agency or entity.

     “Rollerskate” means any footwear, or device which may be attached to the foot or footwear, to which wheels are attached and which may be used to aid the wearer in moving about or traveling along a surface with human inertia.

     “Skateboard” means a short, narrow board or other rigid material to which wheels are attached and on which a person may stand or kneel and be propelled along primarily by human inertia. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.020 General prohibition.
     It is unlawful for any person to utilize or ride upon rollerskates, a skateboard or similar device on, in or about property when the area has been designated as a “no skateboarding or rollerskating area” by the city manager in accordance with Section 10.32.040 or 10.32.050. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.030 Exemptions.
     Any devices designed, intended and used solely for the transportation of infants, the handicapped or incapacitated persons, or devices designed, intended and used for the transportation of merchandise to and from the place of purchase and other wheeled devices, when being used for either of these purposes, shall be exempt from the provisions of chapter. Furthermore, the city manager may, by department order, suspend the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter to accommodate special events when so requested by the event organizer. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.040 Designation of public property as no skateboarding or rollerskating area.
     The city council may, upon recommendation of the city manager, designate any public roadway, sidewalk or other public property as no skateboarding or rollerskating, etc., area. The city council shall designate such area by resolution and include direction for the posting of appropriate signage in accordance with Section 10.32.060. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.050 Designation of private property as no skateboarding or rollerskating area.
     The city manager may, by department order, designate any private property which is primarily used for business, industrial, commercial or recreational purposes, as a no skateboarding or rollerskating, etc., area. The city manager may so designate this private property subject to the following:

     A.    If the property is owner/occupied property, the property owner shall submit a written application requesting a designation of a no skateboarding or rollerskating area.

     B.     If the property is occupied by tenants of the owner, then the tenants shall submit a written petition or application signed by a majority of tenants on the property supporting a designation of a no skateboarding or rollerskating area and the application shall also contain the written consent of the property owner.

     C.     The city manager shall cause notice of the consideration of this application to be mailed to all tenants in the subject private property as well as to the owner at least ten days prior to making a determination. The notice shall invite written comments.

     The city manager may approve or deny the request for designation of the no skateboarding or rollerskating, etc., area based upon the merits of the request and such other criteria as are deemed relevant. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.060 Appeals of the decision of the city manager.
     A.    Any person may appeal to the city council any order or decision of the city manager made pursuant to Section 10.32.050 in the manner provided herein.

     B.     Appeals shall be made in writing and filed with the city clerk within twenty (20) days after the date of the department order and shall include a statement specifically setting forth the portion(s) of the decision with which the appellant disagrees and the reason or basis in each case for such disagreement. The written appeal statement shall be accompanied by a fee which will be set by resolution of the city council. Upon receipt of notice of the appeal and fee, the city clerk shall set a time within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the notice for a hearing on such appeal. Notice of such hearing shall be given as follows:

     A notice of an appeal from a determination under Section 10.32.050 shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city and written notice shall also be mailed to the property owner and all tenants of the affected property.

     C.     At the hearing the city council shall consider the information and testimony presented and shall at the conclusion of the hearing affirm, reverse or modify the decision of the city manager. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.070 Posting of signs required— Content.
     Prior to the enforcement of the prohibition on skateboarding or rollerskating, etc., the area so designated shall be posted with signs which provide substantially as follows:

 

     Skateboarding or rollerskating etc., is prohibited by Los Alamitos City Code Section 10.32.020. Any violation is punishable by a fine of $25.00 for a first offense.

 

     Such prohibition shall apply to the property or area so designated once posted in plain view at all entrances to the property or area, and on signs which are not less than seventeen (17) by twenty-one (21) inches in size with lettering not less than one inch in height. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.080 Fees set by resolution.
     The city council may, by resolution, establish fees for the receipt and processing of applications and petitions for no skateboarding or rollerskating, etc. areas. In addition, the city council may, by resolution, establish fees sufficient to cover the costs of developing, printing and posting the areas designated pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.090 Delegation by city manager.
     The city manager is authorized to delegate in writing the responsibility for decisions under Section 10.32.050 to any city department head. If such delegation is made, any appeal from a decision of a department head shall be made directly to the city council in accordance with Section 10.32.060. (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

 

10.32.100 Violation—Penalty.
     Any violation of this chapter is deemed an infraction, punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). A second violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a fine of fifty dollars ($50.00), and a third and subsequent violation shall be deemed a misdemeanor punishable and in accordance with Section 17.54.130 (B). (Ord. 568 § 2, 1993)

Chapter 10.36 BICYCLES
10.36.010 Definitions.
     As used in this chapter, the following terms and words shall have the following meanings:

     “Agent” means any person or entity recommended to be an agent by the chief of police and appointed as such by the city council. Such agent need not be located within the city limits but normally shall be a bicycle retailer selling bicycles to residents of the Los Alamitos area.

     “Bicycle” means and includes any device upon which a person may ride, which is propelled by human power through a system of belts, chains or gears and which has wheels at least twenty (20) inches in diameter and a frame size of at least fourteen (14) inches.

     “Bicycle license receipt” means and includes the ownership card issued by the licensing agency or agents of this city upon receipt of the designated license fee.

     “Bicycle plate” means and includes the license tag or decal designated by the state of California in accordance with Section 39001 of the California Vehicle Code, to be permanently affixed to the bicycle and which bears unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state.

     “Licensing agency” means the Los Alamitos police department. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.020 Powers of licensing agency or agents.
     A.    The licensing agency and any duly appointed agent shall be the official issuers of bicycle licenses in the city.

     B.     The licensing agency or any agent shall only license bicycles for persons residing in the city or having a Los Alamitos postal or mailing address; all other bicycle license applicants or purchasers shall be referred to their respective city or jurisdiction of residency. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.030 Bicycle licensing required.
     No person residing in this city shall ride or propel any bicycle upon any public street, sidewalk, alley, bicycle lane or path, or any other public property, or have in his possession any bicycle which has not been licensed and for which the appropriate license fee has not been paid or which does not bear a bicycle plate as required by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.040 License receipt and bicycle plate—Issuance.
     At the time that any person licenses a bicycle and pays the appropriate license fee in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the licensing agency or agent shall provide him with a license receipt bearing the owner’s name, address, telephone number, bicycle plate number, the bicycle manufacturer, type and number and any other descriptive material concerning the bicycle deemed necessary by the licensing agency, and provisions for the transfer of ownership of the bicycle. In addition, at the time of licensing, the bicycle owner shall also be issued his permanent bicycle plate bearing the unique number permanently assigned to that bicycle by the state. The bicycle license shall remain in effect for the period designated by the state in accordance with Section 39001 of the Vehicle Code. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.050 Sale or transfer of bicycle.
     Whenever any person sells, trades, disposes of or transfers any bicycle licensed pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, he shall endorse upon the license receipt previously issued for such bicycle a written transfer of same, setting forth the name, address and telephone number of the transferee, the date of transfer, the signature of the transferor, and shall deliver such license receipt, so endorsed, to the licensing agency at the time of transfer. The transferee shall, within ten (10) days after such transfer, apply to the licensing agency for a transfer of the license receipt. A fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be charged for said transfer of ownership. (Ord. 661 § 3, 2002; Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.060 Change of address bicycle license.
     Whenever any bicycle licensee changes his place of residence, he shall notify the licensing agency of such change of address within ten (10) days. There shall be no charge for the change of address. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.070 Lost or stolen license receipt or bicycle plate—Report and replacement.
     A.    In the event that any license receipt issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, is lost or stolen, the licensee of such bicycle shall immediately notify the licensing agency, and within ten (10) days after such notification shall apply to the licensing agency for a duplicate receipt; whereupon, said licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a duplicate license receipt, upon payment to the licensing agency of a fee as established by resolution of the city council.

     B.     In the event that any bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, is lost or stolen, the licensee shall immediately notify the licensing agency of such loss, and shall within ten (10) days apply to the licensing agency for a new bicycle plate; whereupon, the licensing agency shall issue to such licensee a new bicycle plate, upon payment to said licensing agency of a fee as established by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 661 § 4, 2002; Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.080 Fees.
     The fees required to be paid pursuant to the provisions of this chapter are:

     A.    For a bicycle license, a sum as established by resolution of the city council to be paid per year or any portion thereof:

     B.     For each transfer of license receipt, a sum as established by resolution of the city council;

     C.     For each replacement of bicycle license receipt or bicycle plate, a sum as established by resolution of the city council;

     D.    For each impounding fee for bicycles found to be in violation of this chapter, a sum as established by resolution of the city council not to exceed the maximum sum allowable pursuant to California Vehicle Code Section 39011. (Ord. 661 § 5, 2002; Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.090 Tampering with license receipt or bicycle plate—Prohibited.
     It is unlawful for any person to tamper with, destroy, mutilate or alter any license plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

     It is unlawful for any person to remove, destroy, mutilate or in any way alter or tamper with a bicycle plate issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.100 Bicycle dealers—Weekly bicycle sales reports required.
     Any person engaged in the business of buying, selling or trading bicycles within this city is hereby required to make a weekly report to the licensing agency giving the name, address and telephone number of all persons either buying, selling or trading bicycles and the bicycle manufacturer, type, frame number and bicycle plate number, if any. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.110 Bicycles in violation of this chapter—Impounding and fee.
     The licensing agency shall have the right to impound and retain possession of any bicycle in violation of the provisions of this chapter, and may retain possession of such bicycle until the provisions of this chapter are complied with. A fee to be determined by the city council pursuant to Section 39011 of the California Vehicle Code, shall be charged for each bicycle so impounded. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.120 Fines for violation of this chapter.
     A fee to be determined by the city council pursuant to Section 39011 of the Vehicle Code shall be charged for violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 313, 1975)

 

10.36.130 Enforcement.
     The chief of police and his representatives shall herewith be granted all authority to enforce and carry out the provisions of this chapter pursuant to the provisions included in the California Vehicle Code and all other laws of the state of California. (Ord. 313, 1975)

Chapter 10.40 TAXI ADMINISTRATION PROGRAM
10.40.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases herein defined shall be construed in accordance with the following definitions.

     A.    “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     B.     “City authorization” means city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city.

     C.     “Driver” means a person who drives or controls the movements of a taxicab.

     D.    “Driver’s permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to drive or control the movements of a taxicab.

     E.     “OCTAP” means the Orange County taxicab administration program administered by the Orange County transportation authority.

     F.     “Operate a taxicab” means to drive a taxicab and either solicit or pick up passengers for hire in the city.

     G.    “Owner” means the registered owner or lessor of a taxicab.

     H.    “Person” means and includes natural person, firm, association, organization, partnership, business, trust, corporation, or public entity.

     I.      “Taxicab” means a vehicle operated within the jurisdiction of the city, capable of carrying not more than eight persons, excluding the driver, and used to carry passengers for hire. The term shall exclude a vehicle operating as a charter party carrier licensed as such by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission, or any other vehicle having a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by any state agency, including the Public Utilities Commission.

     J.      “Taxicab business permit” means a valid permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a person to operate a taxicab business.

     K.    “Taxicab vehicle permit” means a permit issued by OCTAP authorizing a particular vehicle to be operated as a taxicab. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.020 City authorization required.
     A.    A person shall only operate a taxicab if the owner of that taxicab is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

     B.     An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated if the owner is authorized by the city to operate a taxicab business in the city.

     C.     The procedures for city authorization to operate a taxicab business in the city shall be established by separate resolution or ordinance of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.030 Driver’s permit required.
     A person shall only operate a taxicab if that person is in possession of a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a driver to operate a taxicab owned by the owner if that driver possesses of a driver’s permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.040 Taxicab vehicle permit required.
     A person shall only operate a taxicab if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. An owner shall only allow a taxicab owned by the owner to be operated in the city if that vehicle displays a taxicab vehicle permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.050 Taxicab business permit required.
     A person or company shall only operate a taxicab business in the city if that person possesses a taxicab business permit and if city authorization has been obtained. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.060 Application for permits.
     Application for a driver’s permit, taxicab vehicle permit or taxicab business permit shall be made to OCTAP, upon a form provided by OCTAP and shall be accompanied by an application fee sufficient to cover the administrative costs of processing said application as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.070 Testing for controlled substances and alcohol.
     A driver shall test negative for controlled substances and alcohol as required by applicable state statutes. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.080 Insurance required.
     A driver operating a taxicab in the city shall carry with him/her at all times proof of insurance covering that vehicle, with such policy limits and coverage as established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. Said proof of insurance must clearly identify the vehicle covered. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.090 Nontransferability.
     No permit issued under this chapter shall be assigned to, or used by, any person or vehicle other than the person or vehicle named in such permit. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.100 Equipment.
     A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be equipped according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.110 Mechanical condition.
     A taxicab operated under the authority of this chapter shall be maintained according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.120 Operational requirements.
     A.    A driver shall only carry a passenger to his/ her destination by the most direct and accessible route.

     B.     A taxicab shall have all permits issued by OCTAP conspicuously displayed according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council.

     C.     A taxicab shall have the following information continuously posted in a prominent location in the taxicab passenger’s compartment according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council:

     1.     A schedule of rates and charges for the hire of said taxicab;

     2.     The driver’s name and address;

     3.     The owner’s name, address and telephone number;

     4.     The taxicab identification number;

     5.     The driver’s permit issued pursuant to this chapter;

     6.     The taxicab vehicle permit issued pursuant to this chapter; and

     7.     Any other information required by the city.

     D.    A driver shall give a receipt for the amount charged upon the request of the person paying the fare.

     E.     A taxicab shall only be operated if the passenger compartment is kept in a clean and sanitary condition.

     F.     A driver shall not leave his taxicab to solicit passengers.

     G.    The name or trade name of the owner and the number by which the taxicab is designated shall be printed, stamped or stenciled conspicuously on the outside of each taxicab according to the standards established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.130 Rates and charges.
     No driver shall charge rates and charges other than those established by OCTAP and adopted by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.140 Separate from business licensing.
     The requirements of this chapter are separate and independent from the business licensing and any other provisions under the city code. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

 

10.40.150 Penalty.
     A.    It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.20 of this code for any person to violate any provision of this chapter.

     B.     Civil Action. The city attorney, at the request of the city council, may institute an action in any court of competent jurisdiction to restrain, enjoin or abate the condition(s) found to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter, as provided by law. (Ord. 616 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 10.44 ROTATIONAL TOWING SERVICES
10.44.010 Definitions.
     “Business license” means a license issued by the city according to Chapter 5.04 of the municipal code.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos or his or her designee.

     “Nonconsensual towing service” means towing services provided to the city’s police department in situations where vehicle owners are unable to consent to having their vehicle towed, such as in cases of severe accident, where a vehicle is being towed for being illegally parked on public property or towed as a result of a police order.

     “Police chief” means the chief of police of the city of Los Alamitos or his or her designee.

     “Police department” means the Los Alamitos police department.

     “Rotation list” means the city’s list of eligible towing carriers to be used by the police department when assistance is needed to remove abandoned, disabled or impounded vehicles.

     “Rules and specifications” means the city’s rules and specifications for towing services and vehicle storage facilities promulgated by the police chief.

     “Tow vehicle” means a motor vehicle which has been altered or designed or equipped for and exclusively used in the business of towing vehicles by means of a crane, tow bar, tow line, dolly or a roll-back carrier or is otherwise used to render emergency assistance to disabled and other vehicles.

     “Towing carrier” or “towing provider” means a towing company and the owner(s) and/or managing employee(s) of a towing company.

     “Tow vehicle driver” means the driver of an authorized tow vehicle used for towing another motor vehicle. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.020 Purpose.
     A.    The purpose of this chapter is to establish towing regulations to govern the provision of nonconsensual towing services to the city’s police department, consistent with state and federal laws, as well as the public health, safety and welfare. A further purpose is to insure that the best possible towing services are selected to participate in the city’s rotational tow program to assist the police department in conducting efficient police investigations and provide the citizens of Los Alamitos with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing services.

     B.     These regulations are not intended to govern situations where towing has been requested by vehicle owners or private property owners, except as may be permitted by law. Instead, these regulations, along with the rules and specifications to be promulgated by the police chief in conjunction with this chapter, are intended to provide a fair and objective method of selecting towing service providers from among qualified firms to insure that towing providers and drivers selected provide the police department and the public with prompt, safe and comprehensive towing services using the latest in towing technology and vehicle towing and storage safety. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.030 Rules and specifications.
     The police chief shall promulgate written rules and specifications for towing services, drivers and vehicle storage facilities. The rules and specifications may be modified from time to time as deemed appropriate by the police chief. Such rules and specifications shall include reasonable provisions respecting the character, extent, quality and standards governing nonconsensual towing services and tow storage lots that are provided and used by the police department. In addition, the rules and specifications shall include such other rules and specifications as may be reasonably necessary to facilitate nonconsensual tow services in the best interests of the public, including, but not limited to, the following specific provisions:

     A.    Provisions requiring that all selected towing carriers obtain a city business license;

     B.     Provisions requiring all selected towing carriers and individual towing vehicle drivers to have a permit issued by the police department;

     C.     A provision requiring all selected towing carriers to enter into a towing services agreement with the city;

     D.    A provision requiring all selected towing carriers to abide by the police department’s rotation list and the rules and specifications established by the police chief;

     E.     A provision requiring all selected towing carriers to protect, indemnify, defend and hold harmless the city, its elected officials, officers, employees, agents and volunteers from all claims, demands or liabilities arising out of or encountered in connection with their agreement with the city or the performance of work or purchase of supplies, equipment and materials in preparation for the towing operation, or claims, demands and liabilities occurring during the towing and subsequent storage and maintenance of vehicles on behalf of the city, whether or not such claims, demands or liabilities are caused by the towing carrier, its employees or agents;

     F.     A provision requiring towing carriers to provide proof and maintain general liability, automobile liability and workers’ compensation insurance, in an amount and insurance-industry rating which meets the requirements of the city’s finance department, names the city as an additional insured and is acceptable to the city attorney.

     G.    A provision requiring inspections to be conducted at least once per year of all towing vehicles and all towing lots and facilities used in the performance of towing service on behalf of the city; and

     H.    A provision requiring all selected towing carriers to pay the administrative fees required by this chapter. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.040 Towing rotation list.
     Towing carriers selected to provide towing services to the city, if more than one is selected, shall abide by the towing rotation system established by the police chief in the rules and specifications. The police chief shall develop a list of towing carriers selected to provide towing services to the city. The towing carrier at the top of the list shall be on call to provide towing service to the city in accordance with the rotation system established by the police chief. Once a tow truck operator completes its designated on-call service, the operator’s name shall be moved to the bottom of the list and the operator then at the top of the list shall begin its designated on-call service. The city may request services from a towing carrier who is not on-call in situations wherein the city manager, police chief or the police department watch commander deems an emergency to exist such that additional towing services are necessary to adequately meet the needs of the city or police department. The towing rotation list may be amended from time to time as part of the police chief’s promulgation or modification of the rules and specifications. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.050 Selection of number of towing providers.
     The police chief shall select towing providers according to the rules and specifications as these may be promulgated and/or amended. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.060 Selection of towing providers.
     The criteria for selecting towing providers shall be included in the rules and specifications as promulgated by the police chief and shall be made available to all applicants. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.070 Permit required.
     No person shall engage in the business of providing towing services to the city’s police department without first obtaining a towing carrier permit from the police chief and then obtaining a business license. Permits shall be issued for a period of not less than three years and not to exceed five years, as determined by the police chief. Notwithstanding the five year limitation on towing permits, the police chief is empowered to provide for a maximum of two, one-year extensions in addition to the maximum term, provided the towing carrier is in good standing and is abiding by the terms of this chapter and the rules and specifications. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.080 Execution of agreements.
     All towing providers selected to provide service shall enter into a towing service agreement with the city. The written agreement shall be in a form approved by the city attorney and shall be executed within thirty (30) days after their selection as a towing provider. The written agreement shall provide that the terms and conditions of this chapter and the rules and specifications shall be applicable for the entire term of the permit. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.090 Payment of administrative fees to city.
     A.    All towing carriers selected to participate in the city’s towing rotation program shall pay to the city the administrative fees and charges per vehicle towed as determined by separate resolution of the city council to cover the costs of the city’s towing program. The towing service agreement entered into between the city and the towing provider shall provide that any subsequent changes to the administrative fees and charges shall be applicable to the towing carrier upon ten (10) days written notification of such changes.

     B.     Payment of administrative fees and charges by selected towing carriers shall be due in accordance with the payment schedule provided in the rules and specifications.

     C.     Any administrative fees and charges which remain unpaid after the date specified in subsection B of this section shall be delinquent and shall result in a penalty equal to ten (10) percent of the unpaid amount. Nonpayment of the administrative fees and charges by any towing provider shall be grounds for revocation of their participation in the city’s towing rotation program.

     D.    Nothing contained in this chapter shall prohibit or limit the city’s ability to impose other fees and charges, including, but not limited to, franchise fees, for the right to provide towing services to the city’s police department, and vehicle release fees. Any such fees shall be established by separate resolution of the city council. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.100 Revocation and suspension of towing carrier and driver permits.
     The police chief may revoke or suspend the towing services agreement for the reasons, and pursuant to the procedures, set forth in the terms of the towing services agreement entered into with each towing carrier or for a violation of the terms of this chapter or the rules and specifications as promulgated by the police chief. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.110 Authority for city to maintain own towing operations and towing yard.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to restrict or prohibit the city from conducting its own towing operations or maintaining its own towing storage yard, either in lieu of, or in addition to any towing carrier permit that is awarded pursuant to this chapter or the rules and specifications. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

 

10.44.120 Penalties.
     Any towing carrier, driver or towing company violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition, any towing carrier or towing company violating the provisions of the rules and specifications shall be subject to the permit revocation provisions of contained herein and in the rules and specifications. (Ord. 693 § 1, 2006)

Title 11 (Reserved)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES
Chapter 12.04 STREETS AND HIGHWAYS GENERALLY
Chapter 12.08 IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
Chapter 12.10 PUBLIC FRANCHISES
Chapter 12.12 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
Chapter 12.16 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
Chapter 12.20 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENT
Chapter 12.24 CITY PARKWAY TREES
Chapter 12.28 BUS BENCHES AND SHELTERS
Chapter 12.32 NEWSRACKS
Chapter 12.36 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
Chapter 12.40 CITY PARKS
Chapter 12.44 PARADES, ATHLETIC EVENTS AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
Chapter 12.48 SIDEWALK VENDING
Chapter 12.52 CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY

Chapter 12.04 STREETS AND HIGHWAYS GENERALLY
12.04.010 Master plan of arterial highways adopted.
     Those certain printed documents, three copies of which are on file in the office of the city clerk, marked and designated as the “Orange County Master Plan of Arterial Highways,” are adopted as the master plan of arterial highways for the city. (Ord. 325 § 1, 1976)

 

12.04.020 Standard street and highway specifications—General requirements.
     A.    The following documents, together with any modifications and additions authorized or enacted by this title, are adopted as the standard plans and specifications for the construction, improvement, and repair of city streets, highways and other public rights-of-way within the city:

     1.     The Orange County Public Facilities and Resources Department (PFR&D) Standard Plans, 1996 Edition; and

     2.     Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction, written and promulgated by Public Works Standards, Inc., 2000 Edition, (“Greenbook”).

     B.     The city engineer may prescribe additional conditions as appropriate pursuant to this title. If any conflict exists between the conditions of approval and the standard plans and specifications, the conditions of approval shall prevail. To the extent any inconsistency exists within the documents comprising the city standard plans and specifications, a conflict may be resolved in the discretion of the city engineer.

     C.     Private applicants for improvement or construction in the city streets, highways and other public rights-of-way shall obtain a public works permit in accordance with Chapter 12.08. All work and materials for improvement or construction in the city streets, highways and other public rights-of-way shall conform to the applicable provisions of the city standard plans and specifications and any applicable conditions of permit approval. Copies of the standard plans and specifications are available for public review in the office of the city engineer. Any amendments or updates to the standard plans and specifications may be approved by resolution of the city council.

     D.    Construction and improvements within the city streets, highways and other public rights-of-way specifically authorized by a franchise, license or other agreement with the city shall be subject to the plans and specifications of said agreement to the extent that the provisions of the agreement are inconsistent with the standard plans and specifications.

     E.     Standard plans and specifications shall include the following general requirements:

     1.     Residential driveways shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in width;

     2.     Residential driveway approaches shall be a minimum of six inches of Portland cement concrete;

     3.     Commercial driveways shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in width;

     4.     Commercial driveway approaches shall be a minimum of six inches of Portland cement concrete;

     5.     Curb and gutter removals shall be saw cut or removed to the nearest expansion joint. If improvements are within eight feet of an expansion joint, removals shall be to the expansion joint;

     6.     Sidewalk removal shall be saw cut at score marks;

     7.     Driveways shall be a minimum of two feet from any surface utility;

     8.     All pavement lines shall be saw cut;

     9.     Asphalt concrete and Portland cement concrete shall conform to the applicable provisions of the standard specifications. (Ord. 645 § 1, 2001; Ord. 366 § 1, 1977; Ord. 325 § 2, 1976)

Chapter 12.08 IMPROVEMENTS WITHIN PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY
12.08.010 Applicability.
     This chapter shall not be construed to apply to the performance of any work mentioned in this chapter when performed under contracts made by any duly authorized official of the city in accordance with provisions of the general laws of the state providing for the improvement of streets and other places in municipalities. (Ord. 325 § 14, 1976)

 

12.08.020 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, Sections 1 and 2 of the Standard Specifications shall apply and the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:

     “Contractor” means a person licensed by the state in the appropriate trade who undertakes or offers to undertake, or purports to have the capacity to construct, alter, repair, add to, improve or install improvements within the public right-of-way.

     “Pavement” means Portland cement concrete or asphaltic cement concrete.

     “Public agency” means the United States or any department or agency thereof, the state or any department or agency thereof, any county, municipal corporation or public district.

     “Public right-of-way” means any public highway, public street, public way or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for public purposes. (Ord. 325 § 13, 1976)

 

12.08.030 Permits for improvements—Required.
     No person shall construct or place improvements within the public right-of-way, including curb cuts, driveways, and aprons, without first obtaining a public works permit therefor. A written application for permit shall be submitted to the city engineer for approval. The application shall include plans in triplicate showing the location and dimensions of the proposed work and such other detail as the city engineer may require; upon approval, one copy of the plans shall be attached to each copy of the permit and become a part of the same. (Ord. 14-02 § 2, 2014; Ord. 325 § 6, 1976)

 

12.08.040 Penalty for beginning work without permit.
     If any person starts or commences work in the public right-of-way without first obtaining a permit and paying the fee, then if a permit is thereafter issued by the city such person shall pay a fee equal to four times the normal fee for projects with a valuation up to two hundred dollars ($200.00) and three times the normal fee for projects with a valuation greater than two hundred dollars ($200.00). (Ord. 527 § 1, 1990; Ord. 325 § 9, 1976)

 

12.08.050 Permits—Terms and conditions.
     Any permit issued under this chapter shall provide that the permittee, his or her successors and assigns, shall indemnify and keep indemnified and save the city, its officers and employees, harmless from and against any claims for injury, loss, damage, liability, cost and expense which the city, its officers and employees may suffer, sustain, incur, be put to, pay or lay out from any actions, suits, proceedings, claims and demands which may be brought, made or filed against the city, its officers and employees, by reason of or arising out of, or in any way connected with, any operations authorized by any permit issued to the permittee; and until all excavation work shall have been completed to the satisfaction of the city engineer; and the city engineer shall have accepted in writing the completion of such work.

     Such permit shall be subject to the following conditions which shall be stated thereon:

     A.    The permit shall be kept at the site of the work with a copy of the plans attached and shall be shown on demand, to any authorized representative of the city or any law enforcement officer;

     B.     The permit shall authorize work to be performed only as to such portion of the highway over which the city has jurisdiction;

     C.     All work shall be performed in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and of all applicable laws, rules and regulations of the city and any other public agency and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     D.    The permit shall be nontransferable;

     E.     The city engineer may, either at the time of the issuance of the permit or at any time thereafter until the completion of the work, prescribe such additional conditions as he or she may deem reasonably necessary for the protection of the highway or for the prevention of undue interference with traffic or to assure the safety of persons using the highway. (Ord. 325 § 7, 1976)

 

12.08.060 Permit—Fees set by resolution.
     A.    Fees for grading permits, plan checking, encroachments and inspections for works of improvement in the public rights-of-way shall be set by resolution of the city council.

     B.     No person shall commence any work of improvement in the public rights-of-way until fees have been paid. (Ord. 527 § 3, 1990)

 

12.08.070 Permit—Cancellation and refunds.
     A.    All unused Class A and Class B permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be canceled thirty (30) days after issuance or sooner if requested by the permittee unless the work authorized by such permit has been commenced prior to the expiration of such thirty (30) day period; provided, that upon written request to the city engineer made prior to the cancellation of such permit, the city engineer may extend the time for commencing such work. Upon the cancellation of any Class A permit the fee paid therefor, less the total of the amount expended by the city in connection with the proposed work, minus twenty (20) percent of such expended amount, may be refunded to the permittee if so requested by him or her within sixty (60) days from the date of such cancellation of the permit, and upon surrender of the permit.

     B.     Should the permittee not construct a portion of the work authorized in a Class A permit, the portion of the fee charged for such work not performed, less the total of the amount expended by the city in connection with such work not performed, minus twenty (20) percent of such expended amount, shall be refunded to the permittee if so requested by him or her within sixty (60) days after the date of expiration of the permit. (Ord. 325 § 18, 1976)

 

12.08.080 Commencement and completion of work—Time limits.
     A.    All work for which a permit is issued under this chapter shall be commenced within thirty (30) days after issuance of the permit.

     B.     All work under this chapter shall be completed within ninety (90) days from the date the permit is issued, unless at the time of taking out the permit the city engineer shall authorize a longer period of time.

     C.     After work under this chapter is commenced, the work shall be prosecuted diligently and continuously until completion so as not to obstruct the street or other public places of travel more than is actually necessary.

     D.    Class A and Class B Permits. A Class A or Class B permit under this chapter shall become null and void ninety (90) days from the date on which construction work actually starts, unless a longer period of time is specified in the permit, in which case such permit shall become null and void at the end of the longer term specified therein; provided, that the city engineer may, upon good cause being shown therefor by the permittee, extend the time for the completion of the work. If after a permit becomes null and void, work is thereafter proposed to be done, an additional fee shall be paid and an additional permit shall be secured from the city engineer before such work is recommenced. (Ord. 325 §§ 8, 17, 1976)

 

12.08.090 Permit issuance—Deposits.
     A.    At the time of issuance of all permits under this chapter, the applicant shall deposit with the city an amount equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the cost of the proposed work with a minimum deposit of one hundred dollars ($100.00); except in the case of excavation, the deposit shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each permit obtained therefor; provided, that the excavation is less than two hundred (200) square feet. In the event the permit is for more than two hundred (200) square feet of excavation, the deposit shall be fifty cents ($0.50) per square foot of excavation. At the option of the applicant, he or she may make and maintain with the city a deposit of two hundred dollars ($200.00) which shall permit the issuance of permits for excavations of up to five hundred (500) square feet per year; a deposit of three hundred dollars ($300.00) which shall permit the issuance of permits for excavations of up to one thousand (1,000) square feet per year; a deposit of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which shall permit the issuance of permits for excavations of up to five thousand (5,000) square feet per year; or a deposit of twenty cents ($.20) per square foot for all excavations in excess of five thousand (5,000) square feet per year, plus one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). The annual permit for excavation shall be based on the city’s fiscal year, July to July. All annual permits shall expire on the subsequent June 30th.

     B.     All deposits shall be held by the city for a period of six months after completion of the work for which the permit was issued to insure that the work was done in a proper and workmanlike manner.

     C.     Application may be made to the city engineer by the applicant for an earlier release of such deposit. The city engineer may so release the deposit upon a proper showing of hardship and proper completion of the work. (Ord. 619 § 1, 1998; Ord. 325 § 19, 1976)

 

12.08.100 Deposits—Exemptions for public agencies.
     If any public agency files with the city a written guarantee of payment of all costs for which they may become liable to the city under this chapter, then no deposit shall be required form such persons other than the issuance fee. (Ord. 325 § 20, 1976)

 

12.08.110 Deductions from deposits— Refunds.
     A.    The city shall deduct from any deposit made or maintained by the permittee under this chapter:

     1.     The permit issuance fee if it has not otherwise been paid;

     2.     The cost to the city of refilling any excavation or removing any obstruction;

     3.     The cost to the city of resurfacing or repairing any highway;

     4.     The cost to the city of any additional repairs as provided in this chapter;

     5.     The cost of any inspection or tests by the city engineer made necessary by the failure of the permittee to comply with any provision of this chapter or the terms or conditions of the permit.

     B.     After making the deductions specified in this section, unless the deductions are made from a general deposit, the city shall refund any balance to the applicant in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust funds. The balance remaining in the general deposit shall be retained by the city and applied to issuance fees and costs in connection with any future excavations, cement work, fills or obstructions pursuant to a permit issued under this chapter; unless a written demand for the balance is made by the depositor, in which event any balance therein shall be refunded in the same manner as provided by law for the repayment of trust funds. (Ord. 325 § 21, 1976)

 

12.08.120 Payment of deficiencies—Action for failure to pay.
     A.    If any deposit under this chapter is insufficient to pay all fees and costs provided in this chapter, the permittee making such deposit, upon demand, shall pay to the city an amount equal to the deficiency.

     B.     If a permittee, upon demand, fails to pay any such deficiency or fails to pay any other costs due the city for which no deposit has been made, the city may recover the same by an action in any court of competent jurisdiction. Until such deficiency or cost is paid in full, a permit under this chapter shall not thereafter be issued to such permittee. (Ord. 325 § 22, 1976)

 

12.08.130 Performance of work not specified in permit.
     No person for whom a permit has been granted under the provisions of this chapter shall perform or cause to be performed any work in a greater amount or quantity than that specified in the permit issued. (Ord. 325 § 10, 1976)

 

12.08.140 Application for inspection.
     A.    No person shall commence any work for which a permit has been issued under this chapter unless such person has made application to the city engineer for inspection, at least twenty-four (24) hours before commencing work, specifying in such application the day and the hour when, and the location at which, the work will be commenced.

     B.     The city engineer may designate at his discretion persons to issue permits and inspect projects. (Ord. 325 § 11, 1976)

 

12.08.150 Commencement of work in emergencies.
     Subject to the limitation of excavation in Sections 12.08.320 and 12.08.330, nothing in this chapter shall prohibit any person from doing any work within the public right-of-way as may be necessary for the preservation of life or property when necessity arises during such hours as the offices of the city are closed, if the person doing such work obtains a permit therefor within one day after the offices of the city engineer are first opened subsequent to doing such work. (Ord. 645 § 12, 2001; Ord. 325 § 12, 1976)

 

12.08.160 Approval of lines and grades.
     No person shall lay, construct, reconstruct or repair any cement work in or upon any public street or other public place, or in, over or through any property or right-of-way owned by the city, without first having the lines and grades approved by the city engineer. (Ord. 325 § 23, 1976)

 

12.08.170 Conformance of work to plans and specifications—Supervision by city.
     All work for which a permit shall have been issued under this chapter shall be performed in accordance with the specifications and plans referred to in such permit, and shall be performed under the supervision of an inspector appointed by the city engineer. (Ord. 325 § 24, 1976)

 

12.08.180 Authorization by council of special plans and staking by city engineer.
     No special plans under this chapter shall be prepared by the city engineer nor shall any staking be done by the city engineer without prior authorization by the city council or the city manager. (Ord. 325 § 25, 1976)

 

12.08.190 Placing rock, gravel, concrete, etc. in parkways.
     No person shall place or maintain loose rock, grave or decorative stones in the parkway of any street within the city. This section shall not pertain to existing gravel parkways. Concrete may be installed in a parkway, after having obtained a permit as provided in this chapter; provided, that adequate tree wells shall be installed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. (Ord. 325 § 26, 1976)

 

12.08.200 Safety precautions—Obstruction of traffic.
     A.    It shall be the duty of every person doing work in any public right-of-way to maintain safe crossings for vehicles and pedestrian traffic at all street intersections, and safe crossings for pedestrians at intervals not to exceed six hundred (600) feet. If any such work is made in public right-of-way, at least one safe crossing of twelve (12) foot width shall be maintained at all times for vehicles and pedestrians. Free access shall be provided to all fire hydrants, water gates and driveway. All materials shall be laid along the side of the work so as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to public travel. If the street is not wide enough to hold materials without using part of the adjacent sidewalk, the person by whom the excavation is made shall erect a tight board fence upon and along such sidewalk and keep a passageway at least three feet in width open and along such a sidewalk.

     B.     All excavation work under this chapter shall maintain the surface of the backfill for vehicular traffic and pedestrians until the pavement or surfacing has been replaced, and shall assume full responsibility for all accidents which may occur due to vehicles and pedestrians crossing the site of the excavation until the pavement or surfacing has been replaced to the satisfaction of the city engineer. If it is impractical to maintain the surface of the backfill in a safe condition for traffic, then the permittee shall maintain barriers and red lights around the excavation to the satisfaction of the city engineer until the pavement or surfacing has been replaced.

     C.     One travel lane in each direction shall remain open at all times. Barricading and/or delineation shall comply with the requirements of the Work Area Traffic Control Handbook (WATCH) or the state of California Traffic Control Manual. (Ord. 645 § 6, 2001; Ord. 325 § 27, 1976)

 

12.08.210 Gutter maintenance.
     All gutters adjacent to an excavation under this chapter shall be maintained free and unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb and for at least one foot in width from the face of such curb at the gutter line. Whenever a gutter crosses an intersecting street an adequate waterway shall be provided and at all times maintained. (Ord. 325 § 28, 1976)

 

12.08.220 Placement and maintenance of barriers and warning lights.
     It shall be the duty of every person doing any work in any street or other public place to keep and maintain barriers at each of such excavation and at such places as may be necessary along the work to prevent accidents. It shall also be the duty of every person cutting or doing any work on any street to place and maintain a sign or barrier with letters not less than three inches in height, which signs shall state the name of the person doing the work, and to place and maintain lights at each end of such work and at a distance of not more than fifty (50) feet along the line thereof, from sunset each day to sunrise of the next day, until such work is entirely completed. No person shall fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any requirements contained in this section. (Ord. 325 § 29, 1976)

 

12.08.230 Compaction requirements— Clean-up—Pavement removals.
     A.    General Compaction Requirements.

     1.     All soils within the road right-of-way shall be compacted until the relative compaction within six feet of the top surface is not less than ninety (90) percent, and below six feet is not less than the adjacent undisturbed soil as determined by the relative compaction test.

     2.     All excavation backfill for trenches less than twenty four (24) inches in width shall be sand cement slurry containing two sacks of cement per cubic yard, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or his designee. Trenches twelve (12) inches deep or less shall be backfilled with sand cement slurry containing six sacks of cement per cubic yard.

     3.     Approved native material may be used for all excavation backfill for trenches wider than twenty-four (24) inches. Relative compaction shall be a minimum of ninety (90) percent for subgrade below thirty-six (36) inches and minimum of ninety-five (95) percent relative compaction up to thirty-six (36) inches from finished grade. Compaction tests may be required by the city engineer or his designee. Temporary re-surfacing of all compacted backfill areas shall be as described in Section 12.08.250 and shall remain for not more than ten days without approval from the city engineer, at which time the permanent pavement shall be placed at a minimum of one inch greater than existing. Slurry backfill excavation shall receive surfacing seventy-two (72) hours after placement of backfill, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer.

     4.     The city engineer, in his or her discretion, may adjust the compaction requirements set forth in this section as reasonably necessary or prudent based upon the circumstances of the application.

     B.     Compaction of Clayey Soils. Clayey material shall be defined as a soil containing more than thirty (30) percent of material which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen. Clayey material may not be ponded or jetted but shall be compacted as specified under general compaction requirements by any other suitable method; provided, the material is first conditioned by wetting or drying to within two percent of optimum moisture content.

     In lieu of compacting clayey material, the permittee at his option may elect to furnish sandy or granular material, less than thirty (30) percent of which will pass a No. 200 mesh screen.

     C.     Finishing and Clean Up. After the work has been completed, all debris and excess material shall be removed within three days from the right-of-way and the roadway shall be left in a neat and orderly condition. All roadside drainage ditches shall be restored to the original grades and the inlet and outlet ends of all culverts shall be left free and clear. All approaches to private driveways and intersecting highways and streets shall be kept open to traffic at all times. Excess and nonsurfacing materials which adhere to roadway surfacing as a result of construction operations shall be removed by approved methods to the satisfaction of the city engineer.

     D.    Pavement Removals. All pavement removal shall be saw cut to a minimum depth of one and one-half inches. If a saw cut is within two feet of a construction joint, expansion joint, edge or gutter, the pavement shall be removed to the joint or edge. Pavement shall be cut with an abrasive power-driven saw or cutting wheel leaving a uniform sharp edge unless otherwise approved by the city engineer or his designee. All asphalt pavement shall be overcut by a minimum of eighteen (18) inches on each side of the trench. (Ord. 645 §§ 2, 3, 2001; Ord. 325 § 30, 1976)

 

12.08.235 Location and installation of lines, pipes and wires.
     So far as practicable, all lines, pipes, and wires shall be located along the edge or shoulders of public streets or otherwise located so as to minimize disturbances to the right-of-way. Prior to commencement of work on any public street, an applicant shall provide the city engineer with a map depicting the proposed location of any lines, pipes, and wires and obtain any applicable permits or approvals to commence such proposed work. The city engineer may direct the time, place, and manner of installation and maintenance of lines, pipes, and wires and other equipment so as to minimize and mitigate any anticipated adverse impacts on the public’s use of the rights-of-way. (Ord. 645 § 7, 2001)

 

12.08.240 Duties upon completion of work.
     Immediately upon completion of the work necessitating the excavation or obstruction authorized by any permit issued pursuant to this chapter, the permittee shall promptly and in a workmanlike manner refill the excavation or remove the obstruction to the satisfaction of the city engineer. If any permittee fails or refuses to refill any excavation which he has made or remove any obstruction which he has placed on any highway, the city engineer may do so and the applicant shall promptly reimburse the city the cost thereof or forfeit the required bond or deposit. (Ord. 325 § 31, 1976)

 

12.08.250 Temporary restoration of surface.
     A.    Whenever the pavement of surfacing under this chapter is not immediately replaced, the surface shall have a two-inch temporary course of asphalt concrete installed immediately upon completion of work and compaction. The surface shall conform to the level of the adjoining street surface, and shall be compacted so that it is hard enough and smooth enough to be safe for traffic to pass over at any legal rate of speed in the determination of the city engineer.

     B.     Temporary bituminous re-surfacing, minimum two inches thick, shall be placed and maintained at locations determined by the city engineer or his designee, wherever excavation is made through pavement, sidewalk or driveways. In sidewalk areas, the temporary bituminous re-surfacing shall be at least two inches thick at major intersections and other critical locations, a greater thickness of four inches may be required and maintained until permanent pavement is placed. Temporary resurfacing shall be placed as soon as the condition of the backfill is suitable to receive it. (Ord. 645 § 4, 2001; Ord. 325 § 32, 1976)

 

12.08.260 Resurfacing.
     A.    After completion of the refilling and compacting of the backfill material in an excavation as specified in this chapter, and the removal of any obstruction, the permittee under the permit issued shall promptly replace any portion of the right-of-way surface removed or damaged by the excavation, obstruction or construction operations with permanent patching material to the satisfaction of the city engineer. Excavation resurfacing shall conform to Section 301 and pavement reconstruction shall comply with the applicable provisions of Section 302 of the Greenbook Standard Specifications for Public Works Construction. All excavation edges shall be sealed after final pavement is placed.

     B.     Where asphalt concrete pavement is removed, it shall be replaced with a one-inch greater thickness of asphalt pavement with a minimum thickness of three inches. If Portland cement concrete pavement is removed it shall be replaced with Portland cement concrete of the same thickness. The minimum width of pavement removal and replacement shall be two feet. Rock base shall be replaced with the same thickness as that which exists.

     C.     Excavation of pavement or surfacing on an arterial highway (as shown on the master plan of highways) and determined by the city engineer as having been improved with asphalt concrete surfacing or Portland cement concrete pavement, will be permitted only when physical conditions make boring or tunneling impossible. All boring and tunneling and placing of conduits, casing and pipe lines shall be done in such a manner that the existing driving lanes will not be disturbed. If a casing is installed to receive the conduit or pipe line, all voids between the casing conduit shall be filled with grout or sand.

     D.    If the surfacing or pavement within the driving lanes of an arterial highway (as shown on the master plan of highways) and determined by the city engineer as having been improved with plant-mixed surfacing or Portland cement concrete is removed or damaged by parallel construction operations, the existing surface or pavement of the width of the driving lane for the length of the damaged surfacing shall be removed and replaced; except, that such a removal and replacement shall in no case be less than one hundred (100) feet in length. (Ord. 645 § 5, 2001; Ord. 325 § 33, 1976)

 

12.08.270 Repairs necessary subsequent to completion of work.
     If at any time subsequent to the first repair of surface of a highway damaged or destroyed by any excavation or obstruction in such highway, it becomes necessary again to repair such surface due to settlement or any other cause directly attributable to such excavation under this chapter the permittee shall pay to the city the cost of such additional repairs made by the city engineer. The cost shall be computed by the city engineer so that whenever in this chapter any costs are to be charged to any permittee and no other method for the calculation thereof is specified, such cost shall be the actual cost, including the proportionate part of the salaries, wages or other compensation of any deputy or employee, plus the cost of overhead, not to exceed twenty (20) percent of the total cost. (Ord. 325 § 34, 1976)

 

12.08.280 Nonliability of city.
     No action pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be construed to relieve the person responsible for the existence of any obstruction, encroachment or excavation in the public street, sidewalk, alley or way from any liability whatsoever arising out of the existence of such condition; nor shall any provision of this chapter be construed to constitute an assumption of liability by the city of any duties imposed by law or contract upon any person. (Ord. 325 § 35, 1976)

 

12.08.290 Completion of work—Certificates of acceptance.
     Whenever any permittee under this chapter has completed any work for which a permit has been issued, the permittee shall so notify the city engineer in writing. If the city engineer has by survey or inspection, or both, found that the work has been completed in accordance with the requirements of the permit issued therefor and all the provisions of this chapter, he or she shall issue or cause to be issued, if so requested by the permittee, a certificate of acceptance which shall contain a statement of the location, nature and total amount of the work performed under this permit. (Ord. 325 § 36, 1976)

 

12.08.300 Atlas maps.
     It is the duty of every person owning, using, controlling or having an interest in pipes, conduits, wire, cables, manholes, ducts, tunnels, or any other such work under the surface of any public street to file with the city engineer a map or maps, in the format requested by the city engineer, showing in detail the location, size, description and date of installation of all mains, laterals, services and accessory fittings, vaults, chambers, and similar structures installed beneath the surface of the streets. These maps shall be kept up to date at all times, and at such time as there is any material change in the location or type of equipment installed within a public street, the owner shall submit a revised map to the city engineer. Whenever any pipe, conduit, wire, cable, manholes, duct, tunnel or other subsurface structure is to be abandoned, the person concerned shall file with the city engineer a statement giving details of such abandonment, and shall revise the maps on file with the city to show such abandonment. (Ord. 645 § 8, 2001)

 

12.08.310 Coordination of construction and equipment location.
     A.    Excavation construction and installation of lines, pipes, wires, or other equipment in the right-of-way shall not interfere with city construction schedules for road resurfacing or rehabilitation or any limitation of excavation imposed by the city on the excavation of streets, except as provided in this chapter.

     B.     Any interested individual or company may register with the city clerk for future notices regarding anticipated construction in the right-of-way within the city and any changes in applicable regulations. The city clerk shall maintain such register for city reference in a format to be determined by the city clerk. The city clerk shall make a reasonable effort to include in such register all current utility companies, any past applicants for excavation permits, and any other service providers deemed appropriate. Each registered utility or other service provider shall be responsible for updating information as needed.

     C.     At least ninety (90) days prior to the reconstruction or resurfacing of any city streets, the city engineer shall notify all individuals and companies registered in accordance with subsection B of this section. The city engineer shall coordinate with any and all such providers who request access to such street for installation of telecommunications equipment prior to or concurrent with the street reconstruction. Any applicant(s) for excavation and the installation of lines, pipes, wires, or other equipment in the right-of-way in conjunction with city scheduled road reconstruction shall be responsible for all costs associated with such excavation and installation, including but not limited to any pavement removal, trenching, backfilling and resurfacing which are not otherwise planned for the road reconstruction.

     D.    At least ninety (90) days prior to the scheduled excavation and/or pavement removal by an applicant, the city engineer shall notify each person registered in accordance with subsection B of this section. To the extent practicable, any registered utility or other service provider shall be offered the opportunity to join in the excavation and/or trenching project for the location of additional lines, pipes, wires, and/or other equipment in accordance with this chapter. Each participating utility and/or service provider joining in a cooperative project shall first obtain a public works permit from the city. Each permittee joining in a cooperative project shall be responsible for determining the appropriate share of costs such that all costs associated with the installation of equipment and the full repair of the street in accordance with this chapter are borne by such applicants. (Ord. 645 § 9, 2001)

 

12.08.320 Limitation of excavation.
     No excavation or pavement removal shall be permitted in a public street for sixty (60) months after the entire width of street has been paved or resurfaced (including, but not limited to, asphalt overlay and slurry sealing) except as authorized in this section.

     A.    An applicant shall not be prevented from accessing the public streets for excavation or pavement removal where an existing franchise, license, or other agreement with the city authorizes such access. The city engineer may impose reasonable standards and specifications on such excavation, pavement removal, and/or construction to the extent such standards and specifications are not inconsistent with the provisions of the existing franchise, license, or other agreement.

     B.     In the event of an emergency condition, the city manager may authorize excavation and/or pavement removal in public streets as permitted in Section 12.08.330. The city’s standard plans and specifications shall apply to pavement removal, repair and resurfacing.

     C.     The city council, in its discretion, may permit excavation, pavement removal, or other construction in a public street within sixty (60) months after the street has been paved or resurfaced provided that special circumstances exist and the city council determines the public benefit outweighs the public inconvenience and the impacts resulting from the application. The city council shall review the application at a public hearing and may impose reasonable standards and specifications for pavement removal, repair, and resurfacing as a condition of approval.

     D.    The city engineer may permit excavation and/or pavement removal in a public street within sixty (60) months after the street has been paved or resurfaced provided the applicant agrees to resurface the entire street in which the excavation occurs, from the curb and gutter on each side of the street to the nearest intersections encompassing the excavation. Such resurfacing shall be completed in accordance with specifications designated by the city engineer, and shall be secured by a construction bond or other security sufficient to ensure completion of the work in a timely fashion. The applicant shall guarantee the quality and completeness of the work for a period of two years. (Ord. 10-06 § 2, 2010; Ord. 645 § 10, 2001)

 

12.08.330 Emergency excavations.
     While the need for occasional emergency excavations to protect the public health, safety and welfare is recognized, the practice should be limited as much as possible in order to preserve the public streets and the normal excavation permitting process.

     A.    An emergency shall be deemed to exist when a great public and widespread calamity occurs; or when existing systems or equipment installed within a public street become inoperative or severely damaged such that the condition of the equipment or failures in the street reasonably appear to threaten the public health, welfare or safety, and that an immediate excavation is necessary to remove the threat and/or restore service.

     B.     In the event of an emergency described in subsection A of this section, any person lawfully maintaining the damaged or inoperative systems or equipment in the public streets may begin minimal construction and excavation necessary to alleviate the emergency conditions. As soon as reasonably practicable following the occurrence of the emergency, a person beginning or intending to begin emergency construction shall request a determination by the city manager and further authorization to complete any construction made necessary by such emergency. In any event, the party making the excavation shall apply for a public works permit within one day after the offices of the city are first opened following the excavation, and shall obtain such permit as soon as practicable.

     C.     Upon consultation with the city engineer and the applicant, the city manager shall determine whether an emergency exception to Section 12.08.320 exists and provide direction and standards for any necessary construction. If an emergency exception exists, the person conducting the excavation and/or pavement removal in the public streets shall, at a minimum, repair the public streets in accordance with the city’s standard plans and specifications. (Ord. 645 § 11, 2001)

Chapter 12.10 PUBLIC FRANCHISES
12.10.010 Purpose and intent.
     It is the purpose and intent of the city council of the city of Los Alamitos by enacting this chapter to establish nondiscriminatory procedures for the granting of franchises to use and occupy the public rights-of-way. The city has the authority to manage public property through its police power, charter, and other statutory and constitutional powers granted to municipalities. The authority and procedures contained herein are intended to ensure that applicants seeking to occupy the public right-of-way for commercial purposes are treated fairly with sufficient consideration for due process, and that the city’s responsibility to control and demand a fair rate of compensation for the public for such use is preserved. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.020 Definitions.
     “Franchise” means and includes any authorization granted hereunder in terms of franchise, privilege, or otherwise to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain a facility for commercial purposes by occupying the public right-of-way within all or a specified area in the city. Any such authorization shall not mean or include any license or permit required for the privilege of transacting and carrying on a business within the city generally as required by other ordinances and laws of this city.

     “Franchise agreement” means a negotiated agreement between the franchisee and the city which sets forth the terms and conditions of the grant of franchise.

     “Franchisee” means the person, firm, or corporation granted a franchise by the city council under this chapter, and the lawful successor, transferee, or assignee of such person, firm, or corporation.

     “Right-of-way” means any public highway, public street, public way, or public place in the city, either owned by the city or dedicated to the public for public purposes. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.030 Authority.
     The city council of the city of Los Alamitos shall have the authority to grant a franchise, whether exclusive or nonexclusive, to erect, construct, install, operate, or maintain a facility for commercial purposes by occupying the public right-of-way as approved by the city council and subject to the terms and conditions of this chapter and any franchise agreement executed between the city and the franchisee. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.040 Franchise required.
     A.    Following the effective date of this chapter, no person shall erect, install, or construct any permanent facility for commercial purposes within the public right-of-way unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use granted by the city council under such terms and restrictions as are set forth herein.

     B.     No person shall operate or maintain a permanent facility for commercial use which is erected, installed, or constructed within the public right-of-way following the effective date of this chapter unless the person has first obtained a franchise for such use pursuant to the provisions of this chapter or has obtained some other specific grant of authority from the city for the use of the public right-of-way.

     C.     The procedures set forth herein shall not be applied to any facility, or the operation and maintenance of any facility, which is now or hereafter otherwise specifically authorized to locate in the public right-of-way by federal, state, or local laws, and for which all required approvals by the city are properly obtained. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.050 Applicable laws.
     Franchisee shall be subject to all provisions of the franchise agreement and all applicable laws, ordinances, and regulations of the city of Los Alamitos, county of Orange, Orange County transportation agency (OCTA), state of California, United States of America, and any other public agency having jurisdiction over territory located within the city. The grant of a franchise shall not relieve the franchisee of any obligation under the Los Alamitos Municipal Code to obtain any building and construction permits, public works permits, encroachment permits, use permits, or any other specific authorization that may be required for the proposed project. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.060 Procedures for nonexclusive franchise.
     Negotiation and grant of a nonexclusive franchise shall comply with the following procedural requirements:

     A.    Each applicant for a franchise shall submit the following to the city:

     1.     A written request and application for franchise to the city manager or his/her designee in a form prescribed by the city manager or designee; and

     2.     A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, the amount and method of compensation to the city, and the initial term of the proposed franchise and any renewal, if applicable; and

     3.     All applicable fees required by ordinance or resolution of the city council.

     B.     The city manager or designee shall negotiate a draft franchise agreement between the applicant and the city in consultation with the city attorney. The applicant shall sign the draft franchise agreement indicating acceptance of the terms prior to submission to city council for consideration.

     C.     The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider a resolution accepting the franchise agreement and granting the franchise accordingly. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city shall publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant a franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the city.

     D.    The city council may approve and accept the franchise agreement and grant the franchise by resolution, deny the application for franchise, or continue the decision to grant the franchise and return the franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation between city staff and the applicant. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.070 Procedures for exclusive franchise.
     Negotiation and grant of an exclusive franchise shall comply with the following procedural requirements:

     A.    Each applicant for a franchise shall submit the following to the city:

     1.     A written request and application for exclusive franchise to the city manager or his/her designee in a form prescribed by the city manager or designee; and

     2.     A proposal identifying the requested use of the public right-of-way, proposed locations of right-of-way occupation, method of construction, time of construction, hours of operation, resources and procedures for maintenance, the amount and method of compensation to the city, and the initial term of proposed franchise and any renewal, if applicable; and

     3.     All applicable fees required by ordinance or resolution of the city council.

     B.     The city council shall accept the application and consider a resolution of intention to consider an exclusive franchise and call for proposals which recites the terms under which the city intends to grant the franchise.

     C.     If said resolution is adopted by the city council, the city shall publish within ten days after adoption of the resolution a “notice of intention to consider an exclusive franchise and call for proposals” in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the city. The notice shall invite competing proposals to be submitted to the city manager within sixty (60) days of the date the resolution of intention to consider an exclusive franchise and call for proposals was adopted. The city manager or designee may also send notice to any other persons potentially interested in submitting a proposal.

     D.    The city manager or designee shall consider all proposals and submit one or more of the proposals to the city council for final selection. The city council shall select one proposal and direct the city manager or designee to negotiate a draft franchise agreement between the city and

the party submitting the selected proposal. The city manager or designee shall negotiate the draft franchise agreement in accordance with the terms of the proposal, the provisions of this chapter, and the best interests of the city.

     E.     The city council shall hold a public hearing to consider a resolution accepting the franchise agreement and granting the exclusive franchise accordingly. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the city shall publish notice of public hearing and intent to grant an exclusive franchise in any newspaper of general circulation in the community and post said notice in at least three posting places throughout the city. The notice shall state the date, time, and location of the public hearing for protests and public comments to be heard.

     F.     The city council may approve and accept the franchise agreement and grant the franchise by resolution, deny the application for franchise, or continue the decision to grant the franchise and return the franchise agreement with direction for further negotiation between city staff and the proposed franchisee. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.080 Franchise conditions and restrictions.
     Franchisee shall be subject to all other conditions, restrictions, and specifications as outlined in the franchise agreement negotiated between the city and franchisee as adopted and approved by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.090 Waiver of procedures by city council.
     The city council may waive any procedural requirement imposed under this chapter when the city council determines it to be in the best interest of the city. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

 

12.10.100 Indemnification.
     Franchisee shall agree, and shall so state in the franchise agreement, to indemnify, protect, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, penalties, damages, or liability of any kind or nature, including but not limited to injury, death of persons, damage to property, and any attorney fees, arising directly or indirectly out of franchisee’s exercise or enjoyment of its franchise, or any other negligent or wrongful acts or omissions by franchisee, its officers, employees, or agents, excepting only liability arising out of the sole negligence of the city. Further, franchisee shall agree, and shall so state in the franchise agreement, to indemnify, protect, defend, and hold harmless the city, its officers, officials, employees, and agents against any and all claims, demands, losses, costs, expenses, penalties, damages, or liability of any kind or nature resulting from, or arising with respect to, the award of the franchise, including but not limited to the procedure for accepting and reviewing proposals and the decision of award, negligent or otherwise, including but not limited to a claim of bad faith. (Ord. 604 § 1, 1997)

Chapter 12.12 SPECIAL ASSESSMENT PROCEDURES
12.12.010 Public hearing to be held.
     A.    Before the city council adopts any resolution or ordinance ordering the construction of any improvement or the acquisition of any property for public use, or both (herein referred to as “improvement”), where the cost thereof is to be paid in whole or in part by special assessments or special assessment taxes upon lands, a public hearing may be held and a finding and determination made by the city council as provided herein that the public convenience and necessity require the same.

     B.     If such a procedure is not followed and if such finding and determination is not made thereto, the requirements, limitations and procedures otherwise prescribed by Division 4 (Section 2800 et seq.) of the Streets and Highways Code of the State of California, and Article XVI, Section 19 of the State Constitution shall be complied with before any such resolution or ordinance may be adopted.

     C.     The city council may hold a public hearing to find and determine whether the public convenience and necessity require any such improvement. Reference may be made to maps or plats for the description of the improvement and all particulars relative thereto which maps or plats shall be on file with the city clerk or the department of public works and open to inspection. (Ord. 437 §§ 2, 3, 1982)

 

12.12.020 Separate or combined hearing—Notice required.
     The hearing, as required, may be a separate hearing or may be combined and held concurrently with the hearing required by the improvement act pursuant to which the improvement proceeding is proposed. Whether the hearing is held separate, or combined and held concurrently with the hearing required by the improvement act pursuant to which the improvement proceeding is proposed, notice shall be given by posting and publication in the manner prescribed by the improvement act involved, and if the hearings are combined or held concurrently, such notice may be combined with the notice of hearing given under the improvement act under which the improvement proceeding is proposed. Such additional notice by mailing or posting the streets may be given, as determined by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 437 § 4, 1982)

 

12.12.030 Final decision—Ordinance or resolution to be adopted.
     A.    The hearing may be continued from time to time. After the conclusion thereof and prior to adoption of a resolution or ordinance ordering the improvements, the city council shall consider and pass upon all protests filed and all matters presented, and its decision thereon shall be final and conclusive.

     B.     If by such decision the city council finds and determines by no less than a four-fifths vote of all members thereof that the public convenience and necessity require such improvement, the city council may thereafter, in accordance with the improvement act specified or designated for the project, adopt a resolution or ordinance ordering the improvement substantially as proposed, or as modified, altered or changed by order of the city council as authorized by the improvement act for the project.

     C.     After such finding and determination by the city council, the provisions of law for debt limitation and majority protest as mentioned in Article XVI, Section 19 of the State Constitution, and specifically the “Special Assessment Investigation, Limitation and Majority Protest Act of 1931,” shall not apply. (Ord. 437 § 5, 1982)

Chapter 12.16 TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM IMPROVEMENT PROGRAM
12.16.010 Establishment of program.
     A.    There is established the Los Alamitos comprehensive transportation system improvement program (“program”).

     B.     The program shall be comprised of the following city documents:

     1.     The city’s seven-year transportation capital improvement program;

     2.     The development mitigation program;

     3.     The comprehensive phasing program;

     4.     The performance monitoring program.

     C.     The program shall also include the goals, objectives, policies and implementation program of the growth management element of the city’s general plan.

     D.    The foregoing program documents shall be used in determining the traffic impact fees herein established; the documents are incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 569 § 1, 1993)

 

12.16.020 Traffic impact fee determination—Annual review.
     A.    The traffic impact fee shall be determined in accordance with the methodology described in the program documents. The program documents shall set forth the specific amount of the fee for each development category.

     B.     The program documents shall be reviewed annually during the month of June by the city council. Upon conclusion of such review the city council shall, by resolution, adopt the program documents as amended or revised and shall set forth therein the amount of the fee to be imposed.

     C.     Prior to the annual city council review the city engineer shall prepare a program monitoring report to determine whether the fee is reasonably related to the impacts of development in the city, whether traffic improvement facilities should be added, deleted or modified and whether the methodologies contained in the program are producing the desired results. (Ord. 569 § 2, 1993)

 

12.16.030 Traffic impact fee—Established.
     A.    There is established a traffic impact fee (“fee”) which shall be imposed on all nonexempt developments which contribute measurable traffic to one or more intersections listed in the program documents. The intersections shall include intersections listed in the program documents at the date of adoption of this section and any future listings added the program documents by action of the city council.

     B.     The decision to impose the fee on each nonexempt development project shall be based upon a traffic report prepared at the expense of the project applicant and in accordance with the minimum requirements of GME traffic analyses described in the program documents together with such additional information as may be reasonably required by the city engineer.

     C.     An adjustment to the fee may be made in the following instances:

     1.     A reduction or adjustment of the fee not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent based upon improving the local balance between jobs and housing;

     2.     An adjustment of the fee based upon providing land uses that generate primarily nonpeak hour vehicular trips;

     3.     A reduction in the fee in consideration of participation in a transportation demand management program, designed to reduce the peak-hour traffic demand of the property.

     D.    The fee assessment process shall take into account the existing use of the property, so that a property owner will be charged only for increased traffic impacts. (Ord. 569 § 3, 1993)

 

12.16.040 Time for payment of fees.
     The fee established herein shall be paid upon issuance of the first building permit or grading permit and shall be imposed as a condition of subdivision approval. (Ord. 569 § 4, 1993)

 

12.16.050 Use of fees.
     The revenue derived from the fees, together with the interest earned, shall be used by the city to pay for:

     A.    Past or future construction of transportation facilities or projects listed in the program documents; or

     B.     To reimburse developers qualifying with the fee adjustments provisions set forth in Section 12.16.030 (C)). (Ord. 569 § 5, 1993)

 

12.16.060 Fee refunds.
     A refund of fees collected may be made when the building permit, grading permit or subdivision approval for the project expires and no extensions have been granted. (Ord. 569 § 6, 1993)

 

12.16.070 Phased projects.
     Where there is a requirement imposed upon a phased project pursuant to this section for the payment of the fee it shall be payable serially as to each phase of the project, in conjunction with improvements accomplished and not in one payment for the entire project.

     A.    Any residential development of one hundred (100) or more dwelling units shall be developed in phases not to exceed one hundred (100) dwelling units per phase.

     B.     Any nonresidential development or improvement of five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor area shall be developed in phases not to exceed five hundred thousand (500,000) square feet of gross floor, area per phase.

     C.     Fees shall be payable for each phase at such time as the building permits for that phase are issued.

     D.    No permits shall be issued for any subsequent phase of a development until such time as all infrastructure improvements associated with any previous phase are in place and operational. (Ord. 569 § 7, 1993)

 

12.16.080 Performance monitoring program.
     A.    The city engineer shall annually prepare a list of developments subject to traffic impact fees. This report shall include the identification, location and description of applicable developments and/or modifications thereto and the fees assessed. Such report shall be submitted to the city manager by the first day of March of each year.

     B.     A performance monitoring program shall be initiated and reviewed annually by the city engineer to evaluate the project list, assign infrastructure improvement priorities and the applicability of the program fees. Developers of approved projects shall be required to submit needed information to the city engineer who shall then submit an annual report based on this review to the city manager for incorporation, as applicable, into the seven year capital improvement program. (Ord. 569 § 8, 1993)

 

12.16.090 Exemptions.
     New development or changes in existing development or property use which fall within any of the categories listed below shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter:

     A.    Any development on an existing lot resulting a total daily traffic generation of less than two hundred (200) trips;

     B.     Any agricultural, open space, conservation or passive park use;

     C.     Any rebuilding of an existing development damaged or destroyed by fire or natural disaster if uses and square footage remain substantially the same;

     D.    Public health and safety facilities such as police, fire and safety facilities;

     E.     Minor alterations and remodeling of existing structures resulting in no substantial change in traffic generation as determined by the city engineer;

     F.     Development that creates less than a one percent increase in the intersection capacity utilization (ICU) at one of the previously cited monitoring intersections identified in the program documents. A traffic study shall be prepared and submitted to the city engineer. The city engineer shall then determine if the development may be exempt from the provisions of the impact fee. (Ord. 569 § 9, 1993)

Chapter 12.20 TRANSPORTATION DEMAND MANAGEMENT REQUIREMENT
12.20.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is intended to meet the requirements of AB 1791, Government Code Section 65089 (b) (3) which requires development of a trip reduction and travel demand element to the CMP, and Section 65089.3 (b) which requires adoption and implementation of trip reduction and travel demand ordinance. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.020 Policy.
     New commercial, industrial and mixed-use development including employment centers of one hundred (100) persons or more may adversely impact existing transportation and parking facilities, resulting in increased motor vehicle emissions, deteriorating levels of service, and possibly significant additional capital expenditures to augment and improve the existing transportation system. In order to more efficiently utilize the existing and planned transportation system and to reduce vehicle emissions, it is the policy of the city to:

     A.    Reduce the number of peak-period vehicle trips generated in association with additional development;

     B.     Promote and encourage the use of alternative transportation modes such as ridesharing, carpools, vanpools, public bus and rail transit, bicycles and walking, as well as those facilities that support such modes;

     C.     Achieve related reductions in vehicle trips, traffic congestion and public expenditure and achieve air quality improvements through utilization of existing local mechanisms and procedures for project review and permit processing;

     D.    Promote coordinated implementation of strategies on a countywide basis to reduce transportation demand;

     E.     Achieve the most efficient use of local resources through coordinated and consistent regional and/or local TDM programs. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.030 Applicability.
     A.    This chapter shall apply to all new development projects that are estimated to employ a total of one hundred (100) or more persons as determined by the methodology subsection B of this section.

     B.     For purposes of determining whether a new development project is subject to this chapter, the total employment figure will be determined as follows:

     1.     Employment projections developed by the project applicant, subject to approval by the city; or

     2.     Employment projections developed by the city using the following employee generation factors by type of use.

 

Land Use Category

Gross Sq. Ft./Employee

Commercial

500

- Regional

500

- Community

500

- Neighborhood

500

Office/professional

250

Industrial

525

Hotel

0.8 — 1.2/room

 

     The employment projection for a development of mixed or multiple uses shall be calculated on a case-by-case basis based upon the proportion of development devoted to each type of use. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.040 Definitions.
     For purposes of this chapter, the definitions for the following terms shall apply:

     “Alternative transportation modes” means any mode of travel that serves as an alternative to the single-occupant vehicle. This can include all forms of ridesharing such as carpooling or vanpooling, as well as public transit, bicycling or walking.

     “Applicable development” means any new development project that is determined to meet or exceed the employment threshold using the criteria contained in Section 12.20.030.

     “Developer” means the builder who is responsible for the planning, design and construction of an applicable development project. A developer may be responsible for implementing the provisions of this chapter as determined by the property owner.

     “Employee” means any person employed by a firm, person(s), business, educational institution, nonprofit agency or corporation, government agency or other entity which employs one hundred (100) or more persons at a single worksite.

     “Employment generation factors” refers to factors developed for use by the jurisdiction for projecting the potential employment of any proposed development project.

     “Facility(s)” means the total of all buildings, structures and grounds that encompass a worksite, at either single or multiple locations, that comprises or is associated with an applicable development project.

     “Level of service (Los)” means a measure of the operational quality of a road or intersection ranging from LOS A (best) to LOS F (worst). As required by CMP legislation, the LOS standard for the CMP Highway System must be at E or at the existing LOS, whichever is further from LOS A, for any intersection or roadway segment.

     “Mixed-use development” means new development project that combine any one of these land uses with another: residential, office, commercial, light industrial, and business park.

     “New development project” means any nonresidential project being processed where some level of discretionary action by a decision-making body is required.

     “Peak period” means the hours of the business day between six a.m. and ten a.m. inclusive, Monday through Friday.

     “Site development plan/permit” means a site plan review before the planning commission and as more fully described in Chapter 17.50.

     “Transportation demand management (TDM)” means the implementation of programs, plans or policies designed to encourage changes in individual travel behavior. TDM can include an emphasis on alternative travel modes to the single-occupant vehicle (SOV) such as carpools, vanpools and transit reduction or elimination of the number of vehicle trips, or shifts in the time of vehicle commutes to other than the peak period. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.050 Facility standards.
     All applicable developments shall be subject to the facility standards as specified in this section and shall include in their project site development plans a provision to provide each of the improvements identified in either option A or Option B below:

     A.    Option A Facility Improvements.

     1.     Preferential Parking for Carpool Vehicles.

     a.     At least fifteen (15) percent of the employee parking spaces shall be reserved and designated for carpool vehicles by marking such spaces “carpool only.”

     b.     Carpool spaces shall be used only by carpool vehicles in which at least two of the persons will be employees or tenants of the proposed project, or where a carpool parking agreement with other developments has been established.

     c.     Such carpool spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or at other preferential locations within the employee parking areas as approved by the city manager or his designee.

     (The intent of this section is not to preclude parking arrangements for visitors and handicapped, but to provide preferential carpool parking within the general employee parking areas. The factors listed below shall be used to determine the number of employee parking spaces.)

     d.     The total number of employee parking spaces shall be determined by using the following factors by type of use as specified in the city zoning code.

 

Type of Use

Percent of Total Parking Devoted to Employee Parking

Commercial

30%

- Regional

30%

- Community

30%

- Neighborhood

30%

Office/professional

85%

Industrial

90%

Hotel

20%

 

     2.     Bicycle Parking and Shower Facilities.

     a.     Bicycle parking and locker facilities shall be provided in a secure location for use by employees or tenants who commute to the site by bicycle. The number of facilities/racks to be provided shall be at the rate of at least five racks for every one hundred (100) employees or fraction thereof.

     b.     A minimum of two shower facilities shall be provided, one each for men and women.

     3.     Information on Transportation Alternatives.

     a.     A commuter information area shall be provided that offers employees appropriate information on available transportation alternatives to the single-occupancy vehicle. This area shall be centrally located and accessible to all employees or tenants.

     b.     Information in the area shall include, but not be limited to, the following:

     1.     Current maps, routes and schedules for public transit;

     2.     Ridesharing match lists;

     3.     Available employee incentives;

     4.     Ridesharing promotional material supplied by commuter-oriented organizations.

     4.     Rideshare Vehicle Loading Areas.

     a.     The need for, design and location of passenger loading areas to embark and disembark passengers from rideshare vehicles shall be reviewed by the city manager or his designee.

     b.     Passenger loading areas shall be of a size large enough to accommodate the number of waiting vehicles equivalent to the rate of at least five spaces per every one hundred (100) of the required parking spaces to the project.

     c.     The passenger loading areas shall be located as close as possible to the building’s employee entrance(s), and should be designed in a manner that does not impede vehicular circulation in the parking area.

     5.     Vanpool Vehicle Accessibility.

     a.     The design of all parking facilities shall incorporate provisions for access and parking of vanpool vehicles.

     b.     Where applicable, vanpool vehicle accessibility shall include a minimum seven feet two inches vertical clearance for those parking spaces and ramps to be used by such vehicles.

     c.     Vanpool parking spaces shall be located near the building’s employee entrance(s) or other preferential locations as approved by the city manager or his designee.

     d.     The number of accessible vanpool parking spaces shall be at the rate of at least two spaces per every one hundred (100) total required employee parking spaces as determined in subsection (A)(1) of this section.

     6.     Bus Stop Improvements.

     a.     Bus stop improvements including bus pullouts, bus pads and rights-of-way for bus shelters shall be required for all applicable developments located along high traffic volume streets and established bus routes.

     b.     Bus stop improvements shall be determined in conformance with standard traffic engineering principles including, but not limited to, the following:

     1.     The frequency and relative impact of blocked traffic due to stopped buses;

     2.     The level of transit ridership at the location.

     B.     Option B Facility Improvements.

     1.     A percentage of parking spaces, located as close as is practical to the entrance(s) of the use they are intended to serve, shall be reserved for use of carpool and vanpool vehicles, as determined by the approval body for the proposed use.

     2.     Secure, adequate and convenient storage shall be provided for bicycles.

     3.     Bus bays, bus stops and bus shelters shall be provided adjacent to roads and streets traversing or bounding the development, as requested by the city.

     4.     A transportation information center shall be provided within each building of over twenty-five thousand (25,000) gross square feet.

     5.     A shower and locker room facility for employees of each sex shall be provided in each building of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more gross square feet. For any development containing one hundred thousand (100,000) or more total combined gross square feet, but which does not contain any single building of one hundred thousand (100,000) or more gross square feet, the planning commission may elect, at its discretion, to approve a requirement imposed by city staff on such development to provide shower and locker room facilities.

     6.     Sidewalks or other paved pathways following direct and safe routes from the external pedestrian circulation system to each building in the development shall be provided. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.060 Monitoring.
     For the purposes of determining whether applicable developments are complying with the provisions of this the city shall monitor such compliance in a manner it deems appropriate and reasonable. Monitoring mechanisms may include, but not be limited to, the following to verify compliance with the facility standards required under Section 12.20.050:

     A.    Local procedures for site development plan review, as appropriate;

     B.     Field/site inspections;

     C.     Other building site reports/surveys which the city may deem appropriate. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.070 Enforcement and penalties.
     For purposes of ensuring that applicable developments comply with the provisions of this chapter, the city shall, following written notice to subject property owner or designee (employer), initiate enforcement action(s) which may include, but not be limited to, the following to enforce compliance with facility standards under Section 12.20.050:

     A.    Withholding issuance of a building permit or certificate of use and occupancy;

     B.     Issuance of stop work order(s). (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.080 Fees.
     For purposes of meeting its obligations under this chapter, the city may impose fees to be determined by city council resolution. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

 

12.20.090 Appeals.
     A.    An appeal may be made by the property owner(s) or designee(s) of any applicable development regarding decisions made by the city on any provision of this chapter.

     B.     The appeal shall be heard by the planning commission who must act on such appeal within thirty (30) days of such filing on accordance with existing law.

     C.     The appeal shall be conducted in accordance with adopted planning commission procedures. (Ord. 541 § 2, 1992)

Chapter 12.24 CITY PARKWAY TREES
12.24.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of the requirements set forth in this chapter is to regulate the placement of parkway trees and provide for the proper selection of new trees to minimize problems in public facilities, and to establish requirements for the preservation and proper maintenance of existing trees located on public property that are deemed important to the general welfare and the benefit of the community. The Los Alamitos city council has found and determined that the community has an interest in preserving trees as an important natural resource which provide scale, color, aroma, visual buffers between land uses, increased property values, and which contribute to the environment by improving general aesthetics, modifying temperatures by providing shade and reducing heat and glare, reducing wind velocity, reducing noise, purifying and replenishing oxygen, controlling soil erosion, and providing wildlife habitat. The city council has further found and determined that the regulations set forth in this chapter are necessary to attain such purpose and interest. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter, the following words, terms, phrases and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. The word “shall” in this chapter is always mandatory and not merely directory.

     “Approved tree list” means the list of acceptable trees for parkway planting established pursuant to Section 12.24.050 of this chapter.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     “City manager” means the city manager of the city of Los Alamitos or his or her designee.

     “City street” or “street” means the area or a public street within and maintained by the city, from easement line to easement line, including curbs, gutters, sidewalks and driveways.

     “City tree” means any tree growing on property owned or controlled by the city, including but not limited to all streets, parkways, public places, and all easements granted to the city and/or the public.

     “Dripline” means the outermost line of the tree’s canopy projected straight down to the ground surface. As depicted in a plan view, the dripline appears as an irregularly shaped circle.

     “Easement” means a recorded or established right or interest in the land of another which entitles the holder of the easement to some use, privilege or benefit out of or over said land.

     “Ground cover” means low growing plants (less than six inches in height at maturity) that cover the ground in lieu of turf.

     “Hardscape” means the material used in sidewalks, roadways and other solid and rigid surfaces and structures, including but not limited to concrete, cement and asphalt.

     “Maintain” or “maintenance,” when used in reference to parkway trees, means and includes pruning, trimming, root pruning or shaving, removal, spraying, supporting, treating for disease or injury, or any other similar act which promotes tree life, growth, health or appearance.

     “Nuisance tree” means any tree with a root system that (i) according to International Society of Arboriculture standards, or if inapplicable, other nationally recognized arboriculture standards (collectively “ISA”) is capable of causing damage to surrounding landscapes or hardscapes or in its present condition poses a danger to public health or safety or interferes with the free use of a public right-of-way, and (ii) such damage, danger or interference is imminent. A nuisance tree shall include, but is not limited to:

     A.    Any tree which is known to reproduce itself excessively;

     B.     Any dead, diseased, infested, leaning or dying tree in a parkway so situated as to constitute a danger to other parkway trees, streets or hardscape, or any portion thereof, or the life, health or safety of the public or adjoining public property;

     C.     Any tree in a parkway which according to ISA standards is likely to destroy, impair or otherwise interfere with any other parkway tree, street or any portion thereof, or any public utilities or poles, improvements or services including but not limited to sewer, water or cable television lines or any stop sign, signal or fire hydrant, and such destruction, impairment or interference is imminently likely;

     D.    Any tree growing upon private property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street, parkway or public place of the city which endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public;

     E.     The existence of any branches or foliage on private or public property that interferes with visibility on, free use of, or access to, any portion of any Street improved for vehicular or pedestrian travel.

     “Parkway tree master plan” means the plan for the management of the city’s urban forestation pursuant to Section 12.24.060 of this chapter.

     “Parkway” means the portion of the street between the sidewalk and the roadway for vehicular travel, or any private property adjoining the roadway over which the city or the public holds an easement or other property right.

     “Parkway tree” means any tree growing within any street, parkway or right-of-way.

     “Public place” means any property that is owned or controlled by the city and is open to public use.

     “Right-of-way” means an area or strip of land, either public or private, on which a right of passage has been established or recorded.

     “Shrub” or “bush” means any woody vegetation or woody plant having multiple stems and bearing foliage from the ground up.

     “Street” means all or any portion of property owned or controlled by the city and designated for the use of the public as a thoroughfare for travel, including but not limited to sidewalks, gutters, drains, roadways, medians and parkways.

     “Tree” means a woody perennial plant which usually has, but is not limited to, a single dominant trunk and has an expected mature height of fifteen (15) feet or more, or has an existing trunk diameter of four inches or more measured at twenty-four (24) inches above finished grade.

     “Turf” means any grass or lawn area.

     “Vine” means a plant whose stem requires support and which climbs by tendrils or twining. (Ord. 649 § 1, 2002; Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.030 Jurisdiction.
     The city shall have jurisdiction and control of the selection, planting, setting out, location, pruning, maintenance and removal of all trees planted and growing on property owned or controlled by the city. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.040 Applicability.
     Except as otherwise provided herein, no city tree or parkway tree shall be planted, maintained, or removed except in conformity with the provisions set forth in this chapter and the parkway tree master plan. When any new parkway tree is planted, it shall conform to the requirements set forth in Title 17, Zoning of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code, any additional requirements set forth herein, and any other requirements imposed as a condition of approval for necessary permits. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.050 Approved tree list.
     The city council shall establish by resolution a list of approved parkway trees. The list shall be maintained by the city manager and shall be kept on file with the city clerk. The city manager shall review the list from time to time and may make recommendations for changes thereto to the city council. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.060 Parkway tree master plan.
     The city council shall establish by resolution a parkway tree master plan. Such plan shall be maintained by the city manager and shall be kept on file with the city clerk. The city manager shall review the plan from time to time and may make recommendations for changes thereto to the city council. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.070 Permits.
     The city manager shall have the authority to grant tree trimming permits (see Section 12.24.090) and tree planting permits (see Section 12.24.120) as required by and subject to the provisions of this chapter. The city manager shall further have the authority to impose any conditions on the approval of such permits as are deemed necessary by the city manager to fulfill the purposes and intent of this chapter. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.080 Maintenance.
     The city manager shall have the authority to require specific maintenance to any tree, bush, shrub, ground cover, vine or turf in or upon any right-of-way, easement or parkway which: (A) interferes with the construction, reconstruction, repair, maintenance or use of any city street or public utility; (B) is dead or dying; (C) creates a hazard to the public safety; or (d) does not conform to the type, variety or species of tree on the approved tree list or does not conform to the parkway tree master plan. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.090 City trees.
     A.    Permits Required.

     1.     No person, except authorized city personnel and agents, shall trim or alter any city tree, including but not limited to any parkway tree, without having first obtained a tree trimming permit. Any trimming, shaping, thinning or pruning of a city tree shall be done in accordance with pruning standards adopted by the International Society of Arboriculture or the National Arborists Association.

     2.     No person, except authorized city personnel or agents, shall remove any city tree.

     3.     Any alteration or removal work done pursuant to a permit shall be performed in accordance with the terms and conditions of the permit and consistent with the provisions of this chapter.

     B.     Prohibitions. It shall be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 of this code, for any person to perform or cause any of the following actions:

     1.     Damage, cut, carve, etch, hew or engrave, poison or injure the bark or root system of any city tree except for standard root pruning or shaving procedures performed by authorized city personnel or agents;

     2.     Post or affix to any city tree any bill, poster, placard, picture, announcement, notice, advertisement or sign, or cut, paint, print or make any of the same upon such tree or affix or attach in any manner any other thing whatsoever, including any guy wire or rope to any such tree;

     3.     Top or prune any city tree in a manner that threatens the health of the tree and is not consistent with pruning standards adopted by the International Society of Arboriculture and/or the National Arborists Association.

     4.     Allow any gaseous, liquid or solid substance harmful to trees to come in contact with any part of any city tree, including but not limited to over-watering;

     5.     Deposit, place, store or maintain upon the ground surrounding any city trees any stone, brick, concrete or other material which may impede the free passage of air, water and fertilizer to the roots of any tree;

     6.     To perform or cause any act requiring a permit in accordance with this chapter without first obtaining such permit. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.100 Tree retention.
     An owner of property abutting a parkway where a tree is designated to be removed may request the city manager to exempt such tree from removal. The city manager may approve or deny such request. The city manager may impose conditions upon the approval including, but not limited to, a requirement that the abutting owner post cash, a bond or other security acceptable to the city to defray the present and future costs of maintaining the tree and public improvements affected thereby. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.120 Planting of parkway trees.
     A.    No person may plant or cause to be planted any parkway tree in the city without first obtaining a permit approved by the city manager. Any person desiring to plant a parkway tree shall purchase the tree through or from the city. The city public works department shall establish a program whereby trees on the approved tree list are readily available to property owners at reasonable and competitive prices.

     B.     Any owner, lessee or agent constructing or arranging for the construction of a building shall also provide for the planting of trees in the parkways in accordance with the parkway tree master plan adjacent to the site of the building, and the building inspector shall deny occupancy to any building until such trees exist or the planting thereof has been guaranteed by an agreement acceptable to the city manager; unless such person can show, to the satisfaction of the city manager, that such planting is infeasible.

     C.     All plantings should be made in accordance with good horticultural practice as determined by the city manager.

     D.    Plantings for new developments shall conform to the landscaping standards set forth in Title 17 of this code.

     E.     The city manager shall specify the spacing and recommended size of parkway trees and may adopt guidelines pursuant to Section 12.24.190, Regulations by city manager, for the location of such trees in relation to sewer, gas, water and other utility meters or lines, driveways, street lights, power poles, fire hydrants and intersections. Such regulations shall take into account existing and future city rules and regulations as well as those of other public agencies and public utility companies. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.130 Restoration of illegally removed and damaged trees—Fees and fines.
     Any person responsible for the illegal topping, pruning, damage to, destruction of, or removal of any city tree may be required to pay a restoration fee to the city or replace the tree(s) by replanting a tree of approximately equal size, significance and prominence. The fee shall be established by the city manager with the following considerations:

     A.    An amount sufficient to permit the city to maintain the damaged city tree over whatever period is required to restore it to appropriate condition;

     B.     If the city tree cannot be fully restored within a reasonable time, the city manager shall fix the restoration fee at an amount sufficient to replace the tree with a like tree and maintain the new tree until it is fully established;

     C.     The city manager may require the posting of a bond in an amount sufficient to restore or replace the subject tree as a part of such process. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.140 Fees.
     The city council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule of fees for permits required by this chapter. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.150 Appeal.
     Any person aggrieved by the determination of the city manager may appeal the determination to the city council in writing within fifteen (15) days after written notice of such determination by the city manager. The city council shall set the matter for hearing and give written notice to the appellant of the time and place set for the hearing. Following the hearing, the city council shall render its decision either orally or in writing within thirty (30) days. Any person ordered to restore a tree or trees shall do so within fifteen (15) days of the city council’s action on the appeal. If restoration is not completed by such date, then it may be undertaken by the city. The cost of restoration shall be a lien on the property or a debt of the person who removed the tree or trees if such person does not own the property on which the trees were located. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.160 Liability disclaimer.
     Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to impose any liability upon the city, its officers, employees or agents for any action or failure to act which occurs on public or private property. Nor shall any provision in this chapter relieve the owner of any private property from the duty to keep any tree growing thereon in such condition as will prevent it from constituting a health or safety hazard or an impediment to travel or vision upon any street, parkway or public place. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.170 Interference with public official.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 of this code, for any person to obstruct, impede or interfere with any representative of the city enforcing the provisions of this chapter, whether the actions by the city representative take place on public or private property. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.180 Enforcement.
     It is be unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Section 1.20.010 of this code, for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements in this chapter. The city manager or code enforcement officer may, in his/her discretion, issue a warning or enter into an administrative settlement agreement in lieu of prosecution. The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a nuisance and may be abated by the city through civil process by means of restraining order, preliminary or permanent injunction or in any other manner provided by law for the abatement of such nuisance. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

 

12.24.190 Regulations by city manager.
     The city manager is authorized to adopt regulations and standards not inconsistent with this chapter to carry out and implement its provisions. (Ord. 630 § 2, 1999)

Chapter 12.28 BUS BENCHES AND SHELTERS
12.28.010 Definitions.
     The following words, for the purposes of this chapter, are defined and shall be construed as herein set forth:

     “Bench” means a seat, located on public property on any public street for the accommodation of passersby or persons awaiting transportation.

     “Street” means any public thoroughfare, including curb, sidewalk and parkway. (Ord. 548 § 2, 1991)

 

12.28.020 Bus benches—Permitted.
     Nonadvertising bus or transit benches or advertising transit shelters may be installed and maintained on city streets and sidewalks in accordance with the following:

     A.    Pursuant to the terms of the license agreement authorized by Chapter 17.34;

     B.     Where such nonadvertising bus or transit benches or transit advertising shelters presently exist and are owned or maintained by the city; or

     C.     Where the city manager or his designee may authorize upon a finding that the public interest and convenience will be furthered thereby. (Ord. 548 § 2, 1991)

 

12.28.030 Violation—Misdemeanor.
     It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in accordance with Chapter 1.20, for any person, persons, individual, firm, group, association, corporation or other entity to place any bus or transit bench or transit shelter on city property in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 548 § 2, 1991)

 

12.28.040 Violation deemed a public nuisance—Removal.
     A.    Notwithstanding any criminal prosecution pursuant to Section 12.28.020, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed a public nuisance and the city manager or designee shall cause such illegal bench or shelter to be removed and stored if the owner of such bench or shelter fails to do so within seven days after notice of such violation.

     B.     The owner may recover such bench or shelter within sixty (60) days after such removal upon the payment of removal and storage fees as established by resolution of the city council.

     C.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, in those instances where a violation of the provisions of this chapter poses an immediate threat to the public health or safety, the city manager or designee is hereby authorized to cause the summary abatement thereof without notice. (Ord. 2017-12 § 2, 2017; Ord. 548 § 2, 1991)

Chapter 12.32 NEWSRACKS
12.32.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish a comprehensive set of regulations applicable to publication vending machines in the public right-of-way. These regulations do not restrict the rights of freedom of the press or distribution of information but ensure the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002; Ord. 462, 1984)

 

12.32.020 Definitions.
     For the purposes of this chapter:

     “Director” means the community development director.

     “Parkway” means that area between the sidewalks and the curb of any street; and where there is no sidewalk, that area between the edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent thereto. Parkway also includes any area within a roadway which is not open to vehicular travel.

     “Person” means any individual, company, corporation, association, business or other legal entity.

     “Publication vending machine” means any self-service or coin-operated box, container, storage unit or other dispenser installed, used or maintained for the display and/or sale of any printed material, including but not limited to, newspapers or news periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs and records.

     “Right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, pedestrian walkway, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes.

     “Roadway” means that portion of a street improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     “Sidewalk” means any surface provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.

     “Street” means all that area dedicated to public use for public street purposes and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys and sidewalks. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002; Ord. 462, 1984)

 

12.32.030 Permits.
     A.    No person shall install, place, use or maintain any publication vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any public sidewalk or parkway without first obtaining a permit from the director. An amended application for the permit shall be filed with the director the event that additional publication vending machines are installed in the city or removed from the city by the applicant subsequent to the issuing of the original permit by the city.

     B.     The applicant shall pay a separate permit fee per publication vending machine installed in the city and in accordance with the fee schedule adopted by city council resolution.

     C.     An application for a permit for one or more publication vending machines shall be filed with the director for the placement of any publication vending machine in the public right-of-way. The permit shall be valid for one year and shall be renewed pursuant to the procedures set forth for original applications.

     D.    In addition to the permit application, the owner of the publication vending machine or his agent shall also execute a document, approved as to form by the city attorney, agreeing to hold the city, its officers, employees and agents, free and harmless from any claim, demand or judgment in favor of any person, arising out of the location of any publication vending machine located in a public parkway, and deposit with the city clerk a certificate of insurance evidencing that a liability insurance policy in minimum amounts set by the city council has been issued, naming the city as an additional insured, and containing a provision that the policy cannot be canceled except upon twenty (20) days written notice to the city of the fact of such cancellation. If such insurance is canceled at any time during the time the publication vending machine is installed on public property, the publication vending machine shall be removed in accordance with the provisions of Section 12.32.050.

     E.     The requirement in Section 12.32.030(D) of this chapter may be waived by the director in any case when he deems it in the public interest to do so.

     F.     Any non-profit entity, whose purpose or object in their distribution of non-commercial publications is to spread knowledge and ideas, with no thought of commercial gain are exempt from all fees associated with the placement of publication vending machines but are required to adhere to Section D above and provide proof of such non-profit status to the satisfaction of the director.

     G.    A person seeking issuance of a permit pursuant to this chapter shall files with the director a written application on a form supplied by the city. The application shall contain the following information:

     1.     The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;

     2.     The name, address and telephone number of a responsible person whom the city may notify or contact at any time concerning the applicant’s publication vending machine;

     3.     The number of publication vending machines and the exact proposed location of each shown on an eight and one-half inch by eleven (11) inch diagram and identifying all items in the public right-of-way such as but not limited to: bus benches, street poles and posts, driveways, wheelchair ramps, other publication vending machines, fire hydrants, crosswalks, curb returns, fire call boxes, buildings, landscaping, bus shelters, bus stops, trash containers, mailboxes and any other public or private improvement within a twenty (20) foot radius; and

     4.     The names of the newspapers, new periodicals, magazines, books, pictures, photographs or records contained in each publication vending machine. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002; Ord. 585 § 5, 1994; Ord. 462, 1984)

 

12.32.035 Business license required.
     It is unlawful for any person or custodian whether as a principal, agent or employee, either for him or herself or for any other person or body corporate or as an officer of any corporation or otherwise, to place or permit the placement of any publication vending machine within the city or to place any item in an existing publication vending machine without first obtaining a valid business license from the city. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002)

 

12.32.037 Applicability of chapter.
     The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all publication vending machines, whether installed and maintained prior to or after the effective date of any of its provisions. Those publication vending machines installed prior to the effective date of any provision enacted hereunder shall be brought into compliance with this chapter within one hundred twenty (120) days of the effective date thereof. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002)

 

12.32.040 Design and placement standards.
     A.    No person shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which projects onto, into or over any part of the roadway of any public street, or which rests, wholly or in part, upon, along or over any portion of a roadway.

     B.     No person shall install, use or maintain any publication vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, when such installation, use or maintenance endangers the safety of persons or property, or when such site or location is used for public utility purposes, public transportation purposes or other government use, or when such publication vending machine interferes with or impedes the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic, the ingress into or egress from any residence, place of business, or any legally parked or stopped vehicle, or the use of poles, posts, traffic signs or signals, hydrants, mailboxes or other objects near the location, or when such publication vending machine interferes with the cleaning of any sidewalk by the use of mechanical sidewalk cleaning machinery.

     C.     Any publication vending machine which in whole or in part rests upon, in or over any sidewalk or parkway, shall comply with the following standards:

     1.     No publication vending machine shall exceed five feet in height, thirty (30) inches in width, or two feet in depth.

     2.     Publication vending machines shall be placed only near a curb or adjacent to the wall of a building. Publication vending machines placed near the curb shall be placed no less than eighteen (18) inches nor more than twenty-four (24) inches from the edge of the curb. Publication vending machines placed adjacent to the wall of a building shall be placed parallel to such wall and not more than six inches from the wall.

     3.     No publication vending machine shall be placed or maintained on a sidewalk or parkway within ten (10) feet of a newsstand.

     4.     No publication vending machine shall be chained, bolted or otherwise attached to any property or to any permanently fixed object not owned by the owner of the publication vending machine unless the consent of the owner of such property or object is obtained in writing and presented with the permit application.

     5.     Publication vending machines may be placed, chained or otherwise attached to one another; however, no more than three publication vending machines may be joined or placed together in this manner, and a space of no less than eighteen (18) inches shall separate each group of three publication vending machine so attached.

     6.     No publication vending machine, or group of attached publication vending machines allowed under subsection D of this section shall weigh, in the aggregate, in excess of one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds when empty.

     7.     Publication vending machines shall have gloss black pedestals, “wood grain” brown sides and doors, and brown coin box. Notwithstanding the foregoing sentence, publication vending machines may have up to four side portions of the publication vending machine which are made of Plexiglas or other transparent, non-shattering material, which contain the newspaper or periodical; provided however, that all other standards, including, without limitation, any required blinders as provided in Title 5 of this code, or any other applicable standard(s) herein, are complied with in their entirety.

     8.     Every publication vending machine shall be installed on a single pedestal or multiple posts which shall be securely anchored to the ground and shall be constructed, installed and maintained in a safe and secure condition, approved by the director.

     D.    No publication vending machine shall be placed, installed, used or maintained:

     1.     Within three feet of any marked crosswalk;

     2.     Within fifteen (15) feet of the curb return of any unmarked crosswalk;

     3.     Within three feet of any fire hydrant, fire call box, police call box or other emergency facility;

     4.     Within three feet of any driveway;

     5.     Within fifteen (15) feet of any sign marking a designated bus stop;

     6.     Within three feet of any bus bench or bus shelter;

     7.     At any location whereby the clear space for the passageway of pedestrians is reduced to less than five feet;

     8.     Within three feet of any display window of any building abutting the sidewalk or parkway or in such manners as to impede or interfere with the reasonable use of such window for display purposes;

     9.     So that the front face of the publication vending machine is within three feet of any lawn, flowers, shrubs or trees;

     10.   Within five feet of any bicycle rack;

     11.   Publication vending machines may be placed next to each other, provided that no more than six publication vending machines shall be placed immediately adjacent to each other. Also, no group of publication vending machines shall extend more than thirteen (13) feet along a curb or wall.

     E.     No more than six publication vending machines may be located on any public street within a space of two hundred (200) feet in any direction, and no more than eighteen (18) publication vending machines shall be allowed on any one city block.

     F.     The placement of all publication vending machine in the city shall comply with all local and state handicapped accessibility regulations.

     G.    No publication vending machine shall be used for advertising signs or publicity purposes other than reference to the name of the newspaper or periodical being dispensed.

     H.    Any person or entity that installs, vends from, operates or maintains a publication vending machine in the city, or causes to do the same, shall ensure that the publication vending machine is maintained in a clean, neat and attractive condition and shall remain reasonably free of dirt and grease, chipped, faded, peeling and/or cracked paint, graffiti, rust or corrosion, torn, peeling or faded paper or cardboard parts and/or insertions, broken or damaged structural parts, cracked and/or discolored and/or blemished parts (including but not limited to the Plexiglas or other transparent casing mentioned in subsection (C)(7) of this section). Further, publication vending machines shall be maintained in a mechanically operable condition at all times.

     I.      For purposes of location limitations and the special restrictions contained herein, publication vending machine applications shall be reviewed on a first come, first served basis. All applications shall be date and time stamped upon the city’s receipt, and in the event that applications are received simultaneously and the applicants seek to place their publication vending machine in the same location, a lottery shall be conducted by the director of development services, or his or her designee, to determine in a purely random, unbiased manner which application shall receive priority for the location sought.

     J.      Every person who places or maintains a publication vending machine in the public right-of-way shall permanently affix to each publication vending machine the permittee’s name, address, telephone number and permit number in a place where such information may be easily seen. (Ord. 689 § 1, 2006; Ord. 660 § 1, 2002; Ord. 462, 1984)

 

12.32.045 Offensive material.
     No person shall sell, offer for sale, or keep or maintain any written, photographic or printed material including, but not limited to, newspapers or news periodicals in any publication vending machine or on any sidewalk in such manner as to expose to the public view any of the following:

     1.     Any statements or words describing explicit sexual acts, sexual organs or excrement, where such statements or words have as their purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     2.     Any picture or illustration of genitals, pubic hair, perineums, anuses or anal regions of any person where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     3.     Any picture or illustration depicting explicit sexual acts where such picture or illustration has as its purpose or effect sexual arousal, gratification or affront;

     4.     “Explicit sexual acts,” as used in this chapter, means depictions of sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, sadism, masochism, excretory functions in conjunction with sexual activity, masturbation or lewd exhibition of the genitals, whether any of the above conduct is depicted or described as being performed alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, or other acts of sexual arousal involving any physical contact with a person’s genital, pubic region, pubic hair, perineum, anus or anal region. (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002)

 

12.32.050 Violation—Removal of publication vending machine.
     A.    Whenever the director is advised that a publication vending machine has been installed or is being maintained in violation of this chapter, he or she shall notify the person in whose name the publication vending machine is permitted. Such notice shall state the nature of the violation, the intention to impound the publication vending machine if the violation is not corrected or a hearing is not requested before the director or his designee, within ten (10) days after the giving of such notice, and the procedure for requesting such a hearing. A timely request for a hearing shall stay any impounding, provided that if the violation is not corrected within five days after the decision at such hearing becomes final, the director or his or her designee may impound the publication vending machine in accordance with subsection (B).

     Whenever a publication vending machine is impounded pursuant to subsection (A), the publication vending machine shall be removed by the director or his or her designee and stored in a convenient place. The director or his or her designee shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a notice of removal to the address shown on the publication vending machine and if not shown, at the last known address of the owner if such an address can be ascertained. Such notice shall state the date the publication vending machine was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the publication vending machine and the procedure for obtaining a post removal hearing before the director, or his designee, if desire. Any such publication vending machine removed and stored pursuant to these provisions shall be released to its owner if claimed within thirty (30) days after the mailing of the notice of removal and upon the payment of an amount set by city council resolution as the city’s cost of removal and storage. Upon failure of the owner to claim the publication vending machine and pay the city’s costs within thirty (30) days after the mailing of notice of removal such publication vending machine shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed of as such.

     C.     Any publication vending machine in violation of the provisions of this chapter, which violation creates an immediate danger to the health or safety of the public may be summarily removed and stored in a convenient location so as to eliminate the danger to the health or safety of the public. The director or his or her designee shall notify the owner thereof by mailing a notice of removal to the last known address of the owner. Such notice shall state the date the publication vending machine was removed, the reasons therefor, the location and procedure for claiming the publication vending machine and the procedure for obtaining a post-removal hearing before the director or his designee. Any such publication vending machine removed or stored pursuant to this subsection shall be released to the owner thereof if claimed within thirty (30) days after the mailing of written notice or removal and upon the payment of an amount set by city council resolution as the city’s cost of removal and storage. Upon failure of the owner to claim such publication vending machine and pay the city’s costs within this thirty (30) day period, such publication vending machine shall be deemed to be unclaimed property and may be disposed as such.

     D.    Within ten (10) days of the notice of violation, or notice of removal of a publication vending machine summarily impounded, the person in whose name the publication vending machine is permitted or other person who provides satisfactory proof of ownership, may request a hearing before the director or his designee. The request shall be in writing, shall state the basis thereof and shall be filed with the director or his designee. The hearing shall be held within ten (10) working days of the filing of the request, unless continued for good cause. At the hearing any person may present evidence or argument as to whether the use of the publication vending machine has violated this chapter. Within five (5) working days after the close of the hearing, the director or his designee shall render a decision in writing. Notice of the decision shall be given to the person who requested the hearing within five (5) working days of the hearing. The decision shall be final.

     E.     All notices shall be sent by certified mail to the permittee at the address shown on the permit or other address designated by the permittee.

     F.     The city’s charge for permitting, removal and storage may be amended by city council resolution.

     G.    In the event any publication vending machine installed pursuant to this chapter does not contain the publication specified in the application within a period of thirty (30) days for a daily or weekly periodical or other periodical issued at some other time interval and sixty (60) days for a monthly periodical after the release of the current issue, or if no publication is in the publication vending machine for a period of more than thirty (30) consecutive days for a daily or weekly periodical, or other periodical issued at some other time interval and sixty (60) days for a monthly periodical, the director may deem the publication vending machine abandoned and may removed the publication vending machine from the public right-of-way.

     H.    In the event a permittee of a publication vending machine owned by the permittee desire voluntarily to abandon a publication vending machine location, such permittee shall completely remove the publication vending machine and mount and restore the public right-of-way to a safe condition, leaving no hole or projection in the pavement.

     I.      If no permit has been obtained for a publication vending machine located in a public right-of-way and the name and address of the owner does not appear on the publication vending machine, it shall be removed immediately and processed as set forth in Section 12.32.050(B). (Ord. 660 § 1, 2002; Ord. 462, 1984)

Chapter 12.36 UNDERGROUND UTILITY DISTRICTS
12.36.010 Definitions.
     Whenever in this chapter the words or phrases hereinafter in this section defined are used, they shall have the respective meanings assigned to them in the following definitions:

     “Commission” means the Public Utilities Commission of the state of California.

     “Person” means and includes individuals, firms, corporations, partnerships and their agents and employees.

     “Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures” means poles, towers, supports, wires, conductors, guys, stubs, platforms, crossarms, braces, transformers, insulators, cutouts, switches, communication circuits, appliances, attachments and appurtenances located above ground within a district and used or useful in supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service.

     “Underground utility district” or “district” means that area in the city within which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are prohibited as such area is described in a resolution adopted pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.36.030.

     “Utility” includes all persons or entities supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service by means of electrical materials or devices. (Ord. 156 § 1, 1968)

 

12.36.020 Public hearing.
     The council may from time to time call public hearings to ascertain whether the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures within designated areas of the city and the underground installation of wires and facilities for supplying electric, communication or similar or associated service. The city clerk shall notify all affected property owners as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and utilities concerned by mail of the time and place of such hearings at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date thereof. Each such hearing shall be open to the public and may be continued from time to time. At each such hearing all persons interested shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The decision of the council shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 585 § 7, 1994; Ord. 156 § 2, 1968)

 

12.36.030 Report by city engineer.
     Prior to holding such public hearing, the city engineer shall consult with all affected utilities and determine among other information, the extent of such utilities’ participation and estimates of the total cost to the city and affected property owners, and an estimate of the time required to complete such underground installation and removal of overhead facilities. (Ord. 156 § 3, 1968)

 

12.36.040 Designation of underground utility districts by resolution.
     If, after any such public hearing the council finds that the public necessity, health, safety or welfare requires such removal and such underground installation within a designated area, the council shall, by resolution, declare such designated area an underground utility district and order such removal and underground installation. Such resolution shall include a description of the area comprising such district and shall fix the time within which such removal and underground installation shall be accomplished and within which affected property owners must be ready to receive underground service. A reasonable time shall be allowed for such removal and underground installation, having due regard for the availability of labor, materials and equipment necessary for such removal and for the installation of such underground facilities as may be occasioned thereby. (Ord. 156 § 4, 1968)

 

12.36.050 Unlawful acts.
     Whenever the council creates an underground utility district and orders the removal of poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures therein as provided in Section 12.36.040, it is unlawful for any person or utility to erect, construct, place, keep, maintain, continue, employ or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures in the district after the date when the overhead facilities are required to be removed by such resolution, except the overhead facilities may be required to furnish service to an owner or occupant of property prior to the performance by such owner or occupant of the underground work necessary for such owner or occupant to continue to receive utility service as provided in Section 12.36.100, and for such reasonable time required to remove the facilities after work has been performed, and except as otherwise provided in this chapter. (Ord. 156 § 5, 1968)

 

12.36.060 Emergency or unusual circumstances—Exception.
     Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter overhead facilities may be installed and maintained for a period, not to exceed ten days, without authority of the council in order to provide emergency service. The council may grant special permission, on such terms as the council may deem appropriate, in cases of unusual circumstances, without discrimination as to any person or utility to erect, construct, install, maintain, use or operate poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures. (Ord. 156 § 6, 1968)

 

12.36.070 Additional exceptions.
     This chapter and any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040 shall, unless otherwise provided in such resolution, not apply to the following types of facilities:

     A.    Any municipal facilities or equipment installed under the supervision and to the satisfaction of the city engineer;

     B.     Poles or electroliers used exclusively for street lighting;

     C.     Overhead wires (exclusive of supporting structures) crossing any portion of a district within which overhead wires have been prohibited, or connecting to buildings on the perimeter of a district, when such wires originate in an area from which poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures are not prohibited;

     D.    Poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used for the transmission of electric energy at nominal voltages in excess of thirty-four thousand five hundred (34,500) volts;

     E.     Overhead wires attached to the exterior surface of a building by means of a bracket or other fixture and extending from one location on the building to another location on the same building or to an adjacent building without crossing any public street;

     F.     Antennae, associated equipment and supporting structures, used by a utility for furnishing communication services;

     G.    Equipment appurtenant to underground facilities, such as surface-mounted transformers, pedestal-mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts;

     H.    Temporary poles, overhead wires and associated overhead structures used or to be used in conjunction with construction projects. (Ord. 156 § 7, 1968)

 

12.36.080 Notice to property owners and utility companies.
     Within ten days after the effective date of a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the city clerk shall notify all affected utilities and all persons owning real property within the district created by such resolution of the adoption thereof. The city clerk shall further notify such affected property owners of the necessity that, if they or any person occupying such property desire to continue to receive electric, communication or similar or associated service, they or such occupant shall provide all necessary facility changes on their premises so as to receive such service from the lines of the supplying utility or utilities at a new location, subject to the applicable rules, regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the Commission.

     Notification by the city clerk shall be made by mailing a copy of the resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, together with a copy of this chapter, to affected property owners as such as shown on the last equalized assessment roll and to the affected utilities. (Ord. 156 § 8, 1968)

 

12.36.090 Responsibility of utility companies.
     If underground construction is necessary to provide utility service within a district created by any resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the supplying utility shall furnish that portion of the conduits, conductors and associated equipment required to be furnished by it under its applicable rules, regulations and tariffs on file with the Commission. (Ord. 156 § 9, 1968)

 

12.36.100 Responsibility of property owners.
     A.    Every person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting a building or structure within a district shall construct and provide that portion of the service connection on his property between the facilities referred to in Section 12.36.090 and the termination facility on or within the building or structure being serviced, all in accordance with the applicable regulations and tariffs of the respective utility or utilities on file with the commission.

     B.     In the event any person owning, operating, leasing, occupying or renting the property does not comply with the provisions of subsection A of this section within the time provided for in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.36.040, the city engineer shall post written notice on the property being served and thirty (30) days thereafter may authorize the disconnection and removal of any and all overhead service wires and associated facilities supplying utility service to the property. (Ord. 156 § 10, 1968)

 

12.36.110 City’s responsibility.
     The city shall remove at its own expense all city-owned equipment from all poles required to be removed hereunder in ample time to enable the owner or user of such poles to remove the same within the time specified in the resolution enacted pursuant to Section 12.36.040. (Ord. 156 § 11, 1968)

 

12.36.120 Time extension.
     In the event that any act required by this chapter or by a resolution adopted pursuant to Section 12.36.040 cannot be performed within the time provided on account of shortage of materials, war, restraint by public authorities, strikes, labor disturbances, civil disobedience or any other circumstances beyond the control of the actor, then the time within which such act will be accomplished shall be extended for a period equivalent to the time of such limitation. (Ord. 156 § 12, 1968)

 

12.36.130 Violation—Penalty.
     It is unlawful for any person to violate any provision or to fail to comply with any of the requirements of this chapter. Any person violating any provision of this chapter or failing to comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment. Each such person shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for each day during any portion of which any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punishable therefor as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 156 § 13, 1968)

Chapter 12.40 CITY PARKS
12.40.010 Use of parks after dark.
     A.    The chief of police is authorized to designate the public parks in the city which shall be closed to public use during hours of darkness.

     B.     Upon determination by the chief of police that a public park shall be closed during hours of darkness, he shall post appropriate signs at all entrances to the park stating substantially as follows: “This park is closed to public use during the hours from one hour after sunset to one hour before sunrise on the following day.”

     C.     No person shall enter, loiter or remain in or on any public park grounds when the park is posted as herein described.

     D.    A park which is closed to the public may be used by groups during the hours of darkness provided such groups have first obtained written permission from the director of recreation and provided such written permission is in the possession of the group during the period the park is being used.

     E.     For purposes of this section, the hours of darkness are defined as the time from one hour after sunset until one hour before sunrise on the day following. (Ord. 455 § 1, 1983)

Chapter 12.44 PARADES, ATHLETIC EVENTS AND PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES
12.44.010 Purpose.
     This chapter is adopted for the purpose of regulating parades, athletic events and public assemblies occurring on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public rights-of-way which obstruct, delay or otherwise interfere with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic, or which do not comply with applicable traffic laws or controls. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.020 Definitions.
     Unless the contrary is stated or clearly appears from the context, the following definitions shall govern the construction of the words and phrases used in this chapter:

     “Aggrieved person” means any person who is adversely affected by a determination made or action taken by a city officer or employee pursuant to the provisions of this chapter in a manner significantly greater than the public generally, including, but not limited to, any applicant for a permit required by this chapter who is adversely affected by the action of the city manager on such permit.

     “Athletic event” means any event in which a group of persons collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, including, but not limited to jogging, running, racing, bicycling, rollerblading and roller skating, other than a group of people participating in a parade or public assembly.

     “Event” means any parade, athletic event or public assembly.

     “Free speech rights” means expressive activity protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution or Article 1, Section 2 of the California Constitution, provided that such activity is the principal purpose of the event.

     “Parade” means any organized march or organized procession of animals, vehicles or persons (other than public employees acting within the course and scope of their employment) on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, other than a group of people participating in an athletic event or public assembly.

     “Public assembly” means any group of people participating in an organized activity (other than employees acting within the course and scope of their employment) on or within a city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way, other than a group of people participating in an athletic event or parade. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.030 Administration authority.
     The city manager shall have primary responsibility for the administration of the provisions of this article. In carrying out such responsibilities, the duties of the city manager shall include, but not be limited to, acting on all applications for a permit required by this chapter. In addition, the city manager shall be authorized to revoke a permit issued pursuant to this chapter in the manner provided for herein. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.040 Appeal from decision of city manager.
     A.    Right of Appeal. Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city manager may appeal such decision to the city council, except as provided in subsection B of this section.

     B.     Exception. Because time is of the essence, there shall be no appeal to the city council from the decision of the city manager where the exercise of free speech rights is involved. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.050 Permit requirements.
     It is unlawful for any person to conduct, sponsor or knowingly participate in any parade, athletic event or public assembly on or within any city street, sidewalk, parking facility or other public right-of-way which obstructs or interferes with the normal flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic or which does not comply with applicable traffic laws or controls unless and until a permit for such event has been approved and issued in a manner hereinafter provided by this chapter. A permit is not deemed issued until the city manager has received the applicant’s written acceptance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.060 Permit application—Procedure and time requirements.
     A.    Event.

     1.     Except as provided in subsection B of this section, completed applications for a permit authorizing an event:

     a.     Shall be filed in the office of the city manager at least:

     i.      Forty-five (45) days prior to the date of such event, in order to ensure adequate time for an appeal to the city council from a determination by the city manager to deny the application or approve the application subject   to conditions, or

     ii.     Twenty-five (25) days but less than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of such event, in which case the opportunity to appeal to the city council is deemed waived;

     b.     Shall be denied, approved or approved subject to conditions by the city manager within ten days after receipt of the application. After the decision, the city manager shall immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and shall immediately notify the applicant and the city attorney in writing of the city manager’s decision. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by the city manager. Both the oral and the written notifications shall describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons for any denial or approval subject to conditions.

     2.     Acceptance by the applicant of the approval or approval subject to conditions shall be in writing and must be received by the city manager within six days after written notice of the city manager’s decision was sent to the applicant. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by the applicant. Failure to accept as set forth herein or failure to file a timely appeal to the city council shall automatically be deemed a withdrawal of the application. If the applicant files a valid written acceptance and complies with the applicable conditions precedent, if any, in this chapter, the permit will automatically issue upon receipt written acceptance by the manager. The city manager shall immediately notify the city attorney that the permit has issued.

     3.     Appeals from the decision of the city manager shall be made by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk not later than five days following the date the applicant has received a written notice of the city manager’s decision; provided, that the city council may extend the time for filing such notice of appeal for good cause shown. Such notice of appeal shall be in a form prescribed by the city manager, shall contain a statement of the reasons why the person filing the appeal believes that the decision of the city manager does not comply with the provisions of this chapter, and shall set forth the relief requested by such person from such decision. The appeal shall be heard and decided, unless continued for good cause, by the city council at its first regular or adjourned regular meeting on or after the day following the filing of the notice of appeal, subject to the notice and other requirements of the Ralph M. Brown Act. Within three days after the city council’s decision the city clerk shall notify the applicant in writing of the city council’s decision. The applicant shall have three days after receipt of the notice to file a written acceptance of the decision with the city manager. A failure to accept timely, if the appeal was upheld by the city council, shall automatically be deemed a withdrawal of the application.

     4.     Because time is of the essence, there shall be no appeal to the city council from the decision of the city manager where the exercise of free speech rights is involved.

     B.     Free Speech Event.

     1.     Completed applications for a permit authorizing an event which involves an exercise of free speech rights:

     a.     Shall be filed in the office of the city manager at least five days prior to the date of such event in order to ensure adequate time for a determination by the city manager to approve or deny the application or approve the application subject to conditions.

     b.     Shall be denied, approved or approved subject to conditions by the city manager within forty-eight (48) hours of receipt of the application. After a decision, the city manager shall immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and shall immediately notify the applicant and the city attorney, in writing, of the city manager’s decision. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by the city manager. Both the oral and written notifications shall describe, with particularity, the facts and reasons for any denial or approval subject to conditions.

     2.     Acceptance by the applicant of the approval or approval subject to conditions shall be in writing and must be received by the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours after notification has been sent to the applicant. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by the applicant. Failure to accept as set forth in this subsection shall automatically be deemed a withdrawal of the application. If the applicant files a valid written acceptance and complies with the applicable conditions precedent, if any, in this chapter, the permit will automatically issue upon receipt of the written acceptance by the city manager. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.070 Permit application—Form and content.
     Applications for a permit authorizing an event shall be filed by a natural person, shall be in a form prescribed by the city manager, and shall contain all of the following information:

     A.    Information Required for All Events. Applications for all events shall contain:

     1.     The name, mailing address and daytime and evening telephone numbers of the person filing the application;

     2.     If the event is to be conducted by an organization, the name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of the organization, the name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of the president, leader or other head of the organization, and written documentation of the authority under which the applicant is applying for the permit on behalf of the organization;

     3.     The name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of the person who will be present and in charge of the event on the day of the event;

     4.     The name, mailing address and daytime telephone number of any monitors to be employed during the event;

     5.     The name, mailing address and daytime and evening telephone number of an alternate person to contact if an emergency arises and the applicant is unavailable;

     6.     The nature of the event;

     7.     The proposed date and estimated starting and ending time of the event;

     8.     The proposed location of the event, including its boundaries;

     9.     The estimated number of participants in the event;

     10.   The type and estimated number or vehicles, animals and structures that will be used in the event;

     11.   A description of any sound amplification equipment to be employed at the event;

     12.   The number, size and material of construction of any signs or banners to be used in the event;

     13.   The parking requirements for the event;

     14. The location of any water, first aid or comfort stations to be provided at the event; and

     15.   The type and number of any vendors who will sell food or beverages at the event pursuant to and in accordance with permits required by this code.

     B.     Additional Information Required for Parades. In addition to the information required by subsection A of this section, every application for a parade shall include the following information:

     1.     The time when units of the parade will begin to assemble;

     2.     The proposed assembly point for the parade;

     3.     The proposed parade route;

     4.     The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade; and

     5.     The number, type and size of floats or other vehicles. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.080 Permit application—Fee.
     Every application for a permit authorizing an event shall be accompanied by an application fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council; provided, that no fee shall be charged where the event involves an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.090 Approval and issuance of permit.
     When the city manager determines that a completed application has been filed for a permit authorizing an event in a manner required by this chapter, and that there are no grounds for denying such permit, the city manager shall approve such application subject to all the general conditions hereinafter required by this chapter plus any special conditions hereinafter authorized by this chapter and determined by the city manager to be necessary in order to protect the safety of persons and property and/or the control of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the site of the event. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.100 Conditional acceptance or denial of permit.
     Grounds for Permit Conditioning or Denial. The following factors shall be considered by the city manager in determining whether the imposition of reasonable permit conditions will satisfy public health, safety or welfare concerns and allow the event to proceed as modified. If not, the city manager shall deny the application for a permit.

     A.    The person applying for the permit has failed to provide supplemental application information requested by the city manager or has otherwise failed to complete the application;

     B.     The information contained in the application, including supplemental application information requested by the city manager, is found to be false in any material respect;

     C.     An application for another event to be held on the same date as that requested by the applicant has been previously filed or approved, and such other event is so close in time and location to the event proposed by the applicant as to cause undue traffic congestion or to place the city in a position of being unable to meet the needs for police services for both events;

     D.    The time, route or size of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic contiguous to the site or route of the event or disrupt the use of a street at its peak traffic time;

     E.     The concentration of persons, animals or vehicles at the site of the event or at the site of an assembly or disbanding area around the event will prevent proper police, fire or ambulance services from reaching areas contiguous to the event;

     F.     The size of the event will require the diversion of so many city police officers to ensure that participants stay within the boundaries or route of the event and to protect participants in the event, the police protection to the rest of the city will be seriously jeopardized; provided, however, that nothing herein authorizes the denial of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others if reasonable permit conditions can be imposed;

     G.    Given the size and nature of the event, the reasonably available number of city police officers and other personnel is not sufficient to ensure the safety of participants or the attending public;

     H.    The event consists of a parade that will not move from its point of origin to its point of termination in three hours or less;

     I.      The location of the event will substantially interfere with construction or maintenance work previously scheduled to take place on or along the city street, parking facility, sidewalk or other public right-of-way to be occupied by the event;

     J.      The event will occur at a time when a school is in session and along a route or at a location adjacent to the school or a class thereof, and the noise created by the activities of the event will substantially disrupt the educational activity of such school or class;

     K.    The decorative material on parade floats is not noncombustible or flame retardant or motorized parade floats and towing apparatus are not provided with a minimum 2-A, 10-B:C rated portable fire extinguisher readily accessible to the operator, as provided in Uniform Fire Code Section 11.304;

     L.     The application is not timely submitted and there is insufficient time to investigate and process the application pursuant to the timelines herein. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.110 General permit conditions—Indemnification agreement.
     A.    Indemnification Requirements. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an event the permittee shall enter into an agreement with the city in a form approved by the city attorney which shall set forth the undertaking of the permittee to indemnify the city, hold the city harmless and reimburse the city from and for any liability, damage or loss occurring during the course of the event authorized by such permit where such liability, damage or loss is predominantly caused by the negligent or intentional act or omission of the permittee, any officer, employee or agent of the permittee, or any person who is under the permittee’s legal control. In addition, such agreement shall provide that in the event a claim is made against the city by suit or otherwise, whether the same be groundless or not, arising out of such negligent or intentional act or omission, the permittee shall defend the city and shall indemnify the city for any judgment rendered against it or any sums paid out in settlement or otherwise. Such agreement shall be filed with the city manager prior to the issuance of the permit.

     B.     Waiver of Indemnification Agreement. The indemnification agreement required by this section shall be waived by the city manager for any permit authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.120 General permit conditions—Liability insurance.
     A.    Insurance Requirements. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an event, the permittee shall obtain public liability insurance from an insurance company licensed to do business in the state of California and having a financial rating in Best’s Insurance Guide of at least “B.” Such insurance shall provide occurrence coverage against liabilities for death, personal injury or property damage arising out of or in any way connected with such event. Such insurance shall be in the amount of at least one million dollars ($1,000,000.00), combined single limit, and shall name the city and the city’s officers, employees and agents as additional insureds under the coverage afforded. In addition, such insurance shall be primary and noncontributing with respect to any other insurance available to city and shall include a severability of interest (cross liability) clause. Proof of such insurance, in a form approved by the city’s risk manager, shall be filed with the city manager prior to the issuance of the permit and such insurance shall be maintained in full force and effect throughout the course of the event authorized by such permit.

     B.     Waiver of Insurance Requirements. The insurance required by this section shall be waived by the city manager for any permit authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.130 Traffic control fee.
     A.    Fee Requirements. As a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit authorizing an event, the permittee shall pay to the city a fee in an amount equal to the city’s total estimated costs for providing all of the personnel and materials, including, but not limited to, police department personnel, which are necessary in order to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the site of such event. Such traffic control fee shall be determined by the city manager based upon a schedule of traffic control fees and rates established by resolution of the city council; the estimate of city manager as to the type, number and hours of employment of police department personnel necessary to control and monitor pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the site of the event, all as set forth by the city manager in his or her report on the event; and on the estimate of the city manager as to the type, number and hours of employment of other city personnel necessary to control or monitor the event. Such fee shall be paid by the permittee prior to the issuance of the permit.

     B.     Waiver of Traffic Control Fee. The traffic control fee required by this section shall be waived by the city manager for any permit authorizing an event involving an exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.140 Special permit conditions.
     Grounds For Special Permit Conditions. When acting on a permit authorizing an event, the city manager, after reviewing the facts, may condition such permit upon the permittee’s compliance with reasonable requirements concerning the time, place or manner of conducting such event, as necessary to protect the safety of persons and property or to control vehicular and pedestrian traffic in and around the site of the event; provided, that such requirements shall not be imposed in a manner that will unreasonably restrict the exercise of free speech rights. Such conditions may include, but shall not be limited to, requirements concerning the following:

     A.    The assembly or disbanding area for a parade occurring along a route;

     B.     The accommodation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic in and around the site of an event, including restricting an event to a city sidewalk, or only a portion of city street, parking facility or other public right-of-way;

     C.     The number and type of vehicles, animals or structures to be displayed or used in the event;

     D.    The inspection and approval by city personnel of stages, booths, floats and other structures or vehicles to be used or operated in the event, in order to ensure that such structures or vehicles have been safely constructed and can be safely operated;

     E.     The deposit of a sum of money for cleanup if the event will include the erection of structures, the display or use of horses or other large animals, the operation of water aid stations, or the sale of food or beverages;

     F.     The provision and use of traffic cones and barricades;

     G.    The provision and operation for first aid stations or sanitary facilities, including handicap-accessible sanitary facilities;

     H.    The provision and use of garbage containers, and the cleanup and restoration of the site of the event at the termination of the event;

     I.      The use of sound amplification equipment, and restrictions on the amount of noise generated by motors and other equipment used in the course of the event;

     J.      The provision of a notice of permit conditions to event participants; and

     K.    Alternate sites, times, dates or modes of the exercise of free speech rights. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.150 Special permit—Subsequent conditions.
     A.    Grounds for Special Permit Subsequent Conditions. The city manager may subsequently condition a permit authorizing an event when the city manager determines that there are grounds for conditioning a previously issued permit, provided that such facts were first disclosed or otherwise made known to the city manager after issuance of the permit, and further provided that such facts were not discoverable by the exercise of due diligence by the city manager prior to the issuance of a permit.

     B.     Notice of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions. When the city manager decides to condition a previously issued permit based upon subsequently discovered facts, the city manager shall immediately cause a written notice of such action to be served on the permittee and shall provide copies of the notice to the city attorney and all other city officers charged with carrying out any responsibilities under this chapter. However, when the city manager decides to condition a previously issued permit within twenty-four (24) hours of the event, the city manager shall announce such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees engaged in monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event. Thereafter, the city manager shall cause a written notice of such action to be delivered to the permittee.

     C.     Content of Notices of Special Permit Subsequent Conditions. Any notification of action by the city manager taken pursuant to subsection B of this section, whether oral or written, shall describe, with particularity, the facts and the reasons for the decision. Any such written notice may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document sent or signed by the city manager. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.160 Revocation of permit.
     A.    Mandatory Revocation by City Manager. The city manager shall revoke a permit authorizing an event if the city manager determines that there were grounds for denying the permit, as set out in Section 12.44.100, which were first disclosed or otherwise made known to the city manager after issuance of the permit and such facts were not discoverable by the exercise of due diligence by the city manager prior to the issuance of the permit.

     B.     Discretionary Revocation by City Manager. The city manager may revoke a permit authorizing an event if the city manager determines that the event is being conducted in violation of the terms and conditions of the permit or that event participants have violated any applicable law or regulation; provided, however, that this subsection shall not authorize the revocation of a permit because of the need to protect participants from the conduct of others unless there are insufficient resources available to provide necessary police protection; and provided further, that the city manager shall not revoke a permit in the manner provided by this subsection unless and until the city manager advises the permittee or responsible event participants of such violation and provides a reasonable opportunity to correct such violation.

     C.     Notice of Revocation. When the city manager decides to revoke a permit prior to the date of event, the city manager shall immediately cause a written notice of such action to be served on the permittee and all city officers charged with carrying out any responsibilities under this chapter. However, where the city manager decides to revoke a permit on the day of the event and has learned of the facts justifying revocation within twenty-four (24) hours of the event, the city manager shall announce such action to the event participants, to those city officers and employees monitoring or controlling traffic during the event, and to the person in charge of the event, if such person can be located at the site of the event. Thereafter, the city manager shall cause a written notice of such action to be delivered to the permittee.

     D.    Hearing on Revocation. In all cases, except where the city manager learns of the facts justifying revocation of permit within twenty-four (24) hours of the event, the applicant shall have a right to a hearing before the city manager within twenty-four (24) hours after the request for hearing is made. The hearing shall be at the city manager’s office at four p.m. the day after the hearing is requested, unless otherwise agreed upon. The city manager shall issue a decision orally at the conclusion of the hearing and shall also notify the applicant.

     E.     Content of Notices of Revocation. Any notification of action by the city manager taken pursuant to subsection C or D of this section, whether oral or written, shall describe with particularity the facts and the reasons for the decision. Any such written notice may be by telegram, facsimile or any written document signed or sent by the city manager. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.170 Emergency suspension of authorized event.
     The chief of police and any sworn peace officer employed by the city may temporarily suspend an event authorized by a permit whenever there is a fire or other emergency that requires the event to be temporarily suspended to protect public safety. When an event is temporarily suspended for this reason, the permittee and event participants shall immediately comply with the suspending officer’s instructions. The chief of police shall immediately attempt to notify the applicant orally and shall notify the applicant and the city manager in writing, within twenty (20) hours after the suspension, deciding with particularity the facts and the reasons for the suspension. The writing may be by telegram, facsimile or written document sent or signed by the chief of police. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.180 Cordoning off the route or site of an event.
     The chief of police is authorized and directed to place barricades on or within the city’s streets, parking facilities, sidewalks or other public rights-of-way, and to undertake such other actions as may be necessary to cordon off the route or site of an event authorized by a permit. In addition, the chief of police, shall, when appropriate, post the route or site of such event as a no-parking zone for the duration of the event and sufficiently in advance thereof as may be necessary to prevent vehicles from parking along the route or at the site of the event. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.190 Notice to adjoining property owners.
     The chief of police shall endeavor to give notice of the nature, date and time of any event authorized by a permit as soon as possible prior to the date of such event to all owners of property adjoining the city street, sidewalk or other public right-of-way where such event is to occur, either by delivering copies of such notice to the property owners, by publishing such notice in a newspaper of general circulation, or by posting such notice along the route or at the site of the event. However, the provisions of this section shall be directory only and the failure of the chief of police to give such notice shall not invalidate a permit. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

 

12.44.200 Public conduct during an authorized event.
     A.    Interference with Event. No person shall physically obstruct, impede, hamper or otherwise interfere with any event authorized by a permit or with any person, animal or vehicle participating or used in such event.

     B.     Driving-Through Site or Parade or Athletic Event. No person shall drive a vehicle between vehicles or persons traversing the route of a parade or athletic event authorized by a permit when such vehicles or persons are in motion.

     C.     Prohibited Parking. No person shall park along or within any portion of the route or site of an event authorized by a permit, when the route or site has been posted as a no-parking zone by the chief of police in the manner authorized by this chapter. (Ord. 573 § 1, 1993)

Chapter 12.48 SIDEWALK VENDING
12.48.010 Purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to establish a program to regulate sidewalk vending in the public right-of-way in accordance with state law. The reasonable time, place and manner regulations set forth in this chapter are necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare by, among other things, minimizing potential conflicts between motor vehicles and pedestrians and sidewalk vendors, ensuring unobstructed pedestrian travel on city sidewalks and safe and unfettered access to school sites, and limiting the potential for noise and disruption in residential zones. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.020 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

     “Certified farmers’ market” means a location operated in accordance with Chapter 10.5 (commencing with Section 47000) of Division 17 of the Food and Agricultural Code and any regulations adopted pursuant to that chapter.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or re-incorporated form.

     “Merchandise” means small and easily carried or worn items, including, but not limited to, souvenirs, articles of clothing, etc.

     “Public right-of-way” means land which by deed, conveyance, agreement, easement, dedication, usage or process of law is reserved for and dedicated to the general public for street, highway, alley, sidewalk, storm drainage, bicycle path or other purposes.

     “Roaming sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who moves from place to place and stops only to complete a transaction.

     “School” means any public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision thereof or which is licensed by the state to offer pre-school, elementary or secondary academic instruction, including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of the public right-of-way provided for the primary use of pedestrians along or adjacent to the street.

     “Sidewalk vendor” means a person who sells food or merchandise from a pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance, or from one’s person, upon a public sidewalk or other pedestrian path. This definition includes “roaming sidewalk vendor” and “stationary sidewalk vendor.”

     “Stationary sidewalk vendor” means a sidewalk vendor who vends from a fixed location.

     “Street” means the area dedicated to public use and includes, but is not limited to, roadways, parkways, alleys, and curbs.

     “Swap meet” means a location operated in accordance with Article 6 (commencing with Section 21660) of Chapter 9 of Division 8 of the Business and Professions Code, and any regulations adopted pursuant to that article.

     “Temporary special permit” means a permit issued by the city for the temporary use of, or encroachment on, the sidewalk or other public area, including, but not limited to, an encroachment permit, special event permit, or temporary event permit, for purposes including, but not limited to, filming, parades, athletic events, public assemblies, and outdoor concerts.

     “Vend, vends, or vending” means to sell, offer for sale, expose or display for sale, solicit offers to purchase, or to barter food or merchandise, or to require someone to negotiate, establish, or pay a fee before providing food or merchandise, even if characterized as a donation. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.030 Sidewalk vending requirements and prohibitions.
     A.    A sidewalk vendor shall only operate on sidewalks and no other portion of the public right-of-way.

     B.     No sidewalk vendor shall sell any merchandise on any portion of the sidewalk without first obtaining, and thereafter maintaining, the following:

     1.     A business license obtained pursuant to Chapter 5.04 of this code.

     2.     A sidewalk vending permit obtained pursuant to Section 12.48.070.

     3.     A valid California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit.

     C.     Every person, while acting as a sidewalk vendor, shall carry a photo identification showing the person’s name and permanent address. In addition, the sidewalk vendor shall carry a copy of a valid business permit, sidewalk vending permit, and a California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit as specified in subsection B. If acting on behalf of an employer, corporation, group or organization, the sidewalk vendor shall carry written authorization by such third party and copies of the required permits issued to such third party.

     D.    Sidewalk vendors shall not cause or permit litter to be deposited upon any portion of the public right-of-way, any city park or private property within the city except in public receptacles. Where public receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away by the sidewalk vendor and properly disposed of elsewhere.

     E.     No pushcart, stand, display, pedal-driven cart, wagon, showcase, rack, or other nonmotorized conveyance shall be chained or fastened to any pole, sign, tree, or other object in the public right-of-way or left unattended.

     F.     No sidewalk vendor shall operate in the following locations:

     1.     Within five feet of a marked crosswalk.

     2.     Within five feet of a fire hydrant or fire call box.

     3.     Within five feet of a driveway.

     4.     Within a marked bus zone, or within forty (40) feet of a sign designating a bus stop.

     5.     Within eighteen (18) inches from the edge of the curb.

     6.     Within the immediate vicinity of a certified farmers’ market or a swap meet.

     7.     Within the immediate vicinity of any area designated for a temporary special permit.

     G.    No sidewalk vendor shall operate in a manner that reduces the minimum clearance width required for safe pedestrian travel under the Americans with Disabilities Act. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.040 Sidewalk vending in city parks.
     No stationary sidewalk vendor shall sell food or merchandise in a city park if the operator of the park has signed an agreement for concessions that exclusively permits the sale of food or merchandise by a concessionaire. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.050 Sidewalk vending in residential areas.
     In addition to the requirements and prohibitions set forth in Section 12.48.030, the following restrictions apply to all residential zoning districts:

     A.    Stationary sidewalk vendors are prohibited at all times.

     B.     Roaming sidewalk vendors are permitted between the hours of eight a.m. to six p.m. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.060 Sidewalk vending near schools.
     No sidewalk vendor shall operate within a five hundred (500) foot radius of any school site between the hours of seven a.m. to five p.m., on days when school is in session. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.070 Application, processing and issuance of sidewalk vending permit.
     A.    Application for Sidewalk Vending Permit. All applicants for a sidewalk vending permit, and any annual renewal of the permit, shall provide the following information on an application form provided by the city:

     1.     The name and current mailing address of the applicant.

     2.     The expiration date of the city business license issued to the applicant.

     3.     A description of the food or merchandise offered for sale or exchange.

     4.     A valid copy of all necessary permits required by State or local health authorities.

     5.     A certification by the applicant that to his or her knowledge and belief, the information contained on the application form is true.

     6.     A copy of a California Department of Tax and Fee Administration seller’s permit issued to the applicant.

     7.     If the sidewalk vendor is an agent of an individual, company, partnership, or corporation, the name and business address of the principal.

     B.     Processing of Applications and Issuance of Permit. Upon application being made as above provided and when the applicant has tendered the permit fee as may be established by city council, the city manager or designee shall process the application. Upon making the determination that the submitted application is complete and in conformance with this chapter, the city manager or designee shall prepare and issue the sidewalk vending permit showing upon the face of each permit the following: (1) the person to whom the permit is issued; (2) the kind of business permitted by either code number or other identification; (3) the date of issuance of the permit; and (4) the date of expiration of such license. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

 

12.48.080 Violations.
     A.    Vending without a valid sidewalk vending permit shall be punishable as follows:

     1.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for a first violation.

     2.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

     3.     An administrative fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

     4.     The administrative fines listed in subsection A shall be reduced from two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) to one hundred dollars ($100.00), five hundred dollars ($500.00) to two hundred dollars ($200.00), and one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) to five hundred dollars ($500.00) upon submission of proof of a valid sidewalk vending permit.

     B.     Any other violation of this chapter shall be punishable as follows:

     1.     An administrative fine not exceeding one hundred dollars ($100.00) for a first violation.

     2.     An administrative fine not exceeding two hundred dollars ($200.00) for a second violation within one year of the first violation.

     3.     An administrative fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each additional violation within one year of the first violation.

     4.     The city may suspend or revoke a sidewalk vending permit issued to a sidewalk vendor for the term of that permit upon the fourth violation or subsequent violations.

     C.     When assessing an administrative fine under subsections A and B, the city shall take into consideration the person’s ability to pay the fine, and shall provide the person with notice of his or her right to request an ability-to-pay determination in accordance with Government Code Section 51039(f) as may be amended. (Ord. 18-08 § 2, 2018)

Chapter 12.52 CAMPING AND STORAGE OF PERSONAL PROPERTY
12.52.010 Purpose.
     Public areas within the city should be accessible and available to residents and the public at large for their intended uses. The unauthorized use of public areas for camping and the storage of personal property interferes with the rights of other members of the public to use public areas for their intended purposes and can create a public health or safety hazard that adversely affects residential and commercial areas. The purpose of this chapter is to maintain public areas in clean, sanitary and accessible condition to prevent the misappropriation of public areas for personal use, and to promote the public health and safety by ensuring that public areas remain readily accessible for their intended uses. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

 

12.52.020 Definitions.
     The following terms used in this chapter shall have the meanings indicated below:

     “Camp” or “camping” means to pitch or occupy camp facilities and/or to use camp paraphernalia for living accommodation or habitation purposes.

     “Camp facilities” include, but are not limited to, tents, huts, or temporary shelters.

     “Camp paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, tarpaulins, cots, beds, sleeping bags, hammocks, or non-city designated cooking facilities and similar equipment.

     “City” means the city of Los Alamitos, a municipal corporation of the state of California, in its present incorporated form or in any later reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or re-incorporated form.

     “Highway” means a way or place of whatever nature, publicly maintained and open to the use of the public for purposes of vehicular travel.

     “Parkway” means the area of the street between the back of the curb and the sidewalk that typically is planted and landscaped.

     “Personal property” means any and all tangible property, and includes, but is not limited to, goods, materials, merchandise, tents, tarpaulins, bedding, sleeping bags, hammocks, personal items such as luggage, backpacks, clothing, and household items.

     “Public area” means all property that is owned, managed or maintained by the city, and shall include, but not be limited to, any public street, building, grounds, lot, parcel, park, plaza or parking lot dedicated to the authorized use and enjoyment of the public.

     “Public street” means and includes, but is not limited to, any street, road, highway, alley, sidewalk, parkway, bridge, culvert, drain, and all other facilities or areas necessary for the construction, improvement, and maintenance of streets and roads.

     “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel.

     “Sidewalk” means that portion of the public right-of-way provided for the primary use of pedestrians along or adjacent to a street.

     “Store or “storing” means to put aside or accumulate for use when needed, to put for safekeeping, and/or to place or leave in a location; which does not include any personal property that clearly has been abandoned or discarded and which clearly has no value.

     “Tent” means any tarp, cover, structure or shelter, made of any material that is not open on all sides and which hinders an unobstructed view behind or into the area surrounded by the tarp, cover, structure or shelter. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

 

12.52.030 Unlawful camping.
     It is unlawful for any person to camp, erect or occupy camp facilities or use camp paraphernalia in any public area within the city, except as otherwise provided in Section 12.52.050, as may be permitted under Section 12.40.010, or as mandated by applicable law. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

 

12.52.040 Storage of personal property in public areas.
     It is unlawful for any person to store personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in any public area within the city, except as otherwise provided in Section 12.52.050, as may be permitted under Section 12.40.010, or as mandated by applicable law. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

 

12.52.050 Exceptions.
     A.    This chapter shall not apply to any person camping, occupying camp facilities or using camp paraphernalia, or to any person storing personal property, including camp facilities and camp paraphernalia, in any public area designated by the city for such purposes. The city council may, by resolution or ordinance, establish one or more specified areas of public property for such purposes.

     B.     Absent exigent circumstances relating to immediate threats to the public health, safety, or welfare, the provisions of this chapter will not be enforced against indigent homeless persons sitting, lying, or sleeping on public property when no alternative shelter is available in accordance with the holding in Martin v. City of Boise (9th Cir. 2018) 902 F.3d 1031. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

 

12.52.060 Violations.
     Any violation of this chapter may be prosecuted as a misdemeanor, pursuant to Section 1.20.010 of this code. (Ord. 20-01 § 1, 2020)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES
Chapter 13.04 WATER CONSERVATION
Chapter 13.05 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING

Chapter 13.04 WATER CONSERVATION
13.04.010 Definitions.
     For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:

     “City council” means the city council of the city of Los Alamitos.

     “Conservation offset” means the implementation of proven conservation techniques which, when installed, will result in no additional demand on water supplies.

     “Customer” means any person, persons, association, corporation, or governmental agency supplied and/or billed for water service by Golden State Water.

     “Excess runoff” means water accumulation on streets, gutters, neighboring properties or other areas in an amount sufficient to cause flow.

     “Graywater” means untreated household wastewater which has not come into contact with toilet waste. Graywater includes used water from bathtubs, showers, bathroom wash basins, and clothes washing machines.

     “Potable water” means water which is suitable for drinking.

     “Recycled water” means treated domestic water (effluent) from a wastewater treatment plant that is suitable for a direct beneficial use or a controlled use that would not otherwise occur.

     “Single pass cooling systems” means equipment where water is circulated only once to cool equipment before being disposed.

     “Water shortage” means a determination by the city in consideration of the existing conditions of water production and/or an announcement by any state water agency, the Metropolitan Water District of Southern California, or any of its water suppliers. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.020 Applicability.
     The provisions of this chapter apply to all water users, water users being those persons, customers and property served within the incorporated boundaries of the city. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.030 Exceptions to provisions.
     A.    None of the restrictions outlined in this chapter shall apply to the following:

     B.     The routine and necessary use of water by a government entity in pursuit of its functions for protecting the public health, safety and welfare. This exception does not apply to landscape irrigation by a government agency.

     C.     The necessary use of water for the routine maintenance and/or repair of water distribution facilities, residential and commercial plumbing and existing landscape irrigation systems.

     D.    The prohibited uses set forth in this subsection do not apply to graywater. This provision shall not be construed to authorize the use of graywater if such use is otherwise prohibited by law. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.040 Water user responsibility.
     Water users are deemed to have under control at all times their water distribution systems and facilities and to know the manner and extent of their water use and excess run-off. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.050 Conservation measures.
     A.    The city shall periodically monitor the water supply and demand in the city by regular communication with its water supply sources. Upon notification from its water suppliers that a drought or other condition exists of sufficient magnitude and duration to reasonably cause conservation measures to be enforced, the city council by resolution may implement the conservation measures set forth in Sections 13.04.070, 13.04.080 and 13.04.090 and make such measures mandatory upon all water users in the city. In such event, the penalty provisions of Section 13.04.110 shall be imposed.

     B.     Implementation of the provisions of Section 13.04.070 as mandatory measures shall be accomplished as follows:

     1.     The city council shall, at a regular or special meeting, review the status of the supply of water in the city and upon its reasonable determination that a drought or other condition exists of sufficient magnitude and duration to cause mandatory enforcement, it shall declare the provisions of Section 13.04.070 mandatory. The determination shall be made by public announcement and shall be published three consecutive times in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.

     2.     The conservation measures shall become effective immediately after the council determination.

     3.     At such time as the city council determines there is a sufficient supply of water to meet the city’s demands, it shall repeal its determination and such repeal shall be publicized in the same manner as the implementation. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.060 Adequate water supply conditions—Permanent conditions.
     The following activities are hereby prohibited at all times:

     A.    Allowing irrigation water to run off into a gutter, ditch, drain, driveway, and sidewalk, street or onto pavement or other hard surface.

     B.     Outdoor irrigation of landscape for more than fifteen (15) minutes of watering per day, per station. The restriction does not apply to landscapes that utilize drip irrigation systems.

     C.     Watering between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. daily.

     D.    Automated irrigation of landscape during the hours of 6:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. Customers are encouraged to avoid the use of sprinklers on windy days. Irrigation by hand held hoses with automatic shutoff nozzles, drip irrigation or hand held buckets is permitted anytime.

     E.     Outdoor irrigation of landscape on rainy days.

     F.     Washing down hard or paved surfaces, including but not limited to, sidewalks, walkways, driveways, parking areas, patios, and alleys, except when necessary to alleviate safety or sanitary hazards.

     G.    Excess use, loss or escape of water through breaks, leaks, or other malfunctions in the plumbing system or distribution system for any period of time after such escape of water should have reasonably been discovered and corrected.

     H.    Washing of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, airplanes and other types of mobile equipment unless done with a hand held bucket or hand held hose equipped with a positive shutoff nozzle for quick rinses.

     I.      Restaurant serving water to their customers, except when specifically requested by the customers.

     J.      Operating a decorative water fountain or feature, built or installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, that does not include re-circulated water.

 

     K.    Operating a commercial car wash or laundry, built or installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, that does not use re-circulated water.

     L.     Operating a single pass cooling system built or installed after the adoption of said ordinance.

     M.    Not repair leaks within seven days of notice.

     N.    For hotels to provide daily linen service without offering a waiver option to guests. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.070 Stage 1 water shortage restrictions to take effect.
     The following additional measure shall take effect upon a declaration by the city council that needed supplies are anticipated to be reduced approximately ten (10) percent or less. Upon this declaration, the following restrictions shall apply to all users of water.

     A.    Restaurants must use water conserving dish spray nozzles.

     B.     Ornamental lakes and ponds shall not be filled or refilled with potable water except to the extent needed to sustain aquatic life.

     C.     Outdoor irrigation of landscape with potable water will only be allowed three days a week.

     D.    Fix leaks within seventy-two (72) hours. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.080 Stage 2 water shortage restrictions to take effect.
     In the event that city council determines that the measures outlined in Sections 13.04.060 and 13.04.070 do not produce a sufficient reduction in demand, or if the estimated needed supplies are reduced approximately ten (10) percent to twenty (20) percent, then the following additional restrictions shall be implemented.

     A.    Outdoor irrigation of landscaping with potable water will only be allowed two days a week.

     B.     Fix leaks within forty-eight (48) hours.

     C.     No filling of lakes/ponds.

     D.    Wash vehicles only at car wash system. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009; Ord. 538 § 2, 1991)

 

13.04.090 Stage 3 water shortage restrictions to take effect.
     In the event that city council determines that the measures outlined in Sections 13.04.070 and 13.04.080 do not produce a sufficient reduction in demand, or if the estimated needed supplies are reduced approximately twenty (20) percent or more, then the following additional restrictions shall be implemented.

     A.    Potable water service will not be provided to new land development projects except under the following circumstances:

     1.     A valid building permit has been issued for the project, or

     2.     The project is necessary to protect public health, safety, and welfare, or

     3.     The application provides evidence that the project will not include conservation offsets prior to provision of new water service. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009)

 

13.04.100 General provisions.
     A.    Recycled water shall be used instead of potable water for landscape irrigation construction, dust control, and other approved uses to the extent feasible where recycled water is available to supply all or some of the water demand.

     B.     All restrictions resulting from any water shortage stage shall remain in effect with each successive and more severe water shortage stage until such time that the city council changes a particular restriction or declares that drought conditions no longer exist.

     C.     Additional restrictions may be implemented as determined by the city, after notice to users. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009)

 

13.04.110 Notice—Violations and penalties.
     A.    The city manager, city building official, code enforcement officer or law enforcement officer shall give a first-time and second-time violator of this title a warning notice of the violation. Upon a third and subsequent violations, the violator shall receive a citation and fine.

     B.     The first and second warning notice shall specify the nature of the violation, the date on which they occurred and the corrective measures to be taken. Upon a third violation, the water user shall be charged with an infraction and shall upon conviction be subjected to the following fines:

     1.     Fifty dollars ($50.00) for the first conviction;

     2.     One hundred dollars ($100.00) for the second conviction;

     3.     Two hundred dollars ($200.00) for the third conviction. (Ord. 09-05 § 3, 2009)

Chapter 13.05 WATER EFFICIENT LANDSCAPING
13.05.010 Purpose.
     This chapter establishes requirements and standards for landscaping and irrigation to:

     A.    Enhance the appearance of development projects; reduce heat and glare; control soil erosion; conserve water; screen potentially incompatible land uses; preserve the integrity of neighborhoods; improve air and water quality; and protect pedestrian and vehicular traffic and safety;

     B.     Promote the benefits of consistent landscape ordinances with neighboring local and regional agencies;

     C.     Promote the values and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to invest water and other resources as efficiently as possible;

     D.    Establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects by encouraging the use of a watershed approach that requires cross-sector collaboration of industry, government, and property owners to achieve the many benefits possible;

     E.     Establish provisions for water management practices and water waste prevention for existing landscapes;

     F.     Use water efficiently without waste by setting a maximum applied water allowance as an upper limit for water use and reduce water use to the lowest practical amount; and

     G.    Encourage the use of economic incentives that promote the efficient use of water, such as implementing a budget-based tiered-rate structure, providing rebate incentives and offering educational programs. (Ord. 15-13 § 2, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

 

13.05.020 Applicability.
     A.    After December 1, 2015, and consistent with Executive Order No. B-29-15, this chapter shall apply to all of the following landscape projects:

     1.     New development projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than five hundred (500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check or design review;

     2.     Rehabilitated landscape projects with an aggregate landscape area equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet requiring a building or landscape permit, plan check, or design review;

     3.     Existing landscapes when alterations or expansions to existing nonresidential development or residential projects are proposed, to the greatest extent feasible, as determined by the director. The approval of a discretionary application for alterations or expansions to an existing nonresidential development or residential projects may include conditions of approval requiring compliance with the requirements of this chapter. This chapter does not apply to changes of use or interior tenant improvements that do not require discretionary approval; and

     4.     Cemeteries. Recognizing the special landscape management needs of cemeteries, new and rehabilitated cemeteries are limited to the provisions for new construction or rehabilitated landscapes of the Guidelines, including landscape and irrigation maintenance schedule and irrigation audit, irrigation survey and irrigation water use analysis. Existing cemeteries are limited to the provisions for existing landscapes of the Guidelines, including irrigation audit, irrigation survey and irrigation water use analysis.

     B.     Any project with an aggregate landscape area of two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet or less may comply with the performance requirements of this chapter or conform to the prescriptive measures contained in Appendix A of the Guidelines.

     C.     For projects using treated or untreated graywater or rainwater captured on site, any lot or parcel within the project that has less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of landscape and meets the lot or parcel’s landscape water requirement (estimated total water use) entirely with treated or untreated graywater or through stored rainwater captured on site is subject only to Appendix A, Section 5 of the Guidelines.

     D.    This chapter does not apply to:

     1.     Registered local, state or federal historical sites;

     2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system;

     3.     Mined-land reclamation projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system; or

     4.     Existing plant collections, as part of botanical gardens and arboretums open to the public;

     5.     Single-family residential land uses with landscaped areas of less than five thousand (5,000) square feet that are not developer-installed are exempt.

     E.     Subsection B shall apply to:

     1.     All landscaped areas, whether installed prior to or after January 1, 2010; and

     2.     All landscaped areas installed after the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 15-13 § 3, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

 

13.05.030 Implementation procedures.
     A.    Prior to installation, a landscape documentation package shall be submitted to the city for review and approval of all landscape projects subject to the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. Any landscape documentation package submitted to the city shall comply with the provisions of the Guidelines.

     B.     The landscape documentation package shall include a certification by a professional appropriately licensed in the state of California stating that the landscape design and water use calculations have been prepared by or under the supervision of the licensed professional and are certified to be in compliance with the provisions of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance and the Guidelines.

     1.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted to the city for review and approval with appropriate water use calculations.

     2.     Water use calculations shall be consistent with calculations contained in the Guidelines and shall be provided to the local water purveyor, as appropriate, under procedures determined by the city.

     C.     Verification of compliance of the landscape installation with the approved plans shall be obtained through a certification of completion in conjunction with a certificate of use and occupancy or permit final process, as provided in the Guidelines. (Ord. 15-13 § 3, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

 

13.05.040 Landscape water use standards.
     A.    For applicable landscape installation or rehabilitation projects subject to Section 13.05.020(A) of this chapter, the estimated applied water use allowed for the landscaped area shall not exceed the MAWA calculated using an ET adjustment factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas, exclusive of special landscape areas. The ETAF for a landscape project is based on the plant factors and irrigation methods selected. The maximum applied water allowance is calculated based on the maximum ETAF allowed (0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas) and expressed as annual gallons required. The estimated applied water use is calculated based on the plants used and irrigation method selected for the landscape design.

     B.     Irrigation of all landscaped areas shall be conducted in a manner conforming to the rules and requirements, and shall be subject to penalties and incentives for water conservation and water waste prevention as determined and implemented by the local water purveyor or as mutually agreed by local water purveyor and the local agency.

     C.     Irrigation systems for projects one acre or more in area shall use reclaimed water whenever reclaimed water is available to the site. Reclaimed water systems shall be subject to appropriate health standards. Recirculating water shall be used for any decorative water features. (Ord. 15-13 § 3, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

 

13.05.050 Delegation.
     The city may delegate to, or enter into a contract with, a local agency to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance on behalf of the city. (Ord. 15-13 § 4, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

 

13.05.060 Definitions.
     “Aggregate landscape areas” pertains to the areas undergoing development as one project or for production home neighborhoods or other situations where multiple parcels are undergoing development as one project, but will eventually be individually owned.

     “Applied water” means the portion of water supplied by the irrigation system to the landscape.

     “Budget-based tiered-rate structure” means tiered or block rates for irrigation accounts charged by the retail water agency in which the block definition for each customer is derived from lot size or irrigated area and the evapotranspiration requirements of landscaping.

     “Community Aesthetics Evaluation.” While not subject to a permit, plan check or design review, the community aesthetics evaluation may be performed to ensure the aesthetic standards of the community and irrigation efficiency intent is maintained.

     “Ecological restoration project” means a project where the site is intentionally altered to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem.

     “Estimated applied water use” means the average annual total amount of water estimated to be necessary to keep plants in a healthy state, calculated as provided in the Guidelines. It is based on the reference evapotranspiration rate, the size of the landscape area, plant water use factors, and the relative irrigation efficiency of the irrigation system.

     “ET adjustment factor” or “ETAF” is equal to the plant factor divided by the irrigation efficiency factor for a landscape project, as described in the Guidelines. The ETAF is calculated in the context of local reference evapotranspiration, using site-specific plant factors and irrigation efficiency factors that influence the amount of water that needs to be applied to the specific landscaped area. ETAF means a factor of 0.55 for residential areas and 0.45 for nonresidential areas that, when applied to reference evapotranspiration, adjusts for plant factors and irrigation efficiency, two major influences upon the amount of water that needs to be applied to the landscape. The ETAF for new and existing (non-rehabilitated) special landscape areas shall not exceed 1.0. The ETAF for existing non-rehabilitated landscapes is 0.8.

     “Guidelines” refers to the Guidelines for Implementation of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, as adopted by the city council by resolution (as it may be amended from time to time), which describes procedures, calculations, and requirements for landscape projects subject to this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

     “Hardscapes” means any durable material or feature (pervious and non-pervious) installed in or around a landscaped area, such as pavements or walls. Pools and other water features are considered part of the landscaped area and not considered hardscapes for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance.

     “Irrigation efficiency” means the measurement of the amount of water beneficially used divided by the amount of water applied. Irrigation efficiency is derived from measurements and estimates of irrigation system characteristics and management practices. The irrigation efficiency for purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are 0.75 for overhead spray devices and 0.81 for drip systems.

     “Landscaped area” means all the planting areas, turf areas, and water features in a landscape design plan subject to the maximum applied water allowance and estimated applied water use calculations. The landscaped area does not include footprints of buildings or structures, sidewalks, driveways, parking lots, decks, patios, gravel or stone walks, other pervious or non-pervious hardscapes, and other non-irrigated areas designated for non-development (e.g., open spaces and existing native vegetation).

     “Landscape contractor” means a person licensed by the state of California to construct, maintain, repair, install, or subcontract the development of landscape systems.

     “Landscape documentation package” means the documents required to be provided to the city for review and approval of landscape design projects, as described in the Guidelines.

     “Landscape project” means total area of landscape in a project, as provided in the definition of “landscaped area,” meeting the requirements under Section 1.1 of the Guidelines.

     “Local agency” means a city or county, including a charter city or charter county, that is authorized to implement, administer, and/or enforce any of the provisions of the Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance. The local agency may be responsible for the enforcement or delegation of enforcement of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance including, but not limited to, design review, plan check, issuance of permits, and inspection of a landscape project.

     “Local water purveyor” means any entity, including a public agency, city, county, or private water company that provides retail water service.

     “Maximum applied water allowance” or “MAWA” means the upper limit of annual applied water for the established landscaped area as specified in Section 2.2 of the Guidelines. It is based upon the area’s reference evapotranspiration, the ET adjustment factor, and the size of the landscaped area. The estimated applied water use shall not exceed the maximum applied water allowance. MAWA = (ETo) (0.62) [(ETAF x LA) + ((1-ETAF) x SLA)].

     “Mined-land reclamation projects” means any surface mining operation with a reclamation plan approved in accordance with the Surface Mining and Reclamation Act of 1975.

     “New construction” means, for the purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, a new building with a landscape or other new landscape such as a park, playground, or greenbelt without an associated building.

     “Non-pervious” means any surface or natural material that does not allow for the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

     “Pervious” means any surface or material that allows the passage of water through the material and into the underlying soil.

     “Permit” means an authorizing document issued by local agencies for new construction or rehabilitated landscape.

     “Plant factor” or “plant water use factor” is a factor when multiplied by ETo, that estimates the amount of water needed by plants. For purposes of this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance, the plant factor range for very low water use plants is 0 to 0.1; the plant factor range for low water use plants is 0.1 to 0.3; the plant factor range for moderate water use plants is 0.4 to 0.6; and the plant factor range for high water use plants is 0.7 to 1.0. Plant factors cited in this Water Efficient Landscape Ordinance are derived from the publication, “Water Use Classification of Landscape Species.” Plant factors may also be obtained from horticultural researchers from academic institutions or professional associations as approved by the California Department of Water Resources (DWR).

     “Recycled water” or “reclaimed water” means treated or recycled waste water of a quality suitable for non-potable uses such as landscape irrigation and water features. This water is not intended for human consumption.

     “Reference evapotranspiration” or “ETo” means a standard measurement of environmental parameters which affect the water use of plants. ETo is given expressed in inches per day, month, or year as represented in Appendix D of the Guidelines, and is an estimate of the evapotranspiration of a large field of four- to seven-inch tall, cool-season grass that is well watered. Reference evapotranspiration is used as the basis of determining the maximum applied water allowances.

     “Rehabilitated landscape” means any re-landscaping project that meets the applicability criteria of Section 13.05.020(B) where the modified landscape area is equal to or greater than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet.

     “Smart irrigation controller” means an automatic irrigation controller utilizing either evapotranspiration or soil moisture sensor data with non-volatile memory shall be required for irrigation scheduling in all irrigation systems, recommending U.S. EPA WaterSense labeled devices as applicable.

     “Special landscape area” means an area of the landscape dedicated solely to edible plants such as orchards and vegetable gardens, areas irrigated with recycled water, water features using recycled water, and recreational areas.

     “Turf” means a ground cover surface of mowed grass. Annual bluegrass, Kentucky bluegrass, Perennial ryegrass, Red fescue, and Tall fescue are cool-season grasses. Bermuda grass, Kikuyu grass, Seashore Paspalum, St. Augustine grass, Zoysia grass, and Buffalo grass are warm-season grasses.

     “Valve” means a device used to control the flow of water in an irrigation system.

     “Water feature” means a design element where open water performs an aesthetic or recreational function. Water features include ponds, lakes, waterfalls, fountains, artificial streams, spas, and swimming pools (where water is artificially supplied). The surface area of water features is included in the high water use hydrozone of the landscaped area. Constructed wetlands used for on-site wastewater treatment or stormwater best management practices that are not irrigated and used solely for water treatment or stormwater retention are not water features and, therefore, are not subject to the water budget calculation. (Ord. 15-13 § 5, 2015; Ord. 09-07 § 1, 2009)

Title 14 (Reserved)

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION
Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODES
Chapter 15.06 SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS
Chapter 15.08 FIRE CODE
Chapter 15.10 ADOPTION OF HOUSING LAW REGULATIONS
Chapter 15.12 BUILDING MOVING PERMITS
Chapter 15.14 PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
Chapter 15.16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT

Chapter 15.04 BUILDING CODES
15.04.010 Construction codes adopted.
     A.    For the purpose of prescribing regulations for erecting, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair, improving, removal, conversion, demolition, occupancy, maintenance, equipment use, height, and area of buildings and structures, the following construction codes subject to the modifications set forth in this chapter, are hereby adopted:

     1.     The 2019 California Administrative Code (Title 24, Part 1);

     2.     The 2019 California Building Code (Title 24, Part 2), including the administrative provisions included in Division II of Chapter 1 and Appendix J, based on the 2018 International Building Code as published by the International Code Council;

     3.     The 2019 California Residential Code (Title 24, Part 2.5), including Appendix V, based on the 2018 International Residential Code as published by the International Code Council;

     4.     The 2019 California Electrical Code (Title 24, Part 3), based on the 2017 National Electrical Code as published by the National Fire Protection Association;

     5.     The 2019 California Mechanical Code (Title 24, Part 4), based on the 2018 Uniform Mechanical Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

     6.     The 2019 California Plumbing Code (Title 24, Part 5), based on the 2018 Uniform Plumbing Code as published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials;

     7.     The 2019 California Energy Code (Title 24, Part 6);

     8.     The 2019 California Historical Building Code (Title 24, Part 8);

     9.     The 2019 California Existing Building Code (Title 24, Part 10), based on the 2018 International Existing Building Code as published by the International Code Council;

     10.   The 2019 California Green Building Standards Code (Title 24, Part 11);

     11.   The 2019 California Referenced Standards Code (Title 24, Part 12);

     12.   The 2018 International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International Code Council; and

     13.   The 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code as published by the International Code Council.

     B.     The Codes set forth in subsections (A)(1) through (A)(13), as amended by this chapter shall constitute the building regulations of the city of Los Alamitos and shall be known as the city of Los Alamitos Building Code.

     C.     One copy of all the above construction codes shall be kept on file in the office of the building official pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and made available for public inspection.

     D.    References in Documents and Continuing Legal Effect. References to prior editions of the Building Standards Code or the municipal code sections amended herein that are cited on notices issued by the city or other documents of ongoing or continuing legal effect, including specifically resolutions adopting or imposing fees or charges, until converted, are deemed to be references to the new counterpart 2019 Building Standards Code or amended municipal code sections for the purposes of notice and enforcement. The provisions adopted hereby shall not in any manner affect deposits, established fees or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated by number, code section or otherwise, but such references shall be deemed to apply to the corresponding provisions set forth in the 2019 Building Standards Code adopted hereby. Any fee authorized by the above-referenced construction codes which was in effect in the city at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter need not be re-adopted by resolution, and shall continue in effect, and remain unadjusted in amount unless and until the city council adopts a resolution repealing the fee or establishing a different fee. (Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-06 § 2, 2016)

 

15.04.020 Amendments to the 2019 California Building Code.
     Section 104.8 Liability is amended by adding a sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows:

 

The provisions of this section shall apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representatives are employees of this jurisdiction and shall also apply if the Building Official or his/her authorized representatives are acting under contract as agents of this jurisdiction.

 

     Section 105.2 Work exempt from a permit is amended by amending the following categories of work that are exempt from a building permit:

     A.    Section 105.2 “Building” Item 1 is amended to read as follows:

 

1.     One story detached accessory structures used as storage sheds, playhouses or similar uses, provided the floor area is not greater than 120 square feet and the ceiling height is not over 7 feet.

 

     B.     Section 105.2 “Building” Item 2 is amended to read as follows:

 

2.     Fences not over six feet high and block walls not over three feet high.

 

     C.     Section 105.2 “Building” Item 4 is amended to read as follows:

 

4.     Retaining walls which are not over four feet (1,219 mm) in height measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of the wall, unless supporting a surcharge or impounding Class I, II or III-A liquids.

 

     D.    Section 105.2 “Building” Item 9 is amended to read as follows:

 

9.     Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a Group R occupancy that are less than 18 inches deep, do not exceed 5,000 gallons and are installed entirely above ground.

 

     Section 105.5 Expiration is amended to read as follows:

 

105.5. Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work on the site authorized by such permit is commenced within 180 days and, after its issuance, or if the work authorized on the site by such permit is suspended, abandoned or uncompleted for a period of 180 days after the work has commenced or 180 days past the last required inspection. The building official is authorized to grant one extension of time for not more than 180 days. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated. No permit shall be extended more than once.

 

If work has been suspended or abandoned past 180 days, the permit shall be expired, and new permit(s) issued. The fee for such renewal of permit(s) shall be one half of the original permit fee or one half of the fee of the current adopted fee schedule at the time of renewal. Permits which have been abandoned and require only final inspection may be reissued at minimum fee or as determined by the building official.

 

     Section 105.8 Reconstruction is added to read as follows:

 

105.8. Reconstruction. If the value of the reconstruction (or renovation) of a building is equal to or exceeds 75 percent of the existing habitable square footage of the building, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The value of the reconstruction (or renovation) for a property shall include the value of all construction stemming from construction-related permits issued within the last two years.

 

     Section 113.1 General is amended to read as follows:

 

113.1 General. In order to hear and decide appeals of orders, decisions or determinations made by the Building Official relative to the application and interpretation of this code, there shall be and is hereby created a Board of Appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist of five members and composed of the Mayor and the other members of the City Council. Said members shall hold their respective membership on said Board of Appeals by reason of, and concurrently with their terms of service as Council members and shall cease to be such members upon their ceasing to be Council members. The Building Official shall be the Secretary of the Board. The Board may adopt reasonable rules and regulations for conducting its investigations and shall render all its decisions and findings on contested matters in writing to the Building Official, with duplicative copy thereof to any appellant or contestant affected by any such decision of finding.

 

Three members of the Board shall constitute a quorum. The Mayor shall be the presiding Officer of the Board. Meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the Brown Act.

 

The Board shall have the right, subject to such limits as the City Council may prescribe by resolution, to employ at the cost and expense of the City, such qualified individuals as the Board, in its discretion, may deem reasonably necessary in order to assist it in its investigations and making its findings and decisions.

 

     Section 113.3 Qualifications is deleted in its entirety without replacement.

     Section 202 General Definitions is amended by adding the following definitions:

 

BARRIER. Barrier is a fence, wall, building wall, or any combination of these that completely surrounds the swimming pool and obstructs access to the swimming pool.

 

SWIMMING POOL. Any body of water created by artificial means which is designed, intended for use, or used for swimming or immersion purposes, which has a water depth exceeding 18 inches. The term, “pool,” includes swimming pools, spas, hot tubs, above-and below-ground, and vinyl-lined pools; pool does not include plumbing fixtures such as bathtubs nor does it apply to man-made lakes, reservoirs, farm ponds, or ponds used primarily for public park purposes, water conservation purposes, irrigation purposes or for the watering of livestock.

 

OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

     Section 502.1 Address identification is amended to read as follows:

 

[F] 502.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 4 inches in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch. For R-3 and other occupancies the numbers shall be a minimum of 6 inches high with a minimum stroke width of 1 inch. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.

 

     Section 903.2 Where required is amended to read as follows:

 

[F] 903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided in the following locations:

1.     New buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19, an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area, as defined in Section 202 of the California Building Code, exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2), or more than two stories in height, regardless of fire areas or allowable area.

      Exception: Group R-3 occupancies. Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with California Residential Code Section R313.2.

2.     Existing buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions exists:

a.    When the addition is 33% or more of the existing building area and the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds 5000 square feet (465 m2); or

b.    When the addition exceeds 2,000 square feet (185.81 m2) and the resulting building area, as defined in Section 202, exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2); or

c.    An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area.

 

     Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is added to read as follows:

 

903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

 

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3.

 



 

     Section 1505.1 General is amended, by the deletion of Table 1505.1 and the addition of a new Table 1505.1 thereto, to read as follows:

 

TABLE 1505.1a

MINIMUM ROOF COVERING

CLASSIFICATIONS

TYPES OF CONSTRUCTION

IA

IB

IIA

IIB

IIIA

IIIB

IV

VA

VB

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

For SI: 1 foot = 304.8 mm, 1 square foot = 0.0929 m2.

a.      Unless otherwise required in accordance with Chapter 7A.

 

     Section 1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas is amended, by the deletion of the entire section and the addition of a new section thereto, to read as follows:

 

1505.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

 

     Section 1803.1.1.1 is amended to add the following:

 

1803.1.1.1 Geologic or geotechnical reports. The Building Official may require a geologic or geotechnical report or both, in accordance with the 2019 California Building Code; a geologic report shall be prepared by a Certified Engineering Geologist licensed by the State of California. A geotechnical report shall be prepared by a registered Civil Engineer versed in soils engineering and qualified to perform this work. When both a geotechnical and geologic report are required, the two reports shall be coordinated before submission to the Building Official. The Building Official, at his/her discretion shall obtain any technical support necessary to approve the report. Submitted reports shall contain a finding regarding the safety of the site from any variety of geologic hazard and a finding regarding the effect the proposed improvements, grading and/or construction and use of the site will have on the stability of the site and/or property outside the site. Any recommendation or action presented in the approved reports along with any conditions of approval shall be incorporated into the construction of site improvements. A fee shall be collected for the cost of review of the reports and any required addendums.

 

     Section 1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls is amended to read as follows:

 

1807.1.6 Prescriptive design of concrete and masonry foundation walls. Concrete and masonry foundation walls that are laterally supported at the top and bottom shall be permitted to be designed and constructed in accordance with this section. Prescriptive design of foundation walls shall not be used for structures assigned to Seismic Design Category D, E or F.

 

     Section 3109.1.1 Construction permit; safety features required is added to read as follows:

 

3109.1.1 Construction permit; safety features required. New or remodeled pools or spas, at a private single-family home, shall have an enclosure complying with the amended California Residential Code Appendix V.

(Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-06 § 2, 2016)

 

15.04.030 Amendments to the 2019 California Residential Code.
     Section R105.5 Expiration is amended to read as follows:

 

R105.5 Expiration. Every permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by such permit is commenced within 12 months after its issuance, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days after the time the work is commenced. The Building Official is authorized to grant, in writing, one or more extensions of time, for periods not more than 180 days each. The extension shall be requested in writing and justifiable cause demonstrated.

 

     Section R105.10 Reconstruction is added to read as follows:

 

R105.10 Reconstruction. If the value of the reconstruction (or renovation) of a building is equal to or exceeds 75 percent of the habitable square footage of the building, the entire building shall comply with the code provisions for new construction. The value of the reconstruction (or renovation) for a property shall include the value of all construction stemming from construction-related permits issued within the last two years.

 

     Table R301.2(1) Climatic and Geographic Design Criteria is amended to read as follows:

 

TABLE R301.2(1)

CLIMATIC AND GEOGRAPHIC DESIGN CRITERIA

GROUND SNOW LOAD

WIND DESIGN

SEISMIC DESIGN CATEGORYf

SUBJECT TO

DAMAGE FROM

WINTER DESIGN TEMPe

ICE BARRIER UNDER-LAYMENT REQUIREDh

FLOOD HAZARDSg

AIR FREEZING INDEXi

MEAN ANNUAL TEMPj

Speedd

(mph)

Topo-graphic effectsk

Special

wind

regionl

Wind-borne

debris zonem

Weatheringa

Frost line Depthb

Termitec

Zero

110

No

No

No

D

Negligible

12-24″

Very High

40

No

No

0

66

 

MANUAL J DESIGN CRITERIAn

ELEVATION

LATITUDE

WINTER HEATING

SUMMER COOLING

ALTITUDE CORRECTION FACTOR

INDOOR DESIGN TEMPERATURE

DESIGN TEMPERATURE COOLING

HEAT TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCE

30

34

39

87

 

70

75

 

COOLING TEMPERATURE DIFFERENCE

WIND VELOCITY HEATING

WIND VELOCITY COOLING

COINCIDENT WET BULB

DAILY RANGE

WINTER HUMIDITY

SUMMER HUMIDITY

 

7

 

 

70

23

 

18 (50% RH)

 

For SI: 1 pound per square foot = 0.0479 kPa, 1 mile per hour = 0.447 m/s.

 

a.     Weathering may require a higher strength concrete or grade of masonry than necessary to satisfy the structural requirements of this code. The weathering column shall be filled in with the weathering index (i.e., “negligible,” “moderate” or “severe”) for concrete as determined from the Weathering Probability Map [Figure R301.2(3)]. The grade of masonry units shall be determined from ASTM C 34, C 55, C 62, C 73, C 90, C 129, C 145, C 216 or C 652.

b.     The frost line depth may require deeper footings than indicated in Figure R403.1(1). The jurisdiction shall fill in the frost line depth column with the minimum depth of footing below finish grade.

c.     The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table to indicate the need for protection depending on whether there has been a history of local subterranean termite damage.

d.     The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the wind speed from the basic wind speed map [Figure R301.2(4)].Wind exposure category shall be determined on a site-specific basis in accordance with Section R301.2.1.4.

e.     The outdoor design dry-bulb temperature shall be selected from the columns of 971/2-percent values for winter from Appendix D of the California Plumbing Code. Deviations from the Appendix D temperatures shall be permitted to reflect local climates or local weather experience as determined by the Building Official.

f.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the seismic design category determined from Section R301.2.2.1.

g.     The City of Los Alamitos does have a Flood Hazards Zone.

h.     In accordance with Sections R905.2.7.1, R905.4.3.1, R905.5.3.1, R905.6.3.1, R905.7.3.1 and R905.8.3.1, where there has been a history of local damage from the effects of ice damming, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “NO.”

i.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the 100-year return period air freezing index (BF-days) from Figure R403.3(2) or from the 100-year (99%) value on the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index- USA Method (Base 32°)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

j.      The jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with the mean annual temperature from the National Climatic Data Center data table “Air Freezing Index-USA Method (Base 32°F)” at www.ncdc.noaa.gov/fpsf.html.

k.     In accordance with Section R301.2.1.5, where there is local historical data documenting structural damage to buildings due to topographic wind speed-up effects, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES.” Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

l.      In accordance with Figure R301.2(4)A, where there is local historical data documenting unusual wind conditions, the jurisdiction shall fill in this part of the table with “YES” and identify any specific requirements. Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

m.    In accordance with Section R301.2.1.2.1, the jurisdiction shall indicate the wind-borne debris wind zone(s). Otherwise, the jurisdiction shall indicate “NO” in this part of the table.

n.     The jurisdiction shall fill in these sections of the table to establish the design criteria using Table 1a or 1b from ACCA Manual J or established criteria determined by the jurisdiction.

o.     The jurisdiction shall fill in this section of the table using the Ground Snow Loads in Figure R301.2(6).

 

     Section R309.6 Fire sprinkler attached garages, and carports with habitable space above is amended by modifying the exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing carports and/or garages that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code, OCFA Local Amendments Section 903.2.8.

 

     Section R313.1 Townhouse automatic fire sprinkler systems is amended by modifying the exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required when additions or alterations are made to existing townhouses that do not have an automatic fire sprinkler system installed unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code, OCFA Local Amendments Section 903.2.8.

 

     Section R313.2 One- and two-family dwellings automatic fire sprinkler systems is amended by modifying the exception to read as follows:

 

Exception: An automatic residential fire sprinkler system shall not be required for additions or alterations to existing buildings that are not already provided with an automatic sprinkler system unless a sprinkler system is required in accordance with California Fire Code, OCFA Local Amendments Section 903.2.8.

 

     Section R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure is amended to read as follows:

 

R313.3.6.2.2 Calculation procedure. Determination of the required size for water distribution piping shall be in accordance with the following procedure and California Fire Code Section 903.3.5.

 

(The remainder of the section is unchanged)

 

     Section R319.1 Address identification is amended to read as follows:

 

R319.1 Address identification. New and existing buildings shall be provided with approved address identification. The address identification shall be legible and placed in a position that is visible from the street or road fronting the property. Address identification characters shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall not be spelled out. Each character shall be not less than 6 inches in height with a stroke width of not less than 0.5 inch. Where required by the fire code official, address identification shall be provided in additional approved locations to facilitate emergency response. Where access is by means of a private road and the building address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure. Address identification shall be maintained.

 

     Section R902.1 Roofing covering materials is amended by revising it to allow only class A or B roofs as follows:

 

R902.1 Roofing covering materials. Roofs shall be covered with materials as set forth in Sections R904 and R905. A minimum Class A or B roofing shall be installed in areas designated by this section. Classes A or B roofing required by this section to be listed shall be tested in accordance with UL 790 or ASTM E 108.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Class A roof assemblies include those with coverings of brick, masonry and exposed concrete roof deck.

2.     Class A roof assemblies also include ferrous or copper shingles or sheets, metal sheets and shingles, clay or concrete roof tile, or slate installed on noncombustible decks.

 

     Section R902.1.3 Roof coverings in all other areas is amended by revising it to require a minimum Class B roof as follows:

 

R902.1.3 Roof coverings within all other areas. The entire roof covering of every existing structure where more than 50 percent of the total roof area is replaced within any one-year period, the entire roof covering of every new structure, and any roof covering applied in the alteration, repair or replacement of the roof of every existing structure, shall be a fire-retardant roof covering that is at least Class B.

 

     Section R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes, first paragraph, is amended by revising it to allow only Class A or B treated wood roofs as follows:

 

R902.2 Fire-retardant-treated shingles and shakes. Fire-retardant-treated wood shakes and shingles are wood shakes and shingles complying with UBC Standard 15-3 or 15-4 which are impregnated by the full-cell vacuum-pressure process with fire-retardant chemicals, and which have been qualified by UBC Standard 15-2 for use on Class A or B roofs.

 

     Section R1001.13 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices is added to read as follows:

 

R1001.13 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices shall comply with this section.

 

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

 

     Section R1001.13.1 Gas-fueled devices is added to read as follows:

 

R1001.13.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester in accordance with Section R1003.9.2.

 

     Section R1001.13.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas is added to read as follows:

 

R1001.13.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with Section R1001. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks. The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 15 feet of combustible structures, unless within a permanent or portable fireplace.

(Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-06 § 2, 2016)

 

15.04.040 Amendments to the 2019 California Electrical Code.
     Article 310.16 Continuous Inspection of Aluminum Wiring is added to read as follows:

 

Article 310.16 Continuous Inspection of Aluminum Wiring. Aluminum conductors of No. 6 or smaller used for branch circuits shall require continuous inspection by an independent testing agency approved by the Building Official for proper torqueing of connections at their termination point.

(Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-06 § 2, 2016)

 

15.04.050 Amendments to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code.
     Section [A] 102.3 Application of other codes is amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of occupancy, must be done in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code, California Existing Building Code, California Energy Code, California Electrical Code, California Mechanical Code, California Plumbing Code, California Residential Code, and the California Green Building Standards. Nothing in this code will be construed to cancel, modify, or set aside any provision of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

 

     Section 103.5 Fees is amended to read as follows:

 

103.5 Fees. The fees for activities and services performed by the department in carrying out the department’s responsibilities under this code are set by City Council resolution.

 

     Section 108.1 General is amended to read as follows:

 

108.1 General. When a structure or equipment is found by the code official to be unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found unlawful, such structure may be condemned pursuant to the provisions of Section 17920.3 of the California Health and Safety Code and this code.

 

     Section 112.4 Failure to comply is amended to read as follows:

 

112.4 Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine(s) or fines in an amount(s) as may be established by the City Council.

 

     Section 303.2 Enclosures is amended to read as follows:

 

303.2 Enclosures. Private swimming pools, hot tubs and spas containing water more than 18 inches in depth must be completely surrounded by a fence or barrier at least 60 inches in height above the finished ground level measured on the side of the barrier away from the pool. Gates and doors in such barriers must be self-closing and self-latching. Where release mechanisms of the self-latching device are located less than 60 inches above grade measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool, the release mechanism must be located on the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of the gate and the barrier must have no opening greater than one-half inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism. Self-closing, self- latching gates must be maintained such that the gate will positively close and latch when released from an open position of six inches from the gate post. No existing pool enclosure may be removed, replaced, or changed in a manner that reduces its effectiveness as a safety barrier.

 

     The exception to Section 303.2 is deleted in its entirety.

 

     Section 304.1.1 Unsafe conditions is amended in part to read as follows:

 

304.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired or replaced to comply with the California Building Codes or California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

 

(No further changes to remainder of Section 304.1.1)

 

     Section 305.1.1 Unsafe conditions is amended in part to read as follows:

 

305.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired, or replaced, to comply with the California Building Codes or California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

 

(No further changes to remainder of Section 305.1.1)

 

     Section 306.1.1 Unsafe conditions is amended in part to read as follows:

 

306.1.1 Unsafe conditions. The following conditions are determined to be unsafe and must be repaired, or replaced, to comply with the California Building Codes or the California Existing Building Code as required for existing buildings:

 

(No further changes to remainder of Section 306.1.1)

 

     Section 401.3 Alternative devices is amended to read as follows:

 

401.3 Alternative devices. In lieu of the means for natural light and ventilation herein prescribed, artificial light or mechanical ventilation complying with the California Building Code shall be permitted.

 

     Section [P] 502.5 Public toilet facilities is amended to read as follows:

 

[P] 502.5 Public toilet facilities. Public toilet facilities must be maintained in a safe sanitary working condition in accordance with the California Plumbing Code. Except for periodic maintenance or cleaning, public access and use must be provided to the toilet facilities at all times during occupancy of the premises.

 

     Section [P] 505.1 General is amended to read as follows:

 

[P] 505.1 General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub, shower, drinking fountain, water closet, or other plumbing fixture must be properly connected to either a public water system or to an approved private water system. All kitchen sinks, lavatories, laundry facilities, and bathtubs and showers must be supplied with hot or tempered, and cold running water in accordance with the California Plumbing Code.

 

     Section 602.2 Residential occupancies is amended to read as follows:

 

602.2 Residential occupancies. Dwellings must be provided with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of 68°F in all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and toilet rooms. Cooking appliances may not be used, nor may portable unvented fuel-burning space heaters be used, as a means to provide required heating.

 

     The exception to Section 602.2 is deleted in its entirety.

 

     Section 602.4 Occupiable work spaces is amended in part to read as follows:

 

602.4 Occupiable work spaces. Indoor occupiable work spaces must be supplied with heat to maintain a temperature of not less than 65°F during the time the spaces are occupied.

 

(No further changes to remainder of Section 602.4)

 

     Section 604.2 Service is amended to read as follows:

 

604.2 Service. The size and usage of appliances and equipment serves as a basis for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with the California Electrical Code. Dwelling units must be served by a three-wire, 120/240 volt, single-phase electrical service having a rating of not less than 60 amperes.

 

     Section 604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment is amended to read as follows:

 

604.3.1.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical distribution equipment, motor circuits, power equipment, transformers, wire, cable, flexible cords, wiring devices, ground-fault circuit interrupters, surge protectors, molded case circuit breakers, low-voltage fuses, luminaries, ballasts, motors and electronic control, signaling, and communication equipment and that have been exposed to water must be replaced in accordance with the provisions of the California Building Code and California Electrical Code.

 

     Section 604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment is amended to read as follows:

 

604.3.2.1 Electrical equipment. Electrical switches, receptacles and fixtures, including furnace, water-heater, security system, and power-distribution circuits that have been exposed to fire, must be replaced in accordance with the California Building Code and the California Electrical Code.

 

     Section [F] 702.1 General is amended to read as follows:

 

[F] 702.1 General. A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall comply with the California Building Code.

 

     Section [F] 702.2 Aisles is amended to read as follows:

 

[F] 702.2 Aisles. The required width of aisles in accordance with the California Building Code shall be unobstructed.

 

     Section [F] 702.3 Locked doors is amended to read as follows:

 

[F] 702.3 Locked doors. All means of egress doors must be readily openable from the side from which egress is to be made without the need for keys, special knowledge or effort, except where door hardware conforms to that permitted by the California Building Code.

 

     CHAPTER 9 POST-DISASTER RECOVERY AND RECONSTRUCTION is added to the 2018 International Property Maintenance Code to read as follows:

 

SECTION 901

POST-DISASTER SAFETY ASSESSMENT PLACARDS AND SECURITY

 

901.1 SCOPE. This chapter establishes standard placards to be used to indicate the condition of a structure for continued occupancy after any natural or man-made disaster. It further authorizes the Building and Safety Department, as well as authorized representatives, to post appropriate placards at each entry point to a building or structure upon completion of a safety assessment.

 

901.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures, of all occupancies, regulated by the City following each natural or man-made disaster.

 

901.3 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

 

901.3.1 BUILDING OFFICIAL is person or entity designated as such by the city council or that person or entity’s designee.

 

901.3.2 SAFETY ASSESSMENT is a visual examination of a building or structure for the purpose of determining whether continued use or occupancy is appropriate following a natural or man-made disaster.

 

901.4       PLACARDS. The following official placards must be used to designate the condition of buildings or structures following a disaster.

 

901.4.1 (GREEN) INSPECTED - LAWFUL OCCUPANCY PERMITTED. Posted on any building or structure where no apparent hazard has been found. Placement of this placard does not mean that there is no damage to the building or structure.

 

901.4.2 (YELLOW) RESTRICTED OR LIMITED ENTRY. Posted on each damaged building or structure where damage has created a hazardous condition which justifies restricted occupancy. The Building Official who posts this placard will note in general terms the hazard created and will clearly and concisely note the restrictions on occupancy.

 

901.4.3 (RED) UNSAFE – DO NOT ENTER OR OCCUPY. Posted on each damaged building or structure such that continued occupancy poses a threat to life or health. Buildings or structures posted with this placard may be entered only after authorization in writing by the building official. Safety assessment teams are authorized to enter these buildings at any time. This placard may not be used or considered as a demolition order. The official who posts this placard must make a note in general terms of the damage encountered.

 

901.4.4 SECURING OF UNSAFE BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES. Buildings or structures that have been determined by the Building Official to pose a threat to life safety or to be unsafe due to damage may be required by the Building Official to be secured from entry by fencing or other approved means until such time that the damage or threat to life is removed by repair, reconstruction or demolition. The fencing or security measures may not be removed without authorization from the building official.

 

901.4.5 REMOVAL OF PLACARDS. Once the placard has been attached to a building or structure, it may not be removed, altered, or covered until authorized by the Building Official.

 

901.5 VIOLATION. Any violation of Chapter 9 of this code is a misdemeanor and will be subject to punishment in accordance with the Los Alamitos Municipal Code and the City of Los Alamitos Building Code.

 

SECTION 902

POST DISASTER ABATEMENT

 

902.1 INTENT. This chapter establishes abatement criteria for all buildings and structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared.

 

902.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city.

 

902.3 DEFINITIONS. For the purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply:

 

902.3.1 EVENT means any occurrence which results in the declaration of a disaster, including but not limited to, fires, landslides, wind storms, earthquakes, and floods.

 

902.3.2 HISTORIC BUILDING OR STRUCTURE means any building or structure registered with a federal, state, county, or city government, or the register of points of interest. Historic buildings and structures also include those buildings and structures within a recognized historic district.

 

902.3.3 STATE HISTORIC PRESERVATION OFFICER (SHPO) is the person appointed by the Governor, pursuant to Section 101(b)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, to administer the State Historic Preservation Program.

 

Office of Historic Preservation

Department of Parks and Recreation

P.O. BOX 942896

Sacramento, CA 94296-0001

 

Phone: (916) 653-6624

FAX: (916) 653-9824

 

902.4 ABATEMENT CRITERIA

 

902.4.1 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION. Except as provided in Section 902.4.2 below, the Building Official must serve a written Notice of Determination to each property owner as found on the latest available copy of the last equalized assessment roll. Such Notice of Determination must be delivered by hand-delivery, telephone, telegram, facsimile or other reasonable means, and must clearly indicate that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and that, as such, it constitutes a public nuisance. The notice must set forth those factors which, in the opinion of the Building Official, make the structure an imminent hazard and dangerous, and must also include a directive from the Building Official of the specific action or actions to be taken by the property owner. The Notice must specify that within 48 hours from the time of issuance of the Notice of Determination, the owner or other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property must abate the nuisance in accordance with the directives written in the Notice of Determination by the Building Official.

 

902.4.2 NOTICE OF DETERMINATION EXCEPTION. No prior notice is required, when the Building Official, after considering all the facts, determines, in writing, that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous, and that it must be abated immediately and that time and circumstances do not permit the giving of prior notice to the owner. In those cases where time and circumstances do not permit the city to give the owner notice prior to abatement, the Building Official may cause the nuisance to be summarily abated.

 

902.4.3 APPEAL OF NOTICE OF DETERMINATION. A Notice of Determination delivered by the Building Official, that a building or structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous and therefore must be abated, may be appealed by the property owner or any other party of record with an equitable or legal interest in the property. Such appeal must be made to the Building Official within 48 hours of delivery of such Notice of Determination by the Building Official. Such appeal must be accompanied by a written Hazard Abatement Plan signed by a State of California licensed engineer or architect or by a written report by a State of California licensed engineer or architect stating why the engineer or architect feels the building or structure is not an imminent hazard or dangerous at this time. Such report must include a recommendation by the engineer or architect as to what should or should not be done at this time. If the Building Official accepts the proposed Hazard Abatement Plan in lieu of the Notice of Determination, the Hazard Abatement Plan must be implemented within 24 hours of acceptance by the Building Official. If the Building Official accepts an engineer’s report and agrees there is no imminent hazard, the Building Official must rescind, in writing, the Notice of Determination.

 

Should the Building Official disagree with the Hazard Abatement Plan or should the Building Official disagree with the engineer’s or architect’s report, a hearing must be conducted by the Board of Appeals, as soon as a quorum can be assembled.

 

902.4.4 BOARD OF APPEALS HEARING. At the hearing, the appellant has the right to call witnesses, to submit evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses of the city. All witnesses must be sworn.

 

A record of the proceedings must be made by tape recording. Any relevant evidence may be submitted, regardless of the existence of any common law or statutory rule which might make improper the admission of such evidence over objection in civil actions in the courts of this State.

 

At the close of the hearing, the Board of Appeals must act to uphold, overrule, or modify the determination and order of the Building Official. The determination and order of the Building Official will be upheld, unless the Board of Appeals finds, based upon the evidence in the record, that the Building Official erred in determining that the structure is an imminent hazard and dangerous. The decision of the Board of Appeals, with the reasons therefor, may be given orally on the record. If given orally, the decision must be memorialized in writing and served upon the applicant within 24 hours of the time the oral decision is rendered.

 

If the Board of Appeals upholds the decision of the Building Official, the property owners of record will be ordered to abate the public nuisance within the time set forth in the order. If the structure is determined not to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, the Building Official’s determination and order will be vacated. The decision of the Board of Appeals will be final on the date it is rendered.

 

902.4.5 HAZARD ABATEMENT PLAN. If a Hazard Abatement Plan is approved by the Building Official, the owner or other interested party of record must execute such plan within 24 hours of obtaining approval of the plan from the Building Official. Within 24 hours of completion of the abatement work the owner or other interested party of record must provide the Building Official with a written certification that the public nuisance, as described in the Building Official’s Notice of Determination, has been abated.

 

If the work performed pursuant to the Hazard Abatement Plan amounts to temporary abatement, the owner or other party of record, prior to proceeding with permanent repairs, must obtain required permits and file a damage assessment report with the Building Official. The damage assessment report must be reviewed and approved by the Building Official prior to proceeding with permanent repairs.

 

902.4.6 FAILURE TO PERFORM. In those instances where the property owner or other interested party of record either does not respond to the Building Official’s Notice of Determination or approved Hazard Abatement Plan, responds untimely, or responds timely but fails to abate the public nuisance within the required time period, the imminent hazard and dangerous structure will be subject to immediate abatement by the Building Official.

 

902.4.7 PUBLIC NUISANCE. All structures or portions of such structures which, after inspection by the Building Official, are determined to be an imminent hazard and dangerous, either to the public, occupants of the subject structure, or to any adjacent structures, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and must be abated by the owner in accordance with the procedures specified in Sections 43.2.4.4 and 43.2.4.5.

 

902.4.8 SUSPENSION OF ABATEMENT OF WORK. Notwithstanding any code provisions to the contrary, the Building Official is authorized to suspend abatement work, and to allow the property owner or other party of legal interest to complete the abatement work.

 

902.4.9 CHANGE OF STATUS. When the conditions making a structure an imminent hazard and dangerous have been abated, the structure will no longer be considered an imminent hazard and dangerous. However, if the abatement work is temporary in nature, as determined by the Building Official, the structure will remain subject to the provisions of this section.

 

902.4.10 DEMOLITION PERMIT. If the owner of any building or structure has decided to demolish rather than repair, the owner, or the owner’s representative, must obtain a demolition permit.

 

902.5 HAZARD ABATEMENT OF HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR STRUCTURES.

 

902.5.1 NOTIFICATION OF IMMINENT HAZARD. Within ten days after the event, the Building Official must notify the State Historic Preservation Officer that one of the following actions will be taken regarding any historic building or structure determined by the Building Official to represent an imminent hazard to the health or safety of the public, or to pose an imminent threat to the public right-of-way:

 

       902.5.1.1 BRACING OR SHORING. Whenever possible, as determined by the Building Official, the building or structure may be braced or shored in such a manner as to mitigate the hazard to public health or safety or the hazard to the public right-of-way.

 

        902.5.1.2 CONDEMNATION. Whenever bracing or shoring is determined to be an unreasonable alternative, the Building Official may cause the building or structure to be condemned and immediately demolished. Such condemnation and demolition may be performed in the interest of public health or safety without a condemnation hearing as required by the 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

 

902.5.2 CONDEMNATION PROCEEDINGS. If, ten days after the event and less than 30 days after the event, an historic building or structure is determined by the Building Official to represent a hazard to the health or safety of the public or to pose a threat to the public right-of-way, the Building Official may initiate condemnation proceedings in accordance with the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. The Building Official may also notify the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, as amended, of its intent to hold a condemnation hearing.

 

902.5.3 REQUEST TO DEMOLISH. If the Building Official and the owner of any historic building or structure agree that such a building or structure should be demolished, the Building Official must submit a request to demolish to the Federal Emergency Management Agency, in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1986, as amended. Such request must include all substantiating data.

 

SECTION 903

DISASTER REPAIR AND

RECONSTRUCTION

 

903.1 INTENT. This section establishes standards and regulations for the expeditious repair and reconstruction of structures damaged as a result of a disaster for which a local emergency has been declared.

 

903.2 APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS.

 

903.2.1 DECLARATION OF EMERGENCY. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all buildings and structures regulated by the city following each disaster after a local emergency has been declared.

 

903.2.2 WAIVER FOR ENGINEERING EVALUATION. The requirements of this chapter may be waived by the Building Official subject to an Engineering Evaluation as defined in Section 903.3.3.4.

 

903.3 DEFINITIONS. For the purpose of this section, the following definitions apply:

 

903.3.1 ARCHITECT is a person licensed by the State of California to practice architecture, as prescribed by the State of California Business and Professions Code.

903.3.2 CIVIL ENGINEER is a person registered by the State of California to practice Civil Engineering, as prescribed by the State of California Business and Professions Code.

 

903.3.3 CURRENT CODE means those codes adopted by the city pursuant to California Health and Safety Code § 18941.5.

 

903.3.4 ENGINEERING EVALUATION is an evaluation of a damaged building or structure, or suspected damaged building or structure, performed under the direction of a structural engineer, civil engineer, or architect retained by the owner of the building or structure. Engineering evaluations must, at a minimum, contain recommendations for repair and an appropriate opinion of the construction cost for those repairs. All engineering evaluations must include the engineer’s or architect’s stamp, wet-signature, and license expiration date.

 

903.3.5 ESSENTIAL SERVICE FACILITY means those buildings or structures designated by the city to house facilities necessary for emergency operations subsequent to a disaster.

 

903.3.6 REPLACEMENT VALUE is the dollar value, as determined by the building official, for replacing a damaged structure with a new structure of the same size, same type of construction, and same occupancy, and located on the same site.

 

903.3.7 STRUCTURAL ENGINEER is a person registered by the State of California to practice civil engineering and to use the title, Structural Engineer, as defined in Section 5537.1 of the State of California Business and Professions Code.

 

903.3.8 VALUE OF REPAIR is the dollar value, as determined by the Building Official, for making necessary repairs to the damaged structure.

 

903.4 REPAIR CRITERIA

 

903.4.1 GENERAL. Buildings and structures of all occupancies which have been damaged as the result of a disaster, except as otherwise noted, must be repaired in accordance with the following criteria.

 

903.4.2 UP TO TEN PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair does not exceed ten percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged portion may be restored to the pre-disaster condition; except that when the damaged elements include suspended ceiling systems, the ceiling system must be repaired with all bracing required by current code.

 

903.4.3 UP TO FIFTY PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair is greater than ten percent but less than fifty percent of the replacement value of the structure, the damaged elements must be repaired and brought into conformance with the structural requirements of the current code.

 

903.4.4 MORE THAN FIFTY PERCENT REPAIR VALUE. When the estimated value of repair is fifty percent or more of the replacement value of the structure, the entire structure must be brought into conformance with the fire and life safety and structural requirements of the current code.

 

903.4.5 CHIMNEY VALUE EXCLUSION. In Group R, Division 3, occupancies, the repair value of damaged chimneys may be excluded from the computation of percentage of replacement value. Damaged chimneys must be repaired in accordance with Section 903.5.

 

903.5 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR FIREPLACES AND CHIMNEYS.

 

903.5.1 GENERAL. All damaged chimneys must be repaired or reconstructed to comply with the requirements of Chapter 21 of the CBC. Damaged portions of chimneys must be removed in accordance with the following criteria.

 

903.5.2 DAMAGE ABOVE THE ROOF LINE. When the damaged portion of the chimney is located between the roof line and the top of the chimney, the damaged portion may be removed to the roof line provided the roof and ceiling anchorage are in sound condition. The reconstruction portion of the chimney must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method.

 

903.5.3 SINGLE-STORY STRUCTURE DAMAGE BELOW THE ROOF LINE. For a single-story structure in which the damaged portion of the chimney is below the roof line, or the damaged portion extends from above the roof line to below the roof line, the chimney must be removed to the top of the firebox.

 

903.5.4 MULTI-STORY STRUCTURE DAMAGE BELOW THE ROOF LINE. For a multi-story structure, the damaged portion of the chimney must be removed from the top to a floor line where anchorage is found.

 

903.5.5 FIREBOX DAMAGE. In any structure where the firebox has been damaged, the entire chimney and firebox must be removed to the foundation. If the foundation is in sound condition, the firebox and chimney may be reconstructed using the existing foundation. If the foundation has been damaged, the foundation must be removed and replaced. Such reconstruction and replacement must be in accordance with Chapter 21 of the CBC Code.

 

903.5.6 ENGINEERED ALTERNATE SOLUTIONS. Where existing conditions preclude the installation of all anchorage required by Chapter 21 of the CBC, alternate systems may be used in accordance with the alternate methods and materials provisions of the CBC when approved by the Building Official.

 

903.5.7 BRACING. Where the portion of the chimney extending above the roof line exceeds two times the least dimension of the chimney, that portion above the roof line must be braced to the roof structure using an approved method.

 

903.6 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR

HISTORIC BUILDINGS OR

STRUCTURES.

 

903.6.1 ENGINEERING EVALUATION REQUIRED. Buildings or structures which are included on a national, state, or local register for historic places or which are qualifying structures within a recognized historic district, which have been damaged as a result of a disaster, must have an engineering evaluation performed.

 

903.6.2 MINIMUM REPAIR CRITERIA. The minimum criteria for repair are included in Section 903.4, Repair Criteria, with due consideration given to the historical rating and nature of the structures. Additional standards and criteria, as noted in Part 8, Title 24, California Code of Regulations, also apply.

 

903.7 REPAIR CRITERIA FOR

UNREINFORCED MASONRY

BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES.

 

903.7.1 GENERAL. All damaged buildings determined to be bearing wall buildings constructed of unreinforced masonry must be repaired and strengthened to fully comply with the requirements of Chapter 15.04.

(Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019)

 

15.04.060 Amendments to the 2018 International Swimming Pool and Spa Code.
     Section [A] 101.1 Title is amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Swimming Pool and Spa Code of the City of Los Alamitos hereinafter to as “this code.”

 

     Section [A] 102.7.1 Application of the International Codes is amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 102.7.1 Application of the International Codes. Where the International Residential Code is referenced in this code, the provisions of the California Residential Code shall apply to related systems in detached one- and two-family dwellings and townhouses not more than three stories in height. Other related systems shall comply with the applicable California Codes or referenced standard.

 

     Section [A] 105.6 Fees is amended to read as follows:

[A] 105.6 Fees. A permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by law have been paid. All fees related to and any permit, work, inspection, violation, plan review or refunds shall be in accordance with Section 109 of the California Building Code.

 

     Section [A] 105.6.2 Fee schedule and [A] 105.6.3 Fee refunds are deleted in their entirety without replacement.

     Section [A] 108.2 Membership of board is amended to read as follows:

 

[A] 108.2 Board of appeals. The Board of Appeals shall consist of members as set forth in Chapter 113.1 of the California Building Code and any amendments of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code.

 

     Section [A] 108.2.1 Qualifications is deleted in its entirety without replacement.

     Section 305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances is amended to read as follows:

 

305.2.1 Barrier height and clearances. Barrier heights and clearances shall be in accordance with all of the following:

1.     The top of the barrier shall be not less than 60 inches (1524 mm) above grade where measured on the side of the barrier that faces away from the pool or spa. Such height shall exist around the entire perimeter of the barrier and for a distance of 3 feet (914 mm) measured horizontally from the outside of the required barrier.

 

(The remaining language in Section 305.2.1 is to remain and unchanged.)

(Ord. 19-05 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-06 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 15.06 SMALL RESIDENTIAL SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM PERMITS
15.06.010 Intent and purpose.
     The intent and purpose of this chapter is to establish an expedited, streamlined solar permitting process to facilitate timely and cost-effective installations of small residential rooftop solar energy systems. This chapter is designed to encourage the use of solar systems by removing unreasonable barriers, minimizing costs to property owners and the city, and expanding the ability of property owners to install solar energy systems, all while protecting the public health and safety. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

15.06.020 Definitions.
     A.    “Association” means a nonprofit corporation or unincorporated association created for the purpose of managing a common interest development.

     B.     “Building department” means the building and safety division of the city of Los Alamitos.

     C.     “Building official” means the building official for the city of Los Alamitos.

     D.    “City” means the city of Los Alamitos.

     E.     “Common interest development” means any of the following:

     1.     A community apartment project.

     2.     A condominium project.

     3.     A planned development.

     4.     A stock cooperative.

     F.     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following: email, the Internet or facsimile.

     G.    “Expedited permitting” refers to an organized permitting process by which a majority of small, residential-sized photovoltaic (PV) systems under ten (10) KW-DC may be permitted quickly and easily.

     H.    A “feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact” includes, but is not limited to, any cost-effective method, condition or mitigation imposed by the city on another similarly situated application in a prior successful application for a similar permit.

     I.      “Small residential rooftop solar energy system” means all of the following:

     1.     A solar energy system that is not larger than ten (10) kilowatts alternating current nameplate rating or thirty (30) kilowatts thermal.

     2.     A solar energy system that conforms to all applicable state fire, structural, electrical, and other building codes as adopted or amended by the city and all state health and safety standards.

     3.     A solar energy system that is installed on a single- or duplex-family dwelling.

     4.     A solar panel or module array that does not exceed the maximum legal building height established by the city.

     J.      “Solar energy system” means either of the following:

     1.     Any solar collector or other solar energy device whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for space heating, space cooling, electric generation, or water heating.

     2.     Any structural design feature of a building, whose primary purpose is to provide for the collection, storage, and distribution of solar energy for electricity generation, space heating, space cooling or water heating.

     K.    “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified and written public health or safety standards, policies or con-ditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

 

15.06.030 Applicability.
     This chapter applies to the permitting of all small residential rooftop solar energy systems in the city. Small residential rooftop solar energy systems legally established or permitted prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter are not subject to the requirements of this chapter unless physical modifications or alterations are undertaken that materially change the size, type, or components of such system in such a way as to require new permitting. Routine operation and maintenance or like-kind replacements shall not require a permit. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

 

15.06.040 Solar energy system requirements.
     A.    All solar energy systems shall meet applicable health and safety standards and requirements imposed by the city and the state of California.

     B.     Solar energy systems for heating water in single-family residences and for heating water in commercial or swimming pool applications shall be certified by an accredited listing agency as defined by the California Plumbing and Mechanical Code.

     C.     Solar energy systems for producing electricity shall meet all applicable safety and performance standards established by the California Electrical Code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories and, where applicable, rules of the Public Utilities Commission regarding safety and reliability. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

 

15.06.050 Duties of building department and building official.
     A.    All documents required for the submission of an expedited small residential rooftop solar energy system application shall be made available on the city’s publicly accessible website.

     B.     Electronic submittal of the required permit application and documents via email, the city’s website, or facsimile shall be made available to all small residential rooftop solar energy system permit applicants.

     C.     An applicant’s electronic signature shall be accepted on all forms, applications, and other documents in lieu of a wet signature.

     D.    The building department shall adopt a standard plan and checklist of all requirements with which small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall comply with to be eligible for expedited review.

     E.     The small residential rooftop solar system permit process, standard plans, and checklist shall substantially conform to the recommendations for expedited permitting, including the checklist and standard contained in the most current version of the California Solar Permitting Guidebook adopted by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research.

     F.     Fees for the permitting of small residential rooftop solar energy systems shall be as established by resolution of the city council must comply with Government Code Sections 65850.55 and 66015 and Health and Safety Code Section 17951. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

 

15.06.060 Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.
     A.    The community development department shall adopt an administrative, nondiscretionary review process to expedite the approval of small residential rooftop solar energy system applications within thirty (30) days of adoption of this chapter. For an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system that meets the requirements of the approved checklist and standard plan, the building official shall issue a building permit or other non-discretionary permit within three business days. The building official may require an applicant to apply for a conditional use permit if the official finds, based on substantial evidence, that the solar energy system could have a specific, adverse impact upon the public health and safety. Such decisions may be appealed to the planning commission within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of the decision in accordance with Chapter 17.68 of this code.

     B.     Review of the application shall be limited to the building official’s review of whether the system proposed by the applicant meets local, state and federal health and safety requirements.

     C.     If a use permit is required, the building official may deny an application for the use permit if the building official makes written findings based upon substantive evidence that the proposed installation would have a specific, adverse impact upon public health or safety and there is no feasible method to satisfactorily mitigate or avoid the specific, adverse impact. Such findings shall include the basis for the rejection of any potential feasible alternatives for preventing the adverse impact. A denial may be appealed to the planning commission within fifteen (15) calendar days following the date of the denial decision.

     D.    Any condition imposed on a small residential rooftop solar energy system shall be designed to mitigate the specific, adverse impact upon health and safety at the lowest possible cost and without significantly increasing the cost of the system or significantly decreasing its efficiency or specified performance. For purposes of this subsection, the term “significantly” shall mean the same as defined in Civil Code Section 714(d)(1)(A) and (B).

     E.     If an application for a small residential rooftop solar energy system is deemed incomplete, a written correction notice detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information or documentation required to be eligible for expedited permitting shall be sent to the applicant for resubmission.

     F.     Only one inspection shall be required and performed by the building department for small residential rooftop solar energy systems eligible for expedited review. The inspection shall be scheduled within two business days of a request, shall be done in a timely manner and should include consolidated inspections.

     G.    If a small residential rooftop solar energy system fails inspection, a subsequent inspection is authorized but need not conform to the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 15-05 § 2, 2015)

Chapter 15.08 FIRE CODE
15.08.010 Fire Code adopted.
     A.    The city hereby adopts the California Fire Code, 2019 Edition, including Appendices B, BB, C, and CC based on the 2018 International Fire Code as published by the International Code Council.

     B.     The provisions of the California Fire Code, as amended by this chapter shall constitute the fire code of the city of Los Alamitos.

     C.     One copy of all the California Fire Code and the city’s amendments thereto shall be kept on file in the office of the fire code official pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18942(d)(1) and made available for public inspection.

     D.    References in Documents and Continuing Legal Effect. References to prior editions of the fire code or the municipal code sections amended herein that are cited on notices issued by the city or the agency enforcing the city’s fire regulations or other documents of ongoing or continuing legal effect, including specifically resolutions adopting or imposing fees or charges, until converted, are deemed to be references to the new counterpart 2019 Fire Code or amended municipal code sections for the purposes of notice and enforcement. The provisions adopted hereby shall not in any manner affect deposits, established fees or other matters of record which refer to, or are otherwise connected with, ordinances which are specifically designated by number, code section or otherwise, but such references shall be deemed to apply to the corresponding provisions set forth in the 2019 California Fire Code adopted hereby. Any fee authorized by the above-referenced fire code which was in effect at the time of the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter need not be re-adopted by resolution, and shall continue in effect, and remain unadjusted in amount unless and until a resolution is adopted repealing the fee or establishing a different fee. (Ord. 19-06 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-07 § 2, 2016)

 

15.08.020 Enforcement and inspections.
     The 2019 California Fire Code shall be enforced by the Orange County fire authority, which shall be operated under the director of fire services of the Orange County fire authority. The director of fire services of the fire authority may detail such members of the fire authority as inspectors as shall be necessary from time to time. (Ord. 19-06 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-07 § 2, 2016)

 

15.08.030 Amendments to the 2019 California Fire Code.
     Chapter 1 Scope and Administration is adopted in its entirety, with the exception of Section 109, and with the following amendments:

     Section 109 Board of Appeals is deleted without replacement.

     Section 110.4 Violation penalties is amended to read as follows:

 

110.4 Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or shall fail to comply with any issued orders or notices or who shall erect, install, alter, repair or do work in violation of the approved construction documents or directive of the fire code official, or of a permit or certificate used under provisions of this code, shall be subject to penalties assessed as prescribed in the OCFA Prevention Field Services adopted fee schedule. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.

 

     Section 110.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor is hereby added as follows:

 

110.4.2 Infraction and misdemeanor. Persons operating or maintaining any occupancy, premises or vehicle subject to this code that shall permit any fire or life safety hazard to exist on premises under their control shall be guilty of an infraction. Persons who fail to take immediate action to abate a fire or life safety hazard when ordered or notified to do so by the chief or a duly authorized representative are guilty of a misdemeanor.

 

     Chapter 2 Definitions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 202 General Definitions is amended by adding “OCFA,” and “Spark Arrester” as follows:

 

OCFA: Orange County Fire Authority, fire authority having jurisdiction.

 

SPARK ARRESTER. A listed device constructed of noncombustible material specifically for the purpose of meeting one of the following conditions:

1.     Removing and retaining carbon and other flammable particles/debris from the exhaust flow of an internal combustion engine in accordance with California Vehicle Code Section 38366.

2.     Fireplaces that burn solid fuel in accordance with California Building Code Chapter 28.

 

     Chapter 3 General Requirements is adopted in its entirety, with the exception of Sections 308.1.4, 311.5 through 311.5.5, 318, and 319, and with the following amendments:

     Section 304.1.2 Vegetation is amended to read as follows:

 

304.1.2 Vegetation. Weeds, grass, vines or other growth that is capable of being ignited and endangering property, shall be cut down and removed by the owner or occupant of the premises. Vegetation clearance requirement in urban-wildland interface areas shall be in accordance with Chapter 49. Type, amount, arrangement, and maintenance of vegetation in a fuel modification area, interior slope, or similarly hazardous area shall be in accordance with OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline—Technical Design for New Construction, Fuel Modification Plans, and Maintenance Program.”

 

     Section 305.6 Hazardous conditions is added to read as follows:

 

305.6 Hazardous conditions. Outdoor fires burning wood or other solid fuel are not allowed when any of the following conditions applies:

1.     when predicted sustained winds exceed 8 MPH and relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared.

2.     when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or a public announcement is made.

 

No outdoor fires using any fuel type are permitted when predicted sustained winds exceed 20 MPH or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

 

     Section 305.7 Disposal of rubbish is added to read as follows:

 

305.7 Disposal of rubbish. Rubbish, trash or combustible waste material shall be burned only within an approved incinerator and in accordance with Section 307.2.1.

 

     Section 307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies is added to read as follows:

 

307.6 Outdoor Fireplaces, Fire Pits, Fire Rings, or similar devices used at Group R Occupancies. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits, fire rings, or similar exterior devices used at Group R occupancies shall comply with this section.

 

Exception: Barbeques, grills, and other portable devices intended solely for cooking.

 

307.6.1 Gas-fueled devices. Outdoor fireplaces, fire pits and similar devices fueled by natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas are allowed when approved by the Building Department and the device is designed to only burn a gas flame and not wood or other solid fuel. At R-3 occupancies, combustible construction and vegetation shall not be located within three feet of an atmospheric column that extends vertically from the perimeter of the device. At other R occupancies, the minimum distance shall be ten feet. Where a permanent Building Department approved hood and vent is installed, combustible construction may encroach upon this column between the bottom of the hood and the vent opening. Where chimneys or vents are installed, they shall have a spark arrester as defined in Section 202.

 

307.6.2 Devices using wood or fuels other than natural gas or liquefied-petroleum gas. Permanent outdoor fireplaces burning wood or other solid fuel shall be constructed in accordance with the California Building Code with clearance from combustible construction and building openings as required therein. Fires in a fireplace shall be contained within a firebox with an attached chimney. The opening in the face of the firebox shall have an installed and maintained method of arresting sparks.

 

The burning of wood or other solid fuel in a device is not allowed within 25 feet of combustible structures unless within an approved permanent fireplace. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within 25 feet of a structure or to vegetation shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Fires in devices burning wood or solid fuel shall be in accordance with Sections 305, 307, and 308.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Portable fireplaces and fire rings/pits equipped with a device to arrest sparks shall be located at least 3′ from combustible construction at R-3 occupancies.

2.     Portable fireplaces, and fire pits/rings equipped with a device to arrest sparks, shall be located at least 15 feet from combustible structures at other R occupancies.

 

307.6.2.1 Where prohibited. The burning of wood and other solid fuels shall not be conducted within a fuel modification zone, Wildfire Risk Area (WRA), Wildland-Urban Interface Area (WUI), or in locations where conditions could cause the spread of fire to the WRA or WUI.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Permanent fireplaces that are not located in a fuel modification zone.

2.     Where determined by the Fire Code Official that the location or design of the device should reasonably prevent the start of a wildfire.

 

     Section 308.1.4 Open-flame cooking devices is deleted without replacement.

     Section 308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns is amended to read as follows:

 

308.1.6.3 Sky lanterns. A person shall not ignite, release, or cause to be released a sky lantern.

 

     Section 311.5 Placards (including subsections 311.5.1 through 311.5.5) is deleted without replacement.

     Section 318 Laundry Carts is deleted without replacement.

     Section 319 Mobile Food Preparation Vehicles is deleted without replacement.

     Section 321 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction is added to read as follows:

 

321 Fuel Modification Requirements for New Construction. All new structures and facilities adjoining land containing hazardous combustible vegetation shall be approved and in accordance with the requirements of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

     Section 322 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways is added to read as follows:

 

322 Clearance of brush or vegetation growth from roadways. The fire code official is authorized to cause areas within 10 feet (3048 mm) on each side of portions of highways and private streets which are improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular traffic, to be cleared of flammable vegetation and other combustible growth. Measurement shall be from the flow-line or the end of the improved edge of the roadway surfaces.

 

Exception: Single specimens of trees, ornamental shrubbery or cultivated ground cover such as green grass, ivy, succulents or similar plants used as ground covers, provided that they do not form a means of readily transmitting fire.

 

     Section 323 Unusual circumstances is added to read as follows:

 

323 Unusual circumstances. The fire code official may suspend enforcement of the vegetation management requirements and require reasonable alternative measures designed to advance the purpose of this code if determined that in any specific case that any of the following conditions exist:

1.     Difficult terrain.

2.     Danger of erosion.

3.     Presence of plants included in any state and federal resources agencies, California Native Plant Society and county-approved list of wildlife, plants, rare, endangered and/or threatened species.

4.     Stands or groves of trees or heritage trees.

5.     Other unusual circumstances that make strict compliance with the clearance of vegetation provisions undesirable or impractical.

 

     Section 324 Use of equipment is added to read as follows:

 

324 Use of equipment. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be operated in, upon or adjoining any hazardous fire area any internal combustion engine which uses hydrocarbon fuels, unless the engine is equipped with a spark arrester as defined in Section 202 maintained in effective working order, or the engine is constructed, equipped and maintained for the prevention of fire.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Engines used to provide motor power for trucks, truck tractors, buses, and passenger vehicles, except motorcycles, are not subject to this section if the exhaust system is equipped with a muffler as defined in the Vehicle Code of the State of California.

2.     Turbocharged engines are not subject to this section if all exhausted gases pass through the rotating turbine wheel, there is no exhaust bypass to the atmosphere, and the turbocharger is in good mechanical condition.

 

324.1 Equipment and devices generating heat, sparks or open flames. During any time of the year within Wildfire Risk Areas, within or immediately adjacent to any forest- or brush-covered land or non-irrigated grass-covered land, no person shall use or operate any welding equipment, cutting torches, tar pots, grinding devices, or other tools or equipment that may produce a spark, fire, or flame that could result in a wildfire without doing the following:

1.     First clearing away all flammable material, including snags, from the area around such operation for a distance of 30 feet or other approved method to reduce fire spread into the wildlands. If 30 foot clearing cannot be achieved, then an alternate method shall be approved by the AHJ prior to work starting.

2.     Maintain one serviceable round point shovel with an overall length of not less than forty-six (46) inches and one backpack pump water-type fire extinguisher fully equipped and ready for use at the immediate area during the operation.

3.     Stop work when winds are 8 MPH or greater during periods when relative humidity is less than 25%, or a red flag condition has been declared or public announcement is made, when an official sign was caused to be posted by the fire code official, or when such fires present a hazard as determined by the fire code official.

4.     Keep a cell phone nearby and call 911 immediate in case of fire.

 

324.2 Spark arresters. Spark arresters shall comply with Section 202, and when affixed to the exhaust system of engines or vehicles subject to Section 324 shall not be placed or mounted in such a manner as to allow flames or heat from the exhaust system to ignite any flammable material.

 

     Chapter 4: Emergency Planning and Preparedness. Only the sections, subsections, and amendment are adopted as listed below:

401 – 401.9

402

403.2

403.5 – 403.5.4

403.10.2.1.1

403.13 – 403.13.3

404.5 – 404.6.6

407

 

     Section 407.5 is amended to read as follows:

 

407.5 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement. Where required by the fire code official, each application for a permit shall OCFA’s Chemical Classification Packet in accordance with Section 5001.5.2.

 

     Chapter 5 Fire Service Features is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 501.1 Scope is amended to read as follows:

 

501.1 Scope. Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises shall comply with this chapter and, where required by the fire code official, with OCFA Guideline B-09, “Fire Master Plan for Commercial & Residential Development.” Fire service features for buildings, structures and premises located in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone shall also comply with OCFA Guideline B-09a, “Fire Safe Development in State Responsibility Areas, and Local Responsibility Areas designated as Very High Hazard Fire Severity Zone”.

 

     Section 510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings is amended to read as follows:

 

510.1 Emergency responder radio coverage in new buildings. All new buildings shall have approved radio coverage for emergency responders within the building based upon the existing coverage levels of the public safety communication systems utilized by the jurisdiction, measured at the exterior of the building. This section shall not require improvement of the existing public safety communication systems. The Emergency Responder Radio Coverage System shall comply with the Orange County Sheriff’s Department, Communications and Technology Division guidelines and specifications and, where the functionality or performance requirements in the California Fire Code are more stringent, this code.

 

Exceptions:

1.     In buildings or structures where it is determined by the fire code official that the radio coverage system is not needed, including but not limited to the following:

a.    Existing buildings or structures, unless required by the Building Official and OCFA for buildings and structures undergoing extensive remodel and/or expansion.

b.   Elevators.

c.    Structures that meet all of the following:

i.      Three stories or less, and

ii.     Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iii.    Do not exceed 50,000 square feet on any single story.

d.   Structures that meet all of the following:

i.     Residential structures four stories or less, and

ii.    Constructed of wood, and

iii.   Do not have subterranean storage or parking, and

iv.    Are not built integral to an above ground multi-story parking structure.

        Should a structure that is three stories or less and 50,000 square feet or smaller on any single story include subterranean storage or parking, then this chapter shall apply only to the subterranean areas.

2.     In facilities where emergency responder radio coverage is required and such systems, components or equipment required could have a negative impact on the normal operations of the facility, the fire code official shall have the authority to accept an automatically activated emergency radio coverage system.

 

     Section 510.2 Emergency responder radio coverage in existing buildings is deleted without replacement:

     Section 510.3 Permit required is deleted without replacement.

     Chapter 9 Fire Protection and Life Safety Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 903.2 Where required is amended to read as follows:

 

903.2 Where required. Approved automatic sprinkler systems in buildings and structures shall be provided when one of the following conditions exists:

1.     New Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of Sections 903.2.1 through 903.2.19 an automatic fire-extinguishing system shall also be installed in all occupancies when the total building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2) as defined in Section 202, regardless of fire areas or allowable area.

 

        Exception: Subject to approval by the Fire Code Official, open parking garages in accordance with Section 406.5 of the California Building Code.

 

2.     Existing Buildings: Notwithstanding any applicable provisions of this code, an automatic sprinkler system shall be provided in an existing building when an addition occurs and when one of the following conditions exists:

a.    When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area, and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2) as defined in Section 202; or

b.    When an addition exceeds 2,000 square feet and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet.

c.    An additional story is added above the second floor regardless of fire areas or allowable area.

Exception: Additions to Group R-3 occupancies shall comply with Section 903.2.8(2).

 

     Section 903.2.8 Group R is amended to read as follows:

 

903.2.8 Group R. An automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3 shall be provided throughout all buildings with a Group R fire area as follows:

1.     New Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout all new buildings.

2.     Existing R-3 Buildings: An automatic sprinkler system shall be installed throughout when one of the following conditions exists:

a.   When an addition is 33% or more of the existing building area and the resulting building area exceeds 5,000 square feet (465 m2) as defined in Section 202; or

b.  An addition when the existing building is already provided with automatic sprinklers; or

c.   When an existing Group R Occupancy is being substantially renovated, and where the scope of the renovation is such that the Building Code Official determines that the complexity of installing a sprinkler system would be similar as in a new building.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies and not housing bedridden clients, not housing non-ambulatory clients above the first floor, and not housing clients above the second floor.

2.     Existing Group R-3 occupancies converted to Group R-3.1 occupancies housing only one bedridden client and complying with Section 435.8.3.3 of the California Building Code.

3.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13113, occupancies housing ambulatory children only, none of whom are mentally ill children or children with intellectual disabilities, and the buildings or portions thereof in which such children are housed are not more than two stories in height, and building or portions thereof housing such children have an automatic fire alarm system activated by approved smoke detectors.

4.     Pursuant to Health and Safety Code, Section 13143.6, occupancies licensed for protective social care which house ambulatory clients only, none of whom is a child (under the age of 18 years), or who is elderly (65 years of age or over).

 

When not used in accordance with Section 504.2 or 506.3 of the California Building Code, an automatic sprinkler system installed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.2 shall be allowed in Group R-2.1 occupancies.

 

An automatic sprinkler system designed in accordance with Section 903.3.1.3 shall not be utilized in Group R-2.1 or R-4 occupancies.

 

     Section 903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems is added to read as follows:

 

903.3.5.3 Hydraulically calculated systems. The design of hydraulically calculated fire sprinkler systems shall not exceed 90% of the water supply capacity.

 

Exception: When static pressure exceeds 100 psi, and when required by the fire code official, the fire sprinkler system shall not exceed the water supply capacity specified by Table 903.3.5.3.

 



 

     Chapter 11 Construction Requirements for Existing Buildings. Only those sections and subsections are adopted as listed below:

1103.7

1103.7.3

1103.7.3.1

1103.7.8 – 1103.7.8.2

1103.7.9 – 1103.7.9.10

1103.8 – 1103.8.5.3

1103.9.1

1107

1113

1114

1115

1116

 

     Chapter 12 Energy Systems is adopted in its entirety with the following amendment:

     Section 1201.1.1 Other systems is added to read as follows:

 

1201.1.1 Other systems. Where required by the fire code official, other systems and operations including but not limited to battery systems assembly, battery reconditioning and storage, research and development of battery storage systems, electric vehicle manufacturing and testing, and battery charging systems for cars and carts inside of buildings or structures, shall comply with this chapter.

 

Exception: When approved by the fire code official, charging stations for electric vehicles located in open parking garages of Type I or II construction.

 

     Chapter 25 Fruit and Crop Ripening is deleted in its entirety.

     Chapter 26 Fumigation and Insecticidal Fogging is deleted in its entirety.

     Chapter 28 Lumber Yards and Agro-Industrial, Solid Biomass and Woodworking Facilities is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 2801.2 Permit is amended to read as follows:

 

2801.2 Permit. Permits shall be required as set forth in Sections 105.6 and 105.6.29.

 

     Section 2808.2 Storage site is amended to read as follows:

 

2808.2 Storage site. Storage sites shall be level and on solid ground, elevated soil lifts or other all-weather surface. Sites shall be thoroughly cleaned and approval obtained from the fire code official before transferring wood products to the site.

 

     Section 2808.3 Size of piles is amended to read as follows:

 

2808.3 Size of piles. Piles shall not exceed 15 feet in height, 50 feet in width and 100 feet in length.

 

Exception: The fire code official is authorized to allow the pile size to be increased where a fire protection plan is provided for approval that includes, but is not limited to, the following:

1.     Storage yard areas and materials-handling equipment selection, design and arrangement shall be based upon sound fire prevention and protection principles.

2.     Factor that lead to spontaneous heating shall be identified in the plan, and control of the various factors shall be identified and implemented, including provisions for monitoring the internal condition of the pile.

3.     The plan shall include means for early fire detection and reporting to the public fire department; and facilities needed by the fire department for fire extinguishment including a water supply and fire hydrants.

4.     Fire apparatus access roads around the piles and access roads to the top of the piles shall be established, identified and maintained.

5.     Regular yard inspections by trained personnel shall be included as part of an effective fire prevention maintenance program.

Additional fire protection called for in the plan shall be provided and shall be installed in accordance with this code. The increase of the pile size shall be based upon the capabilities of the installed fire protection system and features.

 

     Section 2808.4 Pile separation is amended to read as follows:

 

2808.4. Pile separation. Piles shall be separated from adjacent piles by minimum distance of 20 feet. Additionally, piles shall have a minimum separation of 100 feet from combustible vegetation.

 

     Section 2808.7 Pile fire protection is amended to read as follows:

 

2808.7 Pile fire protection. Automatic sprinkler protection shall be provided in conveyor tunnels and combustible enclosures that pass under a pile. Combustible conveyor systems and enclosed conveyor systems shall be equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system. Oscillating sprinklers with a sufficient projectile reach are required to maintain a 40% to 60% moisture content and wet down burning/smoldering areas.

 

     Section 2808.9 Material-handling equipment is amended to read as follows:

 

2808.9 Material-handling equipment. All material-handling equipment operated by an internal combustion engine shall be provided and maintained with an approved spark arrester. Approved material-handling equipment shall be available for moving wood chips, hogged material, wood fines and raw product during fire-fighting operations.

 

     Section 2808.11 Temperature control is added to read as follows:

 

2808.11 Temperature control. The temperature shall be monitored and maintained as specified in Sections 2808.11.1 and 2808.11.2.

 

     Section 2808.11.1 Pile temperature control is added to read as follows:

 

2808.11.1 Pile temperature control. Piles shall be rotated when internal temperature readings are in excess of 165 degrees Fahrenheit.

 

     Section 2808.11.2 New material temperature control is added to read as follows:

 

2808.11.2 New material temperature control. New loads delivered to the facility shall be inspected and tested at the facility entry prior to taking delivery. Material with temperature exceeding 165 degrees Fahrenheit shall not be accepted on the site. New loads shall comply with the requirements of this chapter and be monitored to verify that the temperature remains stable.

 

     Section 2808.12 Water availability is added to read as follows:

 

2808.12 Water availability. Facilities with over 2500 cubic feet shall provide a water supply. The minimum fire flow shall be no less than 500 GPM @ 20 psi for a minimum of 1 hour duration for pile heights up to 6 feet and 2 hour duration for pile heights over 6 feet. If there is no water purveyor, an alternate water supply with storage tank(s) shall be provided for fire suppression. The water supply tank(s) shall provide a minimum capacity of 2500 gallons per pile (maximum 30,000 gallons) for piles not exceeding 6 feet in height and 5000 gallons per pile (maximum 60,000) for piles exceeding 6 feet in height. Water tank(s) shall not be used for any other purpose unless the required fire flow is left in reserve within the tank at all times. An approved method shall be provided to maintain the required amount of water within the tank(s).

 

     Section 2808.13 Tipping area is added to read as follows:

 

2808.13 Tipping areas shall comply with the following:

1.     Tipping areas shall not exceed a maximum area of 50 feet by 50 feet.

2.     Material within a tipping area shall not exceed 5 feet in height at any time.

3.     Tipping areas shall be separated from all piles by a 20 foot wide fire access lane.

4.     A fire hydrant or approved fire water supply outlet shall be located within 150 feet of all points along the perimeter of the tipping area.

5.     All material within a tipping area shall be processed within 5 days of receipt.

 

     Section 2808.14 Emergency Contact is added to read as follows:

 

2808.14 Emergency Contact. The contact information of a responsible person or persons shall be provided to the Fire Department and shall be posted at the entrance to the facility for responding units. The responsible party should be available to respond to the business in emergency situation.

 

     Chapter 49 Requirements for Wildland-Urban Interface Fire Areas is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 4906.3 Requirements is amended to read as follows:

 

4906.3 Requirements. Hazardous vegetation and fuels around all applicable buildings and structure shall be maintained in accordance with the following laws and regulations:

1.     Public Resources Code, Section 4291.

2.     California Code of Regulations, Title 14, Division 1.5, Chapter 7, Subchapter 3, Section 1299 (see guidance for implementation “General Guideline to Create Defensible Space”).

3.     California Government Code, Section 51182.

4.     California Code of Regulations, Title 19, Division 1, Chapter 7, Subchapter 1, Section 3.07.

5.     OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

 

     Section 4908 Fuel modification requirements for new construction is added to read as follows:

 

4908 Fuel modification requirements for new construction. All new buildings to be built or installed in a Wildfire Risk Area shall comply with the following:

1.     Preliminary fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to or concurrently with the approval of any tentative map.

2.     Final fuel modification plans shall be submitted to and approved by the fire code official prior to the issuance of a grading permit.

3.     The fuel modification plans shall meet the criteria set forth in the Fuel Modification Section of OCFA Guideline C-05 “Vegetation Management Guideline – Technical Design for New Construction Fuel Modification Plans and Maintenance Program.”

1.1   The fuel modification plan shall include provisions for the maintenance of the fuel modification in perpetuity.

4.     The fuel modification plan may be altered if conditions change. Any alterations to the fuel modification areas shall have prior approval from the fire code official.

5.     All elements of the fuel modification plan shall be maintained in accordance with the approved plan and are subject to the enforcement process outlined in the Fire Code.

 

     Chapter 50 Hazardous Materials – General Provisions is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments.

     Section 5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS), is amended to read as follows:

 

5001.5.2 Hazardous Materials Inventory Statement (HMIS). Where required by the fire code official, an application for a permit shall include. Orange County Fire Authority’s Chemical Classification Packet, which shall be completed and approved prior to approval of plans, and/or the storage, use or handling of chemicals on the premises. The Chemical Classification Packet shall include the following information:

1.     Product Name.

2.     Component.

3.     Chemical Abstract Service (CAS) number.

4.     Location where stored or used.

5.     Container size.

6.     Hazard classification.

7.     Amount in storage.

8.     Amount in use-closed systems.

9.     Amount in use-open systems.

 

     Section 5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances is added to read as follows:

 

5003.1.1.1 Extremely Hazardous Substances. No person shall use or store any amount of extremely hazardous substances (EHS) in excess of the disclosable amounts (see Health and Safety Code Section 25500 et seq.) in a residential zoned or any residentially developed property.

 

     Chapter 56 Explosives and Fireworks is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     Section 5608.2 Firing is hereby added to read as follows:

 

5608.2 Firing. All fireworks displays, regardless of mortar, device, or shell size, shall be electrically fired.

 

     Section 5608.3 Application for Permit is added to read as follows:

 

5608.3 Application for Permit. A diagram of the grounds on which the display is to be held showing the point at which the fireworks are to be discharged, the fallout area based on 100 feet per inch of shell size, the location of all buildings, roads, and other means of transportation, the lines behind which the audience will be restrained, the location of all nearby trees, telegraph or telephone line, or other overhead obstructions shall be provided to OCFA.

 

     Chapter 57 Flammable and Combustible Liquids is adopted in its entirety with the exception of Section 5707 with the following amendment:

     Section 5707 On-Demand Mobile Fueling Operations is deleted without replacement.

     Section 5701.1.1 Mobile fueling is added as follows:

 

5701.1.1 Mobile fueling. On-demand mobile fueling of Class I, II, and III liquids into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

     Chapter 58 Flammable Gases and Flammable Cryogenic Fluids is adopted in its entirety with the exception of Section 5809 and with the following amendment:

     Section 5801.1 Scope is amended to read as follows:

 

5801.1 Scope. The storage and use of flammable gases and flammable cryogenic fluids shall be in accordance with this chapter, NFPA 2 and NFPA 55. Compressed gases shall also comply with Chapter 53 and cryogenic fluids shall also comply with Chapter 55. Flammable cryogenic fluids shall comply with Section 5806. Hydrogen motor fuel-dispensing stations and repair garages and their associated above-ground hydrogen storage systems shall also be designed, constructed and maintained in accordance with Chapter 23. Mobile fueling of gaseous and liquid hydrogen, compressed natural gas (CNG), and liquefied natural gas (LNG) into the fuel tanks of vehicles is prohibited.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Gases used as refrigerants in refrigeration systems (see Section 605).

2.     Liquefied petroleum gases and natural gases regulated by Chapter 61.

3.     Fuel-gas systems and appliances regulated under the California Mechanical Code and the California Plumbing Code other than gaseous hydrogen systems and appliances.

4.     Pyrophoric gases in accordance with Chapter 64.

 

     Section 5809 Mobile Gaseous Fueling of Hyrdrogen-Fueled Vehicles is deleted without replacement.

     Chapter 80 Referenced Standards is adopted in its entirety with the following amendments:

     NFPA 13, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems is amended as follows:

     Section 6.7.3 is amended to read as follows:

 

6.7.3 Fire department connections (FDC) shall be of an approved type. The location shall be approved and be no more than 150 feet from a public hydrant. The FDC may be located within 150 feet of a private fire hydrant when approved by the fire code official. The size of piping and the number of 2½″ inlets shall be approved by the fire code official. If acceptable to the water authority, it may be installed on the backflow assembly. Fire department inlet connections shall be painted OSHA safety red or as approved. When the fire sprinkler density design requires more than 500 gpm (including inside hose stream demand), or a standpipe system is included, four 2½″ inlets shall be provided.

 

     Section 8.3.3.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

8.3.3.1 When fire sprinkler systems are installed in shell buildings of undetermined use (Spec Buildings) other than warehouses (S occupancies), fire sprinklers of the quick-response type shall be used. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the fire sprinkler plan is submitted. Sprinklers in light hazard occupancies shall be one of the following:

(1)    Quick-response type as defined in Section 3.6.4.8.

(2)    Residential sprinklers in accordance with the requirements of Section 8.4.5.

(3)    Quick response CMSA sprinklers.

(4)    ESFR sprinklers.

(5)    Standard-response sprinklers used for modifications or additions to existing light hazard systems equipped with standard-response sprinklers.

(6)    Standard-response sprinklers used where individual standard-response sprinklers are replaced in existing light hazard systems.

 

     Section 8.15.1.2.7 is amended to read as follows:

 

8.15.1.2.7 Concealed spaces filled with noncombustible insulation shall not require sprinkler protection when approved by the fire code official.

 

     Section 11.1.1.1 is added to read as follows:

 

11.1.1.1 When fire sprinkler systems are required in buildings of undetermined use other than warehouses, they shall be designed and installed to have a fire sprinkler density of not less than that required for an Ordinary Hazard Group 2 use, with no reduction(s) in density or design area. Warehouse fire sprinkler systems shall be designed to Figure 16.2.1.3.2 (d) curve “G”. Use is considered undetermined if a specific tenant/occupant is not identified at the time the sprinkler plan is submitted. Where a subsequent use or occupancy requires a system with greater capability, it shall be the responsibility of the occupant to upgrade the system to the required density for the new use or occupancy.

 

     Section 11.2.3.1.1.1 is added to read as follows:

 

11.2.3.1.1.1 The available water supply for fire sprinkler system design shall be determined by one of the following methods, as approved by the fire code official:

1)     Subtract the project site elevation from the low water level for the appropriate pressure zone and multiply the result by 0.433;

2)     Use a maximum of 40 psi, if available;

3)     Utilize the OCFA water-flow test form/directions to document a flow test conducted by the local water agency or an approved third party licensed in the State of California.

 

     NFPA 13D 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured Homes is amended as follows:

     Section 7.1.2 is amended to read as follows:

 

7.1.2 The sprinkler system piping shall not have separate control valves installed unless supervised by a central station, proprietary, or remote station alarm service.

 

     NFPA 14, 2013 Edition, Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems is amended as follows:

     Section 7.3.1.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

7.3.1.1 Class I and III Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 18 inches or more than 24 inches above the finished floor. Class II Standpipe hose connections shall be unobstructed and shall be located not less than 3 feet or more than 5 feet above the finished floor.

 

     NFPA 24, 2016 Edition, Standard for the Installation of Private Fire Service Mains and Their Appurtenances is amended as follows:

     Section 6.2.8.1 is added to read as follows:

 

6.2.8.1 All indicating valves controlling fire suppression water supplies shall be painted OSHA red.

 

Exceptions:

1.     Brass or bronze valves on sprinkler risers mounted to the exterior of the building may be left unpainted.

2.     Where OS&Y valves on the detector check assembly are the only control valves, at least one OS&Y valve shall be painted red.

 

     Section 6.2.9 is amended to read as follows:

 

6.2.9 All connections to private fire service mains for fire protection systems shall be arranged in accordance with one of the following so that they can be isolated:

(1)    A post indicator valve installed not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a post indicator valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the post indicator valve

(2)    A wall post indicator valve

(3)    An indicating valve in a pit, installed in accordance with Section 6.4

(4)    A backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve not less than 40 ft (12 m) from the building

(a)    For buildings less than 40 ft (12 m) in height, a backflow preventer with at least one indicating valve shall be permitted to be installed closer than 40 ft (12 m) but at least as far from the building as the height of the wall facing the backflow preventer

(5)    Control valves installed in a fire-rated room accessible from the exterior

(6)    Control valves in a fire-rated stair enclosure accessible from the exterior

 

     Section 10.1.5 is added to read as follows:

 

10.1.5 All ferrous pipe and joints shall be polyethylene encased per AWWA C150, Method A, B, or C. All fittings shall be protected with a loose 8-mil polyethylene tube or sheet. The ends of the tube or sheet shall extend past the joint by a minimum of 12 inches and be sealed with 2 inch wide tape approved for underground use. Galvanizing does not meet the requirements of this section.

 

Exception: 304 or 316 Stainless Steel pipe and fittings.

 

     Section 10.4.1.1 is amended to read as follows:

 

10.4.1.1 All bolted joint accessories shall be cleaned and thoroughly coated with asphalt or other corrosion-retarding material after installation.

 

Exception: Bolted joint accessories made from 304 or 316 stainless steel.

 

     Section 10.4.1.1.1 is added to read as follows:

 

10.4.1.1.1 All bolts used in pipe-joint assembly shall be 316 stainless steel.

 

     Section 10.4.3.2 is hereby deleted and replaced as follows:

 

10.4.3. Where fire service mains enter the building adjacent to the foundation, the pipe may run under a building to a maximum of 24 inches, as measured from the interior face of the exterior wall to the center of the vertical pipe. The pipe under the building or building foundation shall be 304 or 316 stainless steel and shall not contain mechanical joints or it shall comply with Sections 10.4.3.2.1 through 10.4.3.2.4.

 

     Appendix B is adopted in its entirety with amendments outlined in OCFA Guideline B-09. (Ord. 19-06 § 2, 2019; Ord. 16-07 § 2, 2016)

Chapter 15.10 ADOPTION OF HOUSING LAW REGULATIONS
15.10.010 Adoption of Housing Law Regulations.
     A.    The State Housing Law Regulations found in the California Code of Regulations at Title 25, Division 1, Chapter 1, Subchapter 1, are hereby adopted by reference and shall apply as the Housing Law of the City of Los Alamitos, as specified in Section 6 thereof.

     B.     In the case of any conflict between the regulations set forth in the Housing Law and the Codes adopted pursuant to Chapters 15.04 and 15.08 of this code, the latter provisions shall control. (Ord. 16-06 § 3, 2016; Ord. 13-07 § 3, 2013)

Chapter 15.12 BUILDING MOVING PERMITS
15.12.010 Required.
     No person shall move any building, structure or portion thereof, into the city or relocate any building, structure or portion thereof, within the city, or cause the same to be done, without obtaining a separate building moving permit for each building, structure or portion thereof, from the city council. (Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

 

15.12.020 Application.
     To obtain a building moving permit, the applicant shall file an application in writing. Every such application shall furnish the following information:

     A.    Location: address, assessor’s parcel number and legal description where the building or structure to be moved is to be placed;

     B.     The proposed use or occupancy for the building;

     C.     The address and description location of the building or structure to be moved;

     D.    All dimensions and the structural type of the building or structure;

     E.     The nature of repairs, alterations or additions;

     F.     Valuation of the proposed work;

     G.    A plot plan drawn to a scale of not larger than one-eighth inch to the foot, dimensioning all existing and proposed building locations, yards and setbacks; and

     H.    One eight by ten inch photograph of the building. (Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

 

15.12.030 Posting of moving notice.
     When an application is filed, moving notice cards shall be prepared and posted within forty-eight (48) hours from the time of the filing.

     Moving notice cards shall be not less than one foot square in area, shall be headed “Notice of Moving and Relocation” in blackfaced type letters of not less than two inches in height, and there shall be printed or typewritten upon such cards the following information:

     A.    The address from which and to which the structure is proposed to be moved with a description of the structure;

     B.     If a written protest to such moving, signed by one or more persons who own real property within three hundred (300) feet of the location to which such structure is to be moved, is filed in the office of the city clerk on or before a date therein named then such protest shall be heard and determined by the city council at its first regular meeting after the expiration of the date set for filing protests;

     C.     One moving notice card shall be located and posted in a conspicuous place on the subject lot. If it is proposed to move the building or structure into a corner lot, a second moving notice card shall be located and posted facing the secondary street. One moving notice card shall be posted on the front of the building or structure to be moved. The moving notice cards shall remain posted for a period of seven days. (Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

 

15.12.040 Fees.
     For a permit to move a building from outside the city to within the city, a sum as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city with the application for such permit. If the application is denied, a sum as established by resolution of the city council will be refunded. For a permit to relocate any building within the city, a sum as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city for a permit. If the application is denied, a sum as established by resolution of the city council will be refunded to the applicant. If any building is to be relocated upon the same parcel, a fee as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid to the city for a permit. (Ord. 661 § 6, 2002; Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

 

15.12.050 Hearing by city council on application and protests— Issuance—Denial.
     A.    The city clerk shall present the application to the city council at the first regular meeting following the expiration of the seven-day posting period, and shall file with the city council any protests that shall have been filed with the city clerk. The city council shall take no action until they receive recommendations from various city departments. After the recommendations have been received, the city council at its next meeting shall hear the application and may grant or deny, or may appoint a committee to investigate the application.

     B.     In the event the city council denies an application to move a building or structure, a second application to move the same building or structure to the same property and address shall not be applied for within six months after the date of the denial.

     C.     If the city council authorized the moving of a building or structure to the proposed new location after a hearing, a permit shall be issued; provided, that all other requirements of this chapter have been fulfilled. (Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

 

15.12.060 Performance bond required.
     Any applicant for a permit under this chapter, within three days after the granting of a relocation permit, shall furnish the city clerk with a performance bond in a sufficient amount, to be determined by the building official, to guarantee the completion of construction and final building, plumbing and electrical inspections within one hundred eighty (180) days of the granting of such permit. If the applicant fails within the three-day period to present to the city clerk such bond, the relocation permit shall be null and void. (Ord. 561 § 1, 1992; Ord. 531 § 1, 1990)

Chapter 15.14 PERMIT PROCESS FOR ELECTRIC VEHICLE CHARGING STATIONS
15.14.010 Intent and purpose.
     The purpose of this chapter is to promote and encourage the use of electric vehicles by creating an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations while promoting public health and safety and preventing specific adverse impacts in the installation and use of such charging stations. This chapter is also purposed to comply with California Government Code Section 65850.7. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

 

15.14.020 Definitions.
     “Electric vehicle charging station” or “charging station” means any level of electric vehicle supply equipment station that is designed and built in compliance with Article 625 of the California Electrical Code, as it reads on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, and delivers electricity from a source outside an electric vehicle into a plug-in electric vehicle.

     “Electronic submittal” means the utilization of one or more of the following:

     1.     Electronic mail or email.

     2.     The Internet.

     3.     Facsimile.

     “Specific, adverse impact” means a significant, quantifiable, direct, and unavoidable impact, based on objective, identified, and written public health or safety standards, policies, or conditions as they existed on the date the application was deemed complete. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

 

15.14.030 Applicability.
     Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall implement an expedited, streamlined permitting process for electric vehicle charging stations, and adopt a checklist of all requirements with which electric vehicle charging stations shall comply with in order to be eligible for expedited review. The expedited, streamlined permitting process and checklist may refer to the recommendations contained in the most current version of the “Plug-In Electric Vehicle Infrastructure Permitting Checklist” of the “Zero-Emission Vehicles in California: Community Readiness Guidebook” as published by the Governor’s Office of Planning and Research. The city’s adopted checklist shall be published on the city’s website. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

 

15.14.040 Electrical vehicle charging station requirements.
     A.    Electric vehicle charging station equipment shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code, the Society of Automotive Engineers, the National Electrical Manufacturers Association, and accredited testing laboratories such as Underwriters Laboratories, and rules of the Public Utilities Commission or a municipal electric utility company regarding safety and reliability.

     B.     Installation of electric vehicle charging stations and associated wiring, bonding, disconnecting means and overcurrent protective devices shall meet the requirements of Article 625 and all applicable provisions of the California Electrical Code.

     C.     Installation of electric vehicle charging stations shall be incorporated into the load calculations of all new or existing electrical services and shall meet the requirements of the California Electrical Code. Electric vehicle charging equipment shall be considered a continuous load.

     D.    Anchorage of either floor-mounted or wall-mounted electric vehicle charging stations shall meet the requirements of the California Building or Residential Code as applicable per occupancy, and the provisions of the manufacturer’s installation instructions. Mounting of charging stations shall not adversely affect building elements. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

 

15.14.050 Duties of building department and building official.
     A.    Prior to submitting an application for processing, the applicant shall verify that the installation of an electric vehicle charging station will not have specific, adverse impact to public health and safety and building occupants. Verification by the applicant includes, but is not limited to: electrical system capacity and loads; electrical system wiring, bonding and overcurrent protection; building infrastructure affected by charging station equipment and associated conduits; areas of charging station equipment and vehicle parking.

     B.     A permit application that satisfies the information requirements in the city’s adopted checklist shall be deemed complete and be promptly processed. Upon confirmation by the building official that the permit application and supporting documents meets the requirements of the city adopted checklist, and is consistent with all applicable laws and health and safety standards, the building official shall, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, approve the application and issue all necessary permits. Such approval does not authorize an applicant to energize or utilize the electric vehicle charging station until approval is granted by the city. If the building official determines that the permit application is incomplete, he or she shall issue a written correction notice to the applicant, detailing all deficiencies in the application and any additional information required to be eligible for expedited permit issuance.

     C.     Consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall allow for electronic submittal of permit applications covered by this chapter and associated supporting documentations. In accepting such permit applications, the building official shall also accept electronic signatures on all forms, applications, and other documentation in lieu of a wet signature by any applicant. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

 

15.14.060 Expedited permit review and inspection requirements.
     A.    It is the intent of this chapter to encourage the installation of electric vehicle charging stations by removing obstacles to permitting for charging stations so long as the action does not supersede the building official’s authority to address higher priority life-safety situations. If the building official makes a finding based on substantial evidence that the electric vehicle charging station could have a specific adverse impact upon the public health or safety, as defined in this chapter, the city may require the applicant to apply for a use permit.

     B.     In the technical review of a charging station, consistent with Government Code Section 65850.7, the building official shall not condition the approval for any electric vehicle charging station permit on the approval of such a system by an association, as that term is defined by Civil Code Section 4080. (Ord. 2017-04 § 3, 2017)

Chapter 15.16 FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
15.16.010 Statutory authorization.
     The legislature of the state of California has in Government Code Sections 65302, 65560, and 65800 conferred upon local governments the authority to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city of Los Alamitos of Orange County does hereby adopt the following floodplain management regulations. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.020 Findings of fact.
     A.    The flood hazard areas of Orange County are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety, and general welfare.

     B.     These flood losses are caused by uses that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or protected from flood damage. The cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities also contributes to flood losses. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.030 Statement of purpose.
     It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by legally enforceable regulations applied uniformly throughout the community to all publicly and privately owned land within flood prone, mudslide (i.e., mudflow) or flood-related erosion areas. These regulations are designed to:

     A.    Protect human life and health;

     B.     Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;

     C.     Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;

     D.    Minimize prolonged business interruptions;

     E.     Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; and streets and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;

     F.     Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future blighted areas caused by flood damage;

     G.    Ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and

     H.    Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.040 Methods of reducing flood losses.
     In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes regulations to:

     A.    Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or flood heights or velocities;

     B.     Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;

     C.     Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel floodwaters;

     D.    Control filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and

     E.     Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.050 Definitions.
     Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter the most reasonable application.

     “A zone”—See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Accessory structure” means a structure that is either:

     1.     Solely for the parking of no more than two cars; or

     2.     A small, low cost shed for limited storage, less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet, and one thousand five hundred dollars ($1,500.00) in value.

     “Accessory use” means a use which is incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the parcel of land on which it is located.

     “Alluvial fan” means a geomorphologic feature characterized by a cone or fan shaped deposit of boulders, gravel, and fine sediments that have been eroded from mountain slopes, transported by flood flows, and then deposited on the valley floors, and which is subject to flash flooding, high velocity flows, debris flows, erosion, sediment movement and deposition, and channel migration.

     “Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.

     “Appeal” means a request for a review of the floodplain administrator’s interpretation of any provision of this chapter.

     “Area of shallow flooding” means a designated AO or AH zone on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). The base flood depths range from one to three feet; a clearly defined channel does not exist; the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate; and velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

     “Area of special flood hazard”—See “Special flood hazard area.”

     “Base flood” means a flood which has a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the “100 year flood”). Base flood is the term used throughout this chapter.

     “Base flood elevation” (BFE) means the elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for zones AE, AH, A1-30, VE and V1-V30 that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

     “Basement” means any area of the building having its floor subgrade (i.e., below ground level) on all sides.

     “Building”—See “Structure.”

     “Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

     “Encroachment” means the advance or infringement of uses, plant growth, fill, excavation, buildings, permanent structures, or development into a floodplain which may impede or alter the flow capacity of a floodplain.

     “Existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed prior to adoption of this chapter.

     “Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision” means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

     “Flood,” “flooding,” or “floodwater” means:

     1.     A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of inland or tidal waters; the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source; and/or mudslides (i.e., mudflows); and

     2.     The condition resulting from flood-related erosion.

     “Flood Boundary and Floodway Map (FBFM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the floodway.

     “Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

     “Flood Insurance Study” means the official report provided by the Federal Insurance Administration that includes flood profiles, the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the water surface elevation of the base flood.

     “Floodplain” or “flood-prone area” means any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source. See “Flooding.”

     “Floodplain administrator” is the community official designated by title to administer and enforce the floodplain management regulations.

     “Floodplain management” means the operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage and preserving and enhancing, where possible, natural resources in the floodplain, including, but not limited to, emergency preparedness plans, flood control works, floodplain management regulations, and open space plans.

     “Floodplain management regulations” means this chapter and other zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as grading and erosion control) and other application of police power which control development in flood prone areas. This term describes federal, state, or local regulations in any combination thereof which provide standards for preventing and reducing flood loss and damage.

     “Floodproofing” means any combination of structural and nonstructural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents. For guidelines on dry and wet floodproofing, see FEMA Technical Bulletins TB 1-93, TB 3-93, and TB 7-93.

     “Floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. Also referred to as “regulatory floodway.”

     “Floodway fringe” is that area of the floodplain on either side of the “regulatory floodway” where encroachment may be permitted.

     “Fraud and victimization” as related to Sections 15.16.230 through 15.16.250 of this chapter means that the variance granted must not cause fraud on or victimization of the public. In examining this requirement, the city of Los Alamitos will consider the fact that every newly constructed building adds to government responsibilities and remains a part of the community for fifty (50) to one hundred (100) years. Buildings that are permitted to be constructed below the base flood elevation are subject during all those years to increased risk of damage from floods, while future owners of the property and the community as a whole are subject to all the costs, inconvenience, danger, and suffering that those increased flood damages bring. In addition, future owners may purchase the property, unaware that it is subject to potential flood damage, and can be insured only at very high flood insurance rates.

     “Functionally dependent use” means a use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, and does not include long term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

     “Governing body” is the local governing unit, i.e., county or municipality, that is empowered to adopt and implement regulations to provide for the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry.

     “Hardship” as related to Sections 15.16.230 through 15.16.250 of this chapter means the exceptional hardship that would result from a failure to grant the requested variance. The city of Los Alamitos requires that the variance be exceptional, unusual, and peculiar to the property involved. Mere economic or financial hardship alone is not exceptional. Inconvenience, aesthetic considerations, physical handicaps, personal preferences, or the disapproval of one’s neighbors likewise cannot, as a rule, qualify as an exceptional hardship. All of these problems can be resolved through other means without granting a variance, even if the alternative is more expensive, or requires the property owner to build elsewhere or put the parcel to a different use than originally intended.

     “Highest adjacent grade” means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

     “Historic structure” means any structure that is:

     1.     Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register;

     2.     Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;

     3.     Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or

     4.     Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.

     “Levee” means a man-made structure; usually an earthen embankment designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

     “Levee system” means a flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accord with sound engineering practices.

     “Lowest floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement (see “basement” definition).

     1.     An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure below the lowest floor that is usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building’s lowest floor provided it conforms to applicable non-elevation design requirements, including, but not limited to:

     a.     The flood openings standard in Section 15.16.170(C)(3);

     b.     The anchoring standards in Section 15.16.170(A);

     c.     The construction materials and methods standards in Section 15.16.170(B); and

     d.     The standards for utilities in Section 15.16.180.

     2.     For residential structures, all subgrade enclosed areas are prohibited as they are considered to be basements (see “basement” definition). This prohibition includes below-grade garages and storage areas.

     “Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities. The term “manufactured home” does not include a “recreational vehicle.”

     “Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

     “Market value” is defined in the Orange County substantial damage/improvement procedures. See Section 15.16.140(B)(1).

     “Mean sea level” means, for purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

     “New construction,” for floodplain management purposes, means structures for which the “start of construction” commenced on or prior to adoption of this chapter, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

     “New manufactured home park or subdivision” means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or prior to adoption of this chapter.

     “Obstruction” includes, but is not limited to, any dam, wall, wharf, embankment, levee, dike, pile, abutment, protection, excavation, channelization, bridge, conduit, culvert, building, wire, fence, rock, gravel, refuse, fill, structure, vegetation or other material in, along, across or projecting into any watercourse which may alter, impede, retard or change the direction and/or velocity of the flow of water, or due to its location, its propensity to snare or collect debris carried by the flow of water, or its likelihood of being carried downstream.

     “One hundred year flood” or “100 year flood”—See “Base flood.”

     “Program deficiency” means a defect in a community’s floodplain management regulations or administrative procedures that impairs effective implementation of those floodplain management regulations.

     “Public safety and nuisance,” as related to Sections 15.16.230 through 15.16.250 of this chapter, means that the granting of a variance must not result in anything which is injurious to safety or health of an entire community or neighborhood, or any considerable number of persons, or unlawfully obstructs the free passage or use, in the customary manner, of any navigable lake, or river, bay, stream, canal, or basin.

     “Recreational vehicle” means a vehicle which is:

     1.     Built on a single chassis;

     2.     Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;

     3.     Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and,

     4.     Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.

     “Regulatory floodway” means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.

     “Remedy a violation” means to bring the structure or other development into compliance with state or local floodplain management regulations, or if this is not possible, to reduce the impacts of its noncompliance. Ways that impacts may be reduced include protecting the structure or other affected development from flood damages, implementing the enforcement provisions of this chapter or otherwise deterring future similar violations, or reducing state or federal financial exposure with regard to the structure or other development.

     “Riverine” means relating to, formed by, or resembling a river (including tributaries), stream, brook, etc.

     “Sheet flow area”—See “Area of shallow flooding.”

     “Special flood hazard area (SFHA)” means an area in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It is shown on an FHBM or FIRM as zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.

     “Start of construction” includes substantial improvement and other proposed new development and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within one hundred eighty (180) days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

     “Structure” means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground; this includes a gas or liquid storage tank or a manufactured home.

     “Substantial damage” means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

     “Substantial improvement” means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the “start of construction” of the improvement. This term includes structures which have incurred “substantial damage,” regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:

     1.     Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or

     2.     Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a “historic structure.”

     “Variance” means a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter which permits construction in a manner that would otherwise be prohibited by this chapter.

     “Violation” means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with this chapter. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

     “Water surface elevation” means the height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.

     “Watercourse” means a lake, river, creek, stream, wash, arroyo, channel, or other topographic feature on or over which waters flow at least periodically. Watercourse includes specifically designated areas in which substantial flood damage may occur. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.060 Lands to which this chapter applies.
     This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of Orange County. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.070 Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard.
     The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in the “Flood Insurance Study (FIS) for Orange County, California and Incorporated Areas,” revised September 15, 1989, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) and Flood Boundary and Floodway Maps (FBFMs), and all subsequent amendments and/or revisions, are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. This FIS and attendant mapping is the minimum area of applicability of this chapter and may be supplemented by studies for other areas which allow implementation of this chapter and which are recommended to the city of Los Alamitos by the floodplain administrator. The study, FIRMs and FBFMs are on file at Public Works Department, 3191 Katella Avenue, Los Alamitos, CA 90720. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.080 Compliance.
     No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. Violation of the requirements (including violations of conditions and safeguards) shall constitute a misdemeanor. Nothing herein shall prevent the city of Los Alamitos from taking such lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
     This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.100 Interpretation.
     In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:

     A.    Considered as minimum requirements;

     B.     Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and

     C.     Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.110 Warning and disclaimer of liability.
     The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of city of Los Alamitos, any officer or employee thereof, the state of California, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.120 Severability.
     This chapter and the various parts thereof are hereby declared to be severable. Should any section of this chapter be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the chapter as a whole, or any portion thereof other than the section so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.130 Designation of the floodplain administrator.
     The director of community development is hereby appointed to administer, implement, and enforce this chapter by granting or denying development permits in accord with its provisions. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.140 Duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator.
     The duties and responsibilities of the floodplain administrator shall include, but not be limited to the following:

     A. Permit Review. Review all development permits to determine:

     1.     Permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, including determination of substantial improvement and substantial damage of existing structures;

     2.     All other required state and federal permits have been obtained;

     3.     The site is reasonably safe from flooding;

     4.     The proposed development does not adversely affect the carrying capacity of areas where base flood elevations have been determined but a floodway has not been designated. This means that the cumulative effect of the proposed development when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within Orange County; and

     5.     All letters of map revision (LOMRs) for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on conditional letters of map revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

     B.     Development of Substantial Improvement and Substantial Damage Procedures.

     1.     Using FEMA publication 213, “Answers to Questions About Substantially Damaged Buildings,” develop detailed procedures for identifying and administering requirements for substantial improvement and substantial damage, to include defining “market value.”

     2.     Assure procedures are coordinated with other departments/divisions and implemented by community staff.

     C.     Review, Use and Development of Other Base Flood Data. When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 15.16.070, the floodplain administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal or state agency, or other source, in order to administer Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.220.

     NOTE: A base flood elevation may be obtained using one of two methods from FEMA publication 265, “Managing Floodplain Development in Approximate Zone A Areas – A Guide for Obtaining and Developing Base (100-year) Flood Elevations” dated July 1995.

     D.    Notification of Other Agencies.

     1.     Alteration or relocation of a watercourse:

     a.     Notify adjacent communities and the California Department of Water Resources prior to alteration or relocation;

     b.     Submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency; and

     c.     Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse is maintained.

     2.     Base flood elevation changes due to physical alterations:

     a.     Within six months of information becoming available or project completion, whichever comes first, the floodplain administrator shall submit or assure that the permit applicant submits technical or scientific data to FEMA for a Letter of Map Revision (LOMR).

     b.     All LOMRs for flood control projects are approved prior to the issuance of building permits. Building permits must not be issued based on Conditional Letters of Map Revision (CLOMRs). Approved CLOMRs allow construction of the proposed flood control project and land preparation as specified in the “start of construction” definition.

     Such submissions are necessary so that upon confirmation of those physical changes affecting flooding conditions, risk premium rates and floodplain management requirements are based on current data.

     3.     Changes in Corporate Boundaries. Notify FEMA in writing whenever the corporate boundaries have been modified by annexation or other means and include a copy of a map of the community clearly delineating the new corporate limits.

     E.     Documentation of Floodplain Development. Obtain and maintain for public inspection and make available as needed the following:

     1.     Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(1) and Section 15.16.200 (lowest floor elevations);

     2.     Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(2) (elevation or floodproofing of nonresidential structures);

     3.     Certification required by Section 15.16.170(C)(3) (wet floodproofing standard);

     4.     Certification of elevation required by Section 15.16.190(A)(3) (subdivisions and other proposed development standards);

     5.     Certification required by Section 15.16.220(B) (floodway encroachments); and

     6.     Maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

     F.     Map Determination. Make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions. The person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in Section 15.16.160.

     G.    Remedial Action. Take action to remedy violations of this chapter as specified in Section 15.16.080.

     H.    Biennial Report. Complete and submit Biennial Report to FEMA.

     I.      Planning. Assure community’s general plan is consistent with floodplain management objectives herein. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.150 Development permit.
     A development permit shall be obtained before any construction or other development, including manufactured homes, within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 15.16.070. Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the city of Los Alamitos. The applicant shall provide the following minimum information:

     A.    Plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing:

     1.     Location, dimensions, and elevation of the area in question, existing or proposed structures, storage of materials and equipment and their location;

     2.     Proposed locations of water supply, sanitary sewer, and other utilities;

     3.     Grading information showing existing and proposed contours, any proposed fill, and drainage facilities;

     4.     Location of the regulatory floodway when applicable;

     5.     Base flood elevation information as specified in Section 15.16.070 or Section 15.16.140(C);

     6.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures; and

     7.     Proposed elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed, as required in Section 15.16.170(C)(2) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletin TB 3-93.

     B.     Certification from a registered civil engineer or architect that the nonresidential floodproofed building meets the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.16.170(C)(2).

     C.     For a crawl-space foundation, location and total net area of foundation openings as required in Section 15.16.170(C)(3) of this chapter and detailed in FEMA Technical Bulletins 1-93 and 7-93.

     D.    Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.

     E.     All appropriate certifications listed in Section 15.16.140(E) of this chapter. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.160 Appeals.
     The city of Los Alamitos of Orange County shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.170 Standards of construction.
     In all areas of special flood hazards the following standards are required:

     A.    Anchoring. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.

     B.     Construction Materials and Methods. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures, including manufactured homes, shall be constructed:

     1.     With flood resistant materials, and utility equipment resistant to flood damage for areas below the base flood elevation;

     2.     Using methods and practices that minimize flood damage;

     3.     With electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; and

     4.     Within zones AH or AO, so that there are adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around and away from proposed structures.

     C.     Elevation and Floodproofing.

     1.     Residential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement:

     a.     In AE, AH, A1-30 zones, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.

     b.     In an AO zone, elevated above the highest adjacent grade to a height equal to or exceeding the depth number specified in feet on the FIRM, or elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent grade if no depth number is specified.

     c.     In an A zone, without BFEs specified on the FIRM (unnumbered A zone), elevated to or above the base flood elevation; as determined under Section 15.16.140(C).

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     2.     Nonresidential Construction. All new construction or substantial improvements of nonresidential structures shall either be elevated to conform with Section 15.16.170(C)(1) or:

     a.     Be floodproofed, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, below the elevation recommended under Section 15.16.170(C)(1), so that the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;

     b.     Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and

     c.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect that the standards of Section 15.16.170(C)(2)(a) and (b) are satisfied. Such certification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator.

     3.     Flood Openings. All new construction and substantial improvements of structures with fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor (excluding basements) that are usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, and which are subject to flooding, shall be designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwater. Designs for meeting this requirement must meet the following minimum criteria:

     a.     For non-engineered openings:

     i.      Have a minimum of two openings on different sides having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding;

     ii.     The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade;

     iii.    Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; and

     iv.    Buildings with more than one enclosed area must have openings on exterior walls for each area to allow flood water to directly enter; or

     b.     Be certified by a registered civil engineer or architect.

     4.     Manufactured Homes.

     a.     See Section 15.16.200.

     b.     Garages and Low Cost Accessory Structures.

     i.      Attached Garages.

     (A)   A garage attached to a residential structure, constructed with the garage floor slab below the BFE, must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters. See Section 15.16.170(C)(3). Areas of the garage below the BFE must be constructed with flood-resistant materials. See Section 15.16.170(B).

     (B)   A garage attached to a nonresidential structure must meet the above requirements or be dry floodproofed. For guidance on below grade parking areas, see FEMA Technical Bulletin TB-6.

     ii.     Detached Garages and Accessory Structures.

     (A)   “Accessory structures” used solely for parking (two-car detached garages or smaller) or limited storage (small, low-cost sheds), as defined in Section 15.16.050, may be constructed such that its floor is below the base flood elevation (BFE), provided the structure is designed and constructed in accordance with the following requirements:

     (1)    Use of the accessory structure must be limited to parking or limited storage;

     (2)    The portions of the accessory structure located below the BFE must be built using flood-resistant materials;

     (3)    The accessory structure must be adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement;

     (4)    Any mechanical and utility equipment in the accessory structure must be elevated or floodproofed to or above the BFE;

     (5)    The accessory structure must comply with floodplain encroachment provisions in Section 15.16.220; and

     (6)    The accessory structure must be designed to allow for the automatic entry of floodwaters in accordance with Section 15.16.170(C)(3).

     (B)   Detached garages and accessory structures not meeting the above standards must be constructed in accordance with all applicable standards in Section 15.16.170. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.180 Standards for utilities.
     A.    All new and replacement water supply and sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate:

     1.     Infiltration of flood waters into the systems; and

     2.     Discharge from the systems into flood waters.

     B.     On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them, or contamination from them during flooding. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.190 Standards for subdivisions and other proposed development.
     A.    All new subdivisions proposals and other proposed development, including proposals for manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is the lesser, shall:

     1.     Identify the special flood hazard areas (SFHA) and base flood elevations (BFE).

     2.     Identify the elevations of lowest floors of all proposed structures and pads on the final plans.

     3.     If the site is filled above the base flood elevation, the following as-built information for each structure shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor and provided as part of an application for a letter of map revision based on fill (LOMR-F) to the floodplain administrator:

     a.     Lowest floor elevation;

     b.     Pad elevation;

     c.     Lowest adjacent grade.

     B.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage.

     C.     All subdivision proposals and other proposed development shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage.

     D.    All subdivisions and other proposed development shall provide adequate drainage to reduce exposure to flood hazards. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.200 Standards for manufactured homes.
     A.    All manufactured homes that are placed or substantially improved, on sites located: (1) outside of a manufactured home park or subdivision; (2) in a new manufactured home park or subdivision; (3) in an expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision; or (4) in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision upon which a manufactured home has incurred “substantial damage” as the result of a flood, shall:

     1.     Within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map, be elevated on a permanent foundation such that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated to or above the base flood elevation and be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement.

     B.     All manufactured homes to be placed or substantially improved on sites in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision within zones A1-30, AH, and AE on the community’s Flood Insurance Rate Map that are not subject to the provisions of Section 15.16.200(A) will be securely fastened to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement, and be elevated so that either the:

     1.     Lowest floor of the manufactured home is at or above the base flood elevation; or

     2.     Manufactured home chassis is supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least equivalent strength that are no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade.

     Upon the completion of the structure, the elevation of the lowest floor including basement shall be certified by a registered civil engineer or licensed land surveyor, and verified by the community building inspector to be properly elevated. Such certification and verification shall be provided to the floodplain administrator. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.210 Standards for recreational vehicles.
     A.    All recreational vehicles placed in zones A1-30, AH, and AE will either:

     1.     Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days;

     2.     Be fully licensed and ready for highway use. A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is on its wheels or jacking system, is attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached additions; or

     3.     Meet the permit requirements of Section 15.16.150 of this chapter and the elevation and anchoring requirements for manufactured homes in Section 15.16.200(A). (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.220 Floodways.
     Since floodways are an extremely hazardous area due to the velocity of flood waters which carry debris, potential projectiles, and erosion potential, the following provisions apply:

     A.    Until a regulatory floodway is adopted, no new construction, substantial development, or other development (including fill) shall be permitted within zones A1-30 and AE, unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within Orange County.

     B.     Within an adopted regulatory floodway, Orange County shall prohibit encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development, unless certification by a registered civil engineer is provided demonstrating that the proposed encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.

     C.     If Sections 15.16.220(A) and (B) are satisfied, all new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.220. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.230 Nature of variances.
     The issuance of a variance is for floodplain management purposes only. Insurance premium rates are determined by statute according to actuarial risk and will not be modified by the granting of a variance.

     The variance criteria set forth in this section are based on the general principle of zoning law that variances pertain to a piece of property and are not personal in nature. A variance may be granted for a parcel of property with physical characteristics so unusual that complying with the requirements of this chapter would create an exceptional hardship to the applicant or the surrounding property owners. The characteristics must be unique to the property and not be shared by adjacent parcels. The unique characteristic must pertain to the land itself, not to the structure, its inhabitants, or the property owners.

     It is the duty of the city of Los Alamitos to help protect its citizens from flooding. This need is so compelling and the implications of the cost of insuring a structure built below flood level are so serious that variances from the flood elevation or from other requirements in the flood ordinance are quite rare. The long term goal of preventing and reducing flood loss and damage can only be met if variances are strictly limited. Therefore, the variance guidelines provided in this chapter are more detailed and contain multiple provisions that must be met before a variance can be properly granted. The criteria are designed to screen out those situations in which alternatives other than a variance are more appropriate. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.240 Conditions for variances.
     A.    Generally, variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing that the procedures of Sections 15.16.130 through 15.16.160 and Sections 15.16.170 through 15.16.220 of this chapter have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.

     B.     Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of “historic structures” (as defined in Section 15.16.050 of this chapter) upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.

     C.     Variances shall not be issued within any mapped regulatory floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.

     D.    Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the “minimum necessary” considering the flood hazard, to afford relief. “Minimum necessary” means to afford relief with a minimum of deviation from the requirements of this chapter. For example, in the case of variances to an elevation requirement, this means the city of Los Alamitos need not grant permission for the applicant to build at grade, or even to whatever elevation the applicant proposes, but only to that elevation which the city of Los Alamitos believes will both provide relief and preserve the integrity of the local ordinance.

     E.     Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice over the signature of a community official that:

     1.     The issuance of a variance to construct a structure below the base flood level will result in increased premium rates for flood insurance up to amounts as high as twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for one hundred dollars ($100.00) of insurance coverage, and

     2.     Such construction below the base flood level increases risks to life and property. It is recommended that a copy of the notice shall be recorded by the floodplain administrator in the office of the Orange County recorder and shall be recorded in a manner so that it appears in the chain of title of the affected parcel of land.

     F.     The floodplain administrator will maintain a record of all variance actions, including justification for their issuance, and report such variances issued in its biennial report submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

 

15.16.250 Appeal board.
     A.    In passing upon requests for variances, the city of Los Alamitos shall consider all technical evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other sections of this chapter, and the:

     1.     Danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;

     2.     Danger of life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;

     3.     Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the existing individual owner and future owners of the property;

     4.     Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community;

     5.     Necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable;

     6.     Availability of alternative locations for the proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;

     7.     Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development;

     8.     Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area;

     9.     Safety of access to the property in time of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;

     10.   Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and sediment transport of the floodwaters expected at the site; and

     11.   Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water system, and streets and bridges.

     B.     Variances shall only be issued upon:

     1.     Showing of good and sufficient cause;

     2.     Determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional “hardship” to the applicant; and

     3.     Determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, create a nuisance (see “Public safety and nuisance”), cause “fraud and victimization” of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.

     C.     Variances may be issued for new construction, substantial improvement, and other proposed new development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that the provisions of Sections 15.16.250(A) through (D) are satisfied and that the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and does not result in additional threats to public safety and does not create a public nuisance.

     D.    Upon consideration of the factors of 15.16.240(A) and the purposes of this chapter, the city of Los Alamitos may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 09-16 § 1, 2009)

Title 16 SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS
Chapter 16.06 TYPES OF MAPS
Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE MAPS—REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING
Chapter 16.10 TENTATIVE MAPS—PROCEDURES
Chapter 16.12 STANDARDS OF DESIGN
Chapter 16.14 DEDICATIONS
Chapter 16.16 IMPROVEMENTS, MONUMENTATION, AND SECURITY
Chapter 16.18 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK FACILITIES AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES
Chapter 16.20 MAJOR THOROUGHFARE FEES
Chapter 16.22 TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
Chapter 16.24 PARCEL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 16.26 FINAL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
Chapter 16.28 WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS
Chapter 16.30 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
Chapter 16.32 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
Chapter 16.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
Chapter 16.36 MERGER OF LOTS
Chapter 16.38 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Chapter 16.40 NOTICES OF VIOLATION

Chapter 16.02 GENERAL PROVISIONS
16.02.010 Title.
This title may be cited as the Los Alamitos Subdivision Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.020 Purposes.
A.    The purpose of this title is to provide regulations and controls for the design and improvement of subdivisions in the City, in accordance with the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.).

B.     Other purposes of this title are to:

1.     Implement the General Plan;

2.     Provide regulations and controls, within the law, over the use of land in the City for the health, safety, and welfare of present and future residents; and

3.     Provide a procedure for lot line adjustments and mergers in the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.030 Prohibitions.
A.    No person shall offer to sell or lease, contract to sell or lease, sell or lease, finance any lot or lots of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy, for which a final tract map is required by this Code, until such map, in full compliance with the provisions of this Municipal Code and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the City Clerk.

B.     No person shall sell, lease, or finance any lot or lots of real property or commence construction of any building for sale, lease, or financing thereon, except for model homes, or allow occupancy, for which a parcel map is required by this Municipal Code, until such map, in full compliance with the provisions of this Municipal Code, and the Subdivision Map Act, has been filed for record by the City Clerk.

C.     No permit to develop any real property which has been divided or which has resulted from a division in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title shall be granted by any officer or employee of the City or by the Planning Commission or the City Council unless a certificate of compliance has been issued and recorded for the property to be developed in accordance with this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.040 Development Services Director.
Any reference to the “Director” in this title shall be to the City’s Development Services Director or that person designated by the Director holding the appropriate licenses or credentials required by the Subdivision Map Act. The Director shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this title. The Director is designated as an advisory agency as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, and shall have the authority to review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny amendments to approved tentative maps, certificates of compliance and conditional certificates of compliance, lot line adjustments, mergers of lots, and subdivision improvement plans. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.050 Planning Commission.
A.    The Planning Commission is designated as an advisory agency as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act, and shall have the authority to review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny tentative parcel maps and waivers of parcel maps.

B.     The Planning Commission shall review and make recommendations to the City Council on residential condominium conversions and petitions for reversions to acreage.

C.     The Planning Commission shall perform such other duties as may be specified by the City Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.060 City Council.
A.    The City Council, referred to in this title as Council, is designated as an appeal board as that term is used in the Subdivision Map Act and shall hear appeals from actions of the Planning Commission.

B.     The Council shall have the authority to review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny extensions of time for tentative maps, final parcel maps, final tract maps, petitions for reversions to acreage, tentative tract maps, and vesting tentative maps. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.02.070 Processing and Filing Fees.
Fees to cover the costs incurred by the City in processing maps, plans, and requests filed pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and this Municipal Code shall be paid to the City in compliance with the fee resolution adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.04 DEFINITIONS
16.04.010 Subdivision Map Act Prevails.
The definitions in the Subdivision Map Act and in Title 17 (Zoning Regulations) of the Municipal Code shall govern the meaning of words in this title except as follows:

Term used in this title

Equivalent terms in Subdivision Map Act

Final tract map

Final map

Tract map

Final map

Final parcel map

Parcel map

Tentative tract map

Tentative map

Tentative parcel map

Tentative map

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.020 Zoning Regulations and Subdivision Map Act Definitions Apply.
Unless otherwise defined in this title, words and phrases used in this title shall be deemed to have the same meaning applied to them in the Zoning Regulations, the Subdivision Map Act, and the adopted Uniform Construction Codes. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.030 Subdivision Code Definitions.
All references to this section shall include Sections 16.04.040 Definitions (A) through 16.04.290 Definitions (Z) of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.040 Definitions (A).
Area of benefit. A specified area wherein it has been determined that the real property located within the specified area will benefit from the construction of a major thoroughfare. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.050 Definitions (B).
Building site. A lot or contiguous lots of land which was established in compliance with the property development and building site requirements in the Zoning Regulations and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.060 Definitions (C).
Council. The City Council of the City of Los Alamitos.

City standard plans. The Los Alamitos standard plans as adopted by the Council.

City standard specifications. The Los Alamitos standard specifications as adopted by the Council.

Condominium. A condominium project as defined in Civil Code Section 1350, containing two or more condominiums, as defined in Civil Code Section 783; a community apartment project, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11004, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; a stock cooperative, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; or any other such project as defined by law.

Condominium conversion. The offering for sale of condominium units that were previously units in multiple residential buildings.

Condominium project. An entire parcel of real property divided or to be divided into condominiums, including all structures thereon.

Construction. The preliminary design, environmental or other studies, design, acquisition of right-of-way, administration of construction contracts, and actual construction.

County. The County of Orange.

County Recorder. The County Recorder of the County of Orange.

County Surveyor. The County Surveyor of the County of Orange. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.070 Definitions (D).
Driveway. A designated passageway providing vehicular access between a street, alley, or dedicated easement and a garage or carport, a parking area, or other driveway or street. A driveway shall not be considered a street. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.080 Definitions (E).
Easement. A recorded right or interest in the land of another, which entitles the holder to some use, privilege, or benefit out of or over the land.

Engineering geologist. A person duly certified in the State of California to practice engineering geology. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.090 Definitions (F).
Final parcel map. A recorded parcel map that is in substantial conformance with an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map and which is filed in compliance with provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. See also Section 16.06.050 (Final Parcel Maps).

Final tract map. A recorded tract map that is in substantial conformance with all or a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map and which is filed in compliance with provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. Section 16.06.040 (Final Tract Maps).

Flood-control work or drainage work. The means of conveying or storing stormwater, including natural watercourses, improved drainage channels, retarding basins, closed conduits or pipes, and authorized or existing flood-control channels, and also the control of sedimentation.

Flood hazard. The capability of flowing water or mixtures of soils and water to impair or to damage buildings and other structures, and their functions; to erode natural and modified land surfaces, including channels and watercourses; and to deposit eroded material on either public or private property in a damaging or impairing manner and amount.

Flood hazard, possible. The possible extension of areas denoted as “subject to flood hazard,” including also the uncertainty of degree or extent of bank erosion. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.100 Definitions (G).
Grading Code. The grading and excavation standards established in the adopted Uniform Construction Codes. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.110 Definitions (H).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.120 Definitions (I).
Improvement. Street work and utilities to be installed or agreed to be installed on the land proposed to be subdivided by any person, firm, corporation, partnership, or association to be used for public or private streets, highways, ways, and easements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local neighborhood traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final tract or parcel map. “Improvement” also refers to such other specific improvement or types of improvements, the installation of which, either by the subdivider, by public agencies, by private utilities, by any other entity approved by the Council, or a combination, is necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan, Municipal Code, or any adopted specific plan.

Inundation. Ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth to damage property due to the mere presence of water or to deposition of silt. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.130 Definitions (J).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.140 Definitions (K).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.150 Definitions (L).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.160 Definitions (M).
Major thoroughfare. Those roads designated as transportation corridors and major, primary, secondary, or commuter highways on the master plan of arterial highways in the Mobility and Circulation Element of the City’s General Plan. The primary purpose of major thoroughfares is to carry through traffic and provide a network connecting to and including the State highway system.

Master plan of drainage. An engineering report adopted by the Council which outlines the local drainage facilities (but not including necessary on-site or regional facilities), needed for proper development of a specific area of the City.

Multiple residential building. A building or portion of a building, used and designed as a residence for two or more families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, including apartment houses, apartment hotels, and flats, but not including motels or boarding houses.

Multiple residential unit. A unit within a multiple residential building. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.170 Definitions (N).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.180 Definitions (O).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.190 Definitions (P).
Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, club, social club, fraternal organization, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, the County, this and any other City, City and County, municipality, district or other political subdivision, or any other group or combination acting as a unit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.200 Definitions (Q).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.210 Definitions (R).
Remainder parcel. The portion of a parcel of land which is not to be included within the boundaries of the final parcel or tract map.

Right-of-way. A specifically defined area or strip of land, either public or private, on which an irrevocable right of passage or use has been recorded. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.220 Definitions (S).
Slope, manmade. A manufactured slope consisting wholly or partly of either cut or filled material.

Soil engineer. A civil engineer duly registered in the State of California whose field of expertise includes soil mechanics.

Stock cooperative. See Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2.

Street. A public or private vehicular right-of-way, other than an alley or driveway, including both local streets and arterial highways.

Subdivider. See Government Code Section 66423.

Subdivision. See Government Code Section 66424.

Subdivision Map Act. See Government Code Title 7, Division 2, Section 66410 et seq. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.230 Definitions (T).
Tentative Map. A map showing the design and improvement of a proposed division of land and the existing conditions in and around it. The map may be either a tentative parcel map or a tentative tract map.

Tentative parcel map. See Section 16.06.030 (Tentative Parcel Maps).

Tentative tract map. See Section 16.06.020 (Tentative Tract Maps). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.240 Definitions (U).
Unit. The particular area of a building or airspace that is designed, intended, or used for exclusive possession or control of individual owners or occupiers, whether or not they have interests in common areas of the project. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.250 Definitions (V).
Vehicular access rights. The right of persons to gain entry or exit with a vehicle to or from a street or driveway to or from abutting land.

Vesting tentative map. A map which confers a vested right to proceed with development for a specified time after recordation. See also Section 16.06.080 (Vesting Tentative Maps). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.260 Definitions (W).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.270 Definitions (X).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.280 Definitions (Y).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.04.290 Definitions (Z).
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.06 TYPES OF MAPS
16.06.010 Available Maps and Procedures.
Four different types of maps and procedures are available for the purpose of creating subdivisions and lots, as identified in this chapter. Certain subdivisions may be created without following a map procedure. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.020 Tentative Tract Maps.
A tentative tract map is a preliminary map used whenever a lot or a number of contiguous lots is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating five or more lots, five or more condominium units, the conversion of five or more existing dwelling units to a stock cooperative, or except as otherwise specified by Section 16.06.040 (Final Tract Maps) or Section 16.06.070 (Exclusions and Designated Remainder Parcels). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.030 Tentative Parcel Maps.
A.    A tentative parcel map is a preliminary map used whenever a lot or contiguous lots is proposed to be subdivided for the purpose of creating fewer than five lots or fewer than five condominium units, or where:

1.     The land before division contains consists of less than five acres, each lot proposed to be created by the subdivision will abut upon a maintained public street or highway, and all dedications and improvements required by City standards will have been previously complied with; or

2.     Each lot proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of 20 acres or more and a right of vehicular access for a continuous width of not less than 20 feet to a maintained public street or highway; or

3.     The lot proposed to be subdivided is within a tract of land zoned for commercial or industrial uses and abuts streets or highways which have been approved by the City as to alignment and width and to which it has a right of vehicular access for a minimum continuous width of not less than 28 feet; or

4.     Each lot proposed to be created by the subdivision will have a gross area of not less than 40 acres or not less than a quarter of a quarter section.

B.     A parcel map shall not be required for subdivisions of a portion of the operating rights-of-way of a railroad corporation which are created by short-term leases, meaning terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ written notice. Furthermore, a parcel map shall not be required for land conveyed to or from a governmental agency, public entity, public utility, or for land conveyed to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to that public utility for rights-of-way, unless a showing is made based upon substantial evidence in individual cases that public policy necessitates a parcel map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.040 Final Tract Maps.
A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final tract map that is in substantial conformance with all or a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map. Each final tract map shall include all or an approved portion of the approved or conditionally approved tentative tract map. It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.050 Final Parcel Maps.
A.    A subdivision may be created by the recordation of a final parcel map that is in substantial conformance with an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map or with a portion of an approved or conditionally approved tentative parcel map which complies with the provisions of Section 16.06.030(A)(3) (Tentative Parcel Maps) of this title. A final parcel map may also be recorded on portions of a tentative tract map when such portions comply with the specifications of Section 16.06.030(A)(2), (A)(3), or (A)(4) (Tentative Parcel Maps). It shall be filed in compliance with the provisions of this title and the Subdivision Map Act, in particular, Government Code Sections 66426 and 66463.1.

B.     A parcel map shall be based upon a field survey, except that a parcel map may be compiled from record data when the City Engineer determines that the subdivision does not require a field survey, provided the map complies with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.060 Exceptions.
A.    Certain types of land divisions and transactions may be completed without complying with the entire tentative and final tract or parcel map procedure, as specified in this section.

B.     A request for determination as to the status of any lot created as a result of a lease or conveyance specified by subsections (B)(1) through (9) of this section may be submitted in compliance with the certificate of compliance procedure as stated in Chapter 16.32 (Certificate of Compliance). Neither a tentative or final tract or parcel map is necessary for the following:

1.     The financing or leasing of apartments, offices, stores, or similar space within apartment buildings, industrial buildings, commercial buildings, mobile home parks, or trailer parks;

2.     Mineral, oil, or gas leases;

3.     Land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code;

4.     Leases of agricultural land for agricultural purposes;

5.     Short-term leases (terminable by either party on not more than 30 days’ notice in writing) of a portion of the operating right-of-way of a railroad corporation, defined as such by Public Utilities Code Section 230;

6.     Subdivisions in which every lot has a gross area of 60 acres or more;

7.     Lot line adjustments;

8.     Conveyances of land for rights-of-way to or from a governmental agency, public entity or public utility, or to a subsidiary of a public utility for conveyance to such a public utility; however, in any of these instances a tentative and final tract or parcel map may be required if the Director or City Engineer determines that a map is necessary for purposes of public health and safety or for the general welfare;

9.     Any separate assessment under Revenue and Taxation Code Section 2188.7;

10.   Unless a final parcel or final tract map was approved by the Planning Commission, the conversion of a community apartment project, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11004, to a condominium, as defined in Civil Code Section 783, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

a.     At least 75 percent of the units in the project were occupied by record owners of the project on March 31, 1982,

b.     A final or parcel map of the project was properly recorded, if the property was subdivided, as defined in Government Code Section 66424, after January 1, 1964, with all of the conditions of that map remaining in effect after the conversion, and

c.     The Director certifies that the above requirements were satisfied;

11.   Unless a parcel or final map was approved by the Planning Commission, the conversion of a stock cooperative, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2, to a condominium, as defined in Civil Code Section 783, but only if all of the following requirements are met:

a.     At least 51 percent of the units in the cooperative were occupied by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981 or individually owned by stockholders of the cooperative on January 1, 1981. As used in this subdivision, a cooperative unit is individually owned if and only if the stockholder of that unit owns or partially owns an interest in no more than one unit in the cooperative,

b.     No more than 25 percent of the shares of the cooperative were owned by any one person, as defined in Government Code Section 17, including an incorporator or director of the cooperative, on January 1, 1981,

c.     A person renting a unit in a cooperative shall be entitled at the time of conversion to all tenant rights in state or local law, including, but not limited to, rights respecting first refusal, notice and displacement, and relocation benefits, and

d.     The Director certifies that the above requirements were satisfied;

12.   The leasing of, or the granting of an easement to, a lot, or any portion or portions a lot, in conjunction with the financing, erection, and sale or lease of a wind-powered electrical generation device on the land, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the City;

13.   The leasing or licensing of a portion of a lot or the granting of an easement, Conditional Use Permit, or similar right on a portion of a lot, to a telephone corporation (as defined in Public Utilities Code Section 234) exclusively for the placement and operation of cellular radio transmission facilities, including, but not limited to, antennae support structures, microwave dishes, structures to house cellular communications transmission equipment, power sources, and other equipment incidental to the transmission of cellular communications, if the project is subject to discretionary action by the City; or

14.   The establishment of condominiums on property pursuant to the requirements of the Subdivision Map Act and this title when the Planning Commission or Council approved a final parcel map or final tract map for the project, the separation of a three-dimensional portion or portions of the property from the remainder of the property or the division of that three-dimensional portion or portions into condominiums shall not constitute a further subdivision as defined in Government Code Section 66424, provided each of the following conditions has been satisfied:

a.     The total number of condominiums established is not increased above the number authorized by the City in approving the parcel map or final map,

b.     A perpetual estate or an estate for years in the remainder of the property is held by the condominium owners in undivided interests in common, or by an association as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 subdivision (a), and the duration of the estate in the remainder of the property is the same as the duration of the estate in the condominiums, and

c.     The three-dimensional portion or portions of property are described on a condominium plan or plans, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351 subdivision (e).

C.     A final parcel map is not required when waived pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 16.28 (Waivers and Exceptions).

D.    A request for certificate of compliance may or may not require a tentative map, as specified by the Director. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.070 Exclusions and Designated Remainder Parcels.
Whenever a subdivider seeks to have a lot otherwise covered by the provisions of this title omitted or determined to be a designated remainder parcel, the provisions of Government Code Section 66424.6 shall apply and be followed by the subdivider and the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.06.080 Vesting Tentative Maps.
A.    A vesting tentative map is at the option of the subdivider and shall not be a prerequisite to any proposed subdivision or application for development.

B.     A vesting tentative map shall be identified on the submittal as a “vesting tentative map.”

C.     A vesting tentative map is limited to development of the property per the applicable regulations in existence at the time of approval of the vesting tentative map or pursuant to subsection D of this section.

D.    Whenever a subdivider files a vesting tentative map whose intended development is inconsistent with the Zoning Regulations in effect at the time, the inconsistency shall be noted on the vesting tentative map, and the vesting tentative map shall be processed subject to the provisions of Section 16.10.090 (Property Development Standard Conformance).

E.     A vesting tentative map shall be processed in the same manner as a tentative map. However, previously approved tentative maps which were not approved as vesting tentative maps may be so approved only if refiled and processed in compliance with all requirements in this title.

F.     The provisions of Section 16.10.130 (Period of Validity—Extensions) shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map.

G.    The vested right for a recorded subdivision map shall be for a period of one year beyond the recording date of the final tract map or final parcel map and shall confer on such maps all rights described in Government Code Sections 66498.1 through 66498.8. Where several final maps or parcel maps are recorded on various phases of a project covered by a single vesting tentative map, the one-year time period shall commence when the final map or parcel map for that phase is recorded. Prior to the expiration of the initial one-year period, the developer may apply for a one-year extension of the period of the vested right to the Planning Commission. If the extension is denied, the developer may appeal in accordance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals) of the Municipal Code.

H.    The provisions of Section 16.10.120 (Modification of Maps and Conditions of Approval) shall apply to an approved or conditionally approved vesting tentative map.

I.      Fees for the filing and processing of vesting tentative maps shall be the same as the fees established for the filing and processing of tentative maps. However, the Council may establish by resolution an additional fee to cover additional costs incurred by the processing of vesting tentative maps, including an extension of time.

J.      Fees for development permits such as building and grading permits, filed per an approved vesting tentative map or a recorded vesting final/parcel map shall be the fees in effect at the time of issuance of the permit.

K.    Additional information requested is limited to that which relates to ordinances, resolutions, policies, or standards for the design, development, or improvement relating to the conferred vesting rights, except with regard to a specified determination under the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21080.1, or in compliance with Federal or State requirements. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 2, 2012; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.08 TENTATIVE MAPS—REQUIREMENTS FOR FILING
16.08.010 Types of Maps Covered.
This chapter pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.020 Form and Contents.
Tentative maps shall conform with requirements as to form and content as specified on application forms provided by the Development Services Department of the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.030 Who May File.
Any property owner who proposes to subdivide property may file a tentative map. Any person who proposes to subdivide property that is legally owned by another person may file a tentative map for such property with the written consent of the legal owner of record. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.040 Certification of Ownership.
Each tentative map shall be signed by the property owner or owners of record and shall be accompanied by evidence of ownership of the real property proposed for subdivision. When any portion of a tentative map includes property that is owned by a public agency, the certification of ownership need not include the signatures for ownership, provided portions are clearly identified on the map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.050 Title Report.
Tentative maps shall be accompanied by a preliminary title report which discloses all possessory interests and interests of record in the land being subdivided, when determined to be necessary by the Director. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.060 Soils Report.
A.    Unless the requirement is waived by the Director pursuant to subsection B of this section or deferred pursuant to subsection C of this section, tentative maps, including condominium conversions or the division of an existing developed lot, shall be accompanied by a preliminary soils report based upon adequate test borings and prepared by a registered civil engineer. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of critically expansive soils or other soils problems which, if not corrected, would lead to structural defects, a soils report on each proposed lot in the subdivision containing any such soils problem shall accompany the tentative map. If the preliminary soils report indicates the presence of rocks or liquids containing deleterious chemicals which, if not corrected, could cause construction materials such as concrete, steel, and ductile or cast iron to corrode or deteriorate, a soils investigation of each potentially affected lot in the subdivision may be required by the Director. Such reports shall include recommended corrective action which is likely to prevent structural damage.

B.     The Director may waive the preliminary soils report required by subsection A of this section for tentative tract maps where the Director determines that it is unnecessary because the City already has sufficient information as to the qualities of the soils in the proposed subdivision and for tentative parcel maps.

C.     The Director may defer the requirement for a preliminary soils report until the submission of a final tract or parcel map.

D.    The City may approve or conditionally approve the tentative map or portion thereof where these soils problems exist if it determines that the recommended action is likely to prevent structural damage to each structure to be constructed, and as a condition to the issuance of any building permit, may require that the approved recommended action be incorporated into the construction of each structure.

E.     The preliminary soils report shall be submitted to the City Engineer for review. The City Engineer may require additional information or reject the report if it is found to be incomplete, inaccurate, or unsatisfactory. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.08.070 Additional Information.
A.    Tentative maps shall be accompanied by such additional information as may be specified by the Director. The Director shall have the authority to include among such requirements geologic, seismic, and hydrology reports; aerial photographs and transparent overlays; grading, site development, and landscaping plans, including building setback lines; evidence from the proposed sewering agency and water supplier with respect to their capability of serving the proposed subdivision; fire protection and fuel modification reports; and any other information reasonably relevant to proposed subdivisions.

B.     The Director may require differing amounts of supplementary information, depending upon the type of map involved, the scope of the proposed subdivision, and the anticipated environmental impacts of the subdivision.

C.     The Director may require the submission of additional information after the filing of tentative maps as necessary. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.10 TENTATIVE MAPS—PROCEDURES
16.10.010 Types of Maps Covered.
This chapter pertains to tentative parcel maps and tentative tract maps. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.020 Filing.
A.    Tentative maps shall be filed with the Director, who shall accept such maps only when he/she determines that the requirements for filing a tentative map established by this title and the Subdivision Map Act have been satisfied. The date a tentative map is filed shall be the date it is accepted as complete by the Director.

B.     Each tract or parcel map shall be identified by a number prominently displayed on the face of the map issued by the County. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.030 Copies to Responsible Agencies.
A.    Where a local agency has filed a territorial map with the Director pursuant to the Subdivision Map Act, the Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to the local agency within three days of the date the tentative map is filed.

B.     When the State Department of Transportation has filed with the Council a map of territory within one mile on either or both sides of any State highway routing pursuant to the Government Code, the Director shall forward a copy of any filed tentative map which is located wholly or partially within the territory outlined on the territorial map to the district office of the State Department of Transportation within three days of the date the tentative map is filed.

C.     Within five days of the date a tentative map is filed, the Director shall give notice of the filing to the governing boards of the school district or districts within which the proposed subdivision is located pursuant to Government Code Section 66455.7. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.040 Time for Action.
The Planning Commission and Council shall act upon a tentative map within the time specified in the Subdivision Map Act unless:

A.    An extension of time for action is mutually consented to by the applicant and the Planning Commission or Council, in which case the map shall be acted upon within the time agreed upon; or

B.     The applicant withdraws the map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.050 Reports and Recommendations.
A.    Reports and recommendations on tentative maps shall be in writing and shall be provided to the applicant at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the tentative map, provided that the applicant:

1.     May waive this requirement;

2.     May consent to the receipt by the Planning Commission or Council of additional recommendations and provided further, that an applicant shall be deemed to have consented unless the applicant specifically objects to the form and timeliness of additional recommendations prior to the time the Planning Commission or Council takes action on the tentative map.

B.     The Director may provide additional recommendations on tentative maps to the Planning Commission, and the Planning Commission may provide additional recommendations on tentative maps to the Council. Any additional recommendations shall be provided to the applicant at least three days prior to any hearing or action on the tentative map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.060 Review of Tentative Maps.
Each tentative parcel map shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map. Each tentative tract map shall be reviewed by the Council, which shall approve, conditionally approve, or deny the tentative map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.070 Substitution of Revised Maps.
A revised tentative map may be submitted at any time prior to action on the map by the Planning Commission or Council. The time for action on a tentative map specified in Section 16.10.040 (Time for Action) shall recommence upon the acceptance by the Director of a revised tentative map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.080 Meetings and Hearings.
A.    The Planning Commission or Council shall act on tentative maps at regularly scheduled meetings or duly noticed special meetings when the matter has been duly placed upon the Commission or Council’s agenda. Public hearings shall be required for the consideration of tentative maps. At a public hearing, the Planning Commission or Council shall allow all interested persons an opportunity to address the Planning Commission or Council on any matter pertaining to a proposed subdivision.

B.     Notice of a public hearing shall be given to all persons shown in the latest equalized assessment roll as owning property within 500 feet of the property proposed to be subdivided pursuant to the requirements of Government Code Section 66451.3. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.090 Property Development Standard Conformance.
A.    The Planning Commission or Council shall not approve or conditionally approve a tentative map which does not conform with applicable property development standards as specified in this title, Title 17 (Zoning Regulations), and the General Plan, except as provided in subsection B of this section.

B.     A tentative map may be approved when it conforms with property development standards which have been recommended for adoption by the Planning Commission or Council on the condition that the property development standards must become effective prior to recordation of the final tract or final parcel map.

C.     A tentative map shall not be approved if it is apparent that any proposed lot cannot be developed to its intended use without the modification of property development standards. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.100 Findings Required.
A tentative parcel map or tentative tract map shall be approved or conditionally approved only if the Planning Commission or Council makes the following findings:

A.    The design and improvement of the proposed subdivision is consistent with the City’s General Plan;

B.     The site is physically suitable for the proposed type of development;

C.     The requirements of the California Environmental Quality Act have been satisfied;

D.    The site is physically suitable for the proposed density of development;

E.     The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause substantial environmental damage or substantial and avoidable injury to fish or wildlife or their habitat unless environmental mitigation is infeasible pursuant to Government Code Section 66474.01;

F.     The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements are not likely to cause serious public health problems;

G.    The design of the subdivision and the proposed improvements will not conflict with easements of record or established by court judgment, acquired by the public at large, for access through or use of, property within the proposed subdivision or, if such easements exist, that alternate easements for access or for use will be provided, and that these will be substantially equivalent to ones previously acquired by the public; and

H.    The design and improvement of the proposed subdivision are suitable for the uses proposed and the subdivision can be developed in compliance with Section 16.10.090 (Property Development Standard Conformance). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.110 Additional Findings Required.
A.    The Planning Commission or Council shall determine whether the discharge of waste from the proposed subdivision into an existing community sewer system, where such a system exists, would result in or add to a violation of existing requirements prescribed by either the Santa Ana Regional Water Quality Control Boards. In the event it is determined that the proposed waste discharge would result in or add to such a violation, the Planning Commission or Council shall deny the tentative map unless there are extenuating or overriding considerations, in which case these shall be stated.

B.     In the event a subdivision fronting upon the coastline or shoreline or upon a public waterway, river, or stream owned in part or entirely by a public agency does not provide public access to such public resources through the subdivision itself in accordance with requirements of Sections 16.12.230 (Rivers and Streams), the Planning Commission or Council shall find that reasonable public access to the resource in question is otherwise available within a reasonable distance from the subdivision. If this finding cannot be made, the map shall be denied.

C.     If the Planning Commission or Council approves or conditionally approves a tentative map which deviates from any standard of design as allowed by Section 16.12.260 (Deviations from Standards of Design), the Planning Commission or Council shall make a finding or findings that each deviation has been individually considered and found to be justified based upon specific special circumstances which apply.

D.    The Planning Commission or Council shall determine whether the design of the subdivision provides for future passive or natural heating or cooling opportunities pursuant to Government Code Section 66473.1. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.120 Modification of Maps and Conditions of Approval.
Upon the request of the subdivider, approved tentative maps may be modified and conditions of approval may be modified or deleted by the Director. In all cases, the Director shall attempt to notify any third parties who had previously indicated an interest in the matter of the consideration of the modification. The Director may elect instead to forward any such request to the Planning Commission for consideration and action. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.130 Period of Validity—Extensions.
A.    In accordance with Government Code Section 66452.6, an approved or conditionally approved tentative map shall expire 24 months after its approval or conditional approval, unless prior to the expiration date the property owner or authorized representative requests an extension of time to extend the map, or, if the property owner is required to expend the dollar amount identified in the provisions of Government Code Section 66452.6 to finance public improvements outside the boundaries of the tentative map, excluding improvements of public rights-of-way which abut the boundaries of the property to be subdivided and which are reasonably related to the development of the property, as identified in Government Code Section 66452.6.

B.     The Council may grant an extension of time for any map for a period or periods not exceeding a total of 36 months beyond the original date of expiration, or as may otherwise established by the Subdivision Map Act.

C.     In accordance with Government Code Section 66452.11, if an approved tentative map had not expired on September 13, 1993, the life of the tentative map shall be extended for 24 months.

D.    An extension may be granted only where it will not result in conditions or circumstances contrary to the public health, safety, or the general welfare, as identified in Government Code Section 66452.6. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.10.140 Appeal of Tentative Parcel Map to Council.
Any interested person may appeal to the Council from any action of the Planning Commission with respect to a tentative parcel map by filing an appeal in accordance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals) of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 2, 2012; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.12 STANDARDS OF DESIGN
16.12.010 Conformance with Standards of Design.
Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the following standards of design and any applicable standards for the zone in which the property is located, as identified in Title 17 (Zoning Regulations). Deviations from these standards may be requested pursuant to Section 16.12.260 (Deviations from Standards of Design). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.020 Consistency with General Plan.
Subdivisions shall be designed and improved so as to be consistent with the General Plan and any applicable adopted specific plan and the objectives, policies, and general land uses and programs specified therein. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.030 Boundary Lines.
A.    Tentative map boundaries shall be drawn to include all area of all abutting lots which are owned by the same property owner and proposed for boundary alteration. However, when any land is proposed to be divided in such a way that the subdivision will include a portion of land owned by the same property owner and proposed for boundary alteration, any portion with a contiguous gross area of five acres or more which is not proposed to be included within the subdivision may be identified by reference on the tentative map.

B.     A portion of a tentative parcel map may be designated as a remainder for the purpose of an exception to the survey requirements, in compliance with the following provisions:

1.     Any remainder shall have a gross area of five acres or more;

2.     Any remainder so designated shall not be considered to be a building site; and

3.     Any remainder so designated shall not be improved with any building or structure that is subject to the requirements of the Uniform Building Code.

C.     Whenever a parcel of real property lies partially within the City and partially within an unincorporated area or within another City, any proposal to subdivide such real property shall be consistent with existing corporate boundaries. No lot, except proposed public or private street rights-of-way, shall be partially within a City and partially within unincorporated area. Any portion of such real property lying within any other City or unincorporated County territory shall be included on the tentative map for the purpose of showing the remainder parcel, but any approving action on the tentative map by the City shall not be construed as approval of any design or improvements shown within any other City or unincorporated County territory.

D.    Regardless of its size, no portion of any property shown on the latest equalized County assessment roll as a unit or contiguous units shall be excluded from within the boundaries of a subdivision for the purpose of avoiding dedication or improvement of any street, drainage, or flood-control facility. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.040 Lots.
A.    Each lot being created by a subdivision shall be either numbered or lettered. If it is numbered, it must comply with the requirements of a building site as defined in the Zoning Regulations.

B.     Lettered lots may not be used as building sites and need not comply with the requirements for a building site.

C.     Lettered lots other than streets shall be labeled as to their intended use. Numbered lots may be labeled as to their intended use.

D.    A numbered lot which is drawn so that it is in more than one zone shall comply with area and width requirements of the zone having the greater requirements. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.050 Public Roadways.
If an existing or proposed public roadway, as shown in the General Plan Mobility and Circulation Element, is located so that any portion of such roadway lies within or adjacent to a subdivision, the roadway shall be shown on the map in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the Mobility and Circulation Element, and the roadway shall be designed in accordance with the standard plans or applicable specific plan adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.060 Private Streets.
Private streets shall be permitted, pursuant to conditions specified in the standard plans adopted by the Council, when the Council finds that the occupants of the subdivision will be better served and the welfare of the general public will not be impaired. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.070 Restricted Access to Highways.
Subdivisions shall be designed to limit vehicular access to highways shown on in the General Plan Mobility and Circulation Element. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.080 Street Widths.
Subdivisions shall be designed in conformance with the standard plans adopted by the Council, except:

A.    Private streets serving four or fewer lots as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of 28 feet within a minimum 40-foot-wide right-of-way.

B.     Private streets serving five parcels or more as access to a public street shall provide for a minimum pavement width of 40 feet within a minimum 56-foot-wide right-of-way.

C.     Streets in a subdivision which provides an approved alternate pedestrian circulation system shall have a right-of-way that will provide a minimum parkway width of at least eight feet. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.090 Dead-End or Cul-de-Sac Streets.
Dead-end streets shall be terminated by a turnaround having a diameter which will maintain a parkway width uniform with that of the street. No such dead-end street shall exceed a length of 500 feet measured along the center line from the center point of the turnaround to its center line intersection with a through street. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.100 Local Street and Highway Longitudinal Grades.
Local street and highway longitudinal grades shall be no less than one percent, reverse grade vertical curves excepted. Private longitudinal grades shall be no less than one percent, reverse grade vertical curves excepted. Highway longitudinal grades shall not exceed six percent and local street grades shall not exceed 10 percent, unless approved in writing by the City Engineer. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.110 Curved Local Street and Highway Radii.
The center line radii of curves on local streets or highways shall be not less than:

A.    The Standard Orange County Environmental Management Agency (OCEMA) and CalTrans Highway Design Standards;

B.     550 feet on collector streets; and

C.     250 feet on local streets. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.120 Local Street Lengths.
Local streets shall not exceed 1,000 feet in length without a significant change in alignment. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.130 Local Street and Highway Corner Cutoffs and Corner Radii.
All local street and highway corner cutoffs and corner radii shall be designed in conformance with the standard plans as adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.140 Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways.
A.    Sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with the standard plans adopted by the Council and located as follows:

1.     Along both sides of arterial highways;

2.     Along all commercial and industrial frontage;

3.     Along both sides of collector streets;

4.     Along residential frontage where the required minimum building site area is less than 15,000 square feet and the lots have access to the street, except in those instances where an alternate pedestrian circulation system is proposed;

5.     Along all streets leading directly to a school, a designated school bus stop, or a park;

6.     Where the sidewalk will provide a continuation or link between other sidewalks.

B.     Additional pedestrian ways not abutting a street shall be provided when necessary for access to schools, recreation, and other public areas. These pedestrian ways shall not be less than six feet in width. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.150 Bicycle Trails.
Where the General Plan or any officially adopted specific or precise plan designates a bikeway trail as lying wholly or partially within any proposed subdivision, the necessary right-of-way for the bikeway or equestrian trail shall be shown on the map in compliance with adopted plans, and bikeways shall be designed in accordance with standard plans. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.160 Street Lighting.
Street lighting shall be provided along and at the intersections of all arterial highways and local streets in accordance with the illumination levels specified in the standard plans, except as otherwise approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.170 Underground Utility Lines.
A.    Utility lines, including but not limited to, electric, communications, street lighting, and cable television, shall be placed underground within any new, revised, or reactivated residential subdivision. The subdivider is responsible for making the necessary arrangements with the utility companies for the installation of facilities. For the purposes of this subsection, appurtenances and associated equipment such as, but not limited to, surface mounted transformers, pedestal mounted terminal boxes and meter cabinets, and concealed ducts in an underground system may be placed above ground within the street right-of-way where sufficient right-of-way width exists so as to provide sufficient width to comply with local, State, and Federal standards. The foregoing shall not pose a serious hazard to pedestrian traffic.

B.     If approved by the Director, utility lines, the main purpose of which is to provide service to customers outside of the original boundaries of the subdivision, and those utility lines which were in service in the area covered by the tentative tract or tentative parcel map prior to the filing of the tentative map, may be placed above ground.

C.     Required underground utility lines may be located in street or alley rights-of-way or along any lot line.

D.    Overhead utility lines should be located at the rear of lots where practical. The poles supporting such overhead lines shall not be installed within any street, alleyway, drainage easement, or flood-control channel.

E.     Aboveground installation of utilities shall be permitted on a temporary basis when such utilities are required during construction; provided, however, that such utilities shall be removed or placed underground prior to the final exoneration of street improvement bonds. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.180 Sewers.
All lots intended for development shall be connected to a sanitary sewer system. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.190 Drainage and Erosion Control.
A.    Tentative maps shall illustrate the existing or proposed manner in which water drains onto, across, and off of the land being subdivided, including the facilities and easements necessary to accommodate the drainage to its point of ultimate disposal.

B.     In the event a subdivider unnaturally concentrates or diverts surface water running onto adjacent land in a manner permitted by law, the map shall illustrate the manner in which the water will be accepted and disposed and shall provide appropriate documentation, as necessary, to establish the need and legal right to so affect drainage.

C.     If an existing or proposed flood control channel as shown on an officially adopted flood control plan is located so that any portion of it lies within or adjacent to a subdivision, the channel shall be illustrated on the map as a lettered lot in a width and in an alignment corresponding to the flood control plan.

D.    Where any lot is designed in such a manner that it will not drain with a minimum one percent grade directly to a street or common drainage facility, it shall be designed in a manner that will conform to the following criteria:

1.     Lots shall be designed in such a manner that manufactured slopes are not subject to sheet flow or concentrated runoff from either the same or an adjacent lot;

2.     All water flowing down manufactured slopes, except that falling on each slope, shall be constrained within an approved drainage device; and

3.     All water flowing from one lot to or across another lot shall be within an approved drainage device located within a properly executed easement, where appropriate. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.200 Manufactured Slopes.
A.    Manufactured slopes shall be designed so that they can be conveniently maintained so as to minimize erosion, slope failure, and unsightly conditions.

B.     This section does not apply to manufactured slopes five feet in height or less.

C.     All manufactured slopes shall be shown on tentative maps and shall be classified, labeled, and designed as follows:

Type A. Those proposed to be maintained by a public agency or by a group, such as a homeowners’ association, and which are located either adjacent to an arterial highway or within a park, greenbelt, or other public or common open space area.

Type B. Those proposed to be maintained by a group, such as a homeowners’ association, and which are located within or adjacent to individual lots and which are not within a park, greenbelt, or other public or common open space area.

Type C. Those proposed to be maintained by individuals and which are located within individual lots in such a manner that they are inappropriate for maintenance by a group such as a homeowners’ association.

D.    Manufactured slopes shall be designed to resemble natural terrain where feasible, with a minimum of long, flat, inclined plane surfaces and acute angles.

E.     Manufactured slopes shall be no steeper than three feet horizontal to one foot vertical.

F.     The maximum height of manufactured slopes in excess of or steeper than five feet horizontal to one foot vertical shall be as follows:

Type A. No maximum.

Type B. 35 feet.

Type C. 20 feet.

G.    Manufactured slopes shall not be constructed one on top of another or combined in such a manner so that they exceed the maximum heights specified in subsection F of this section. However, this limitation shall not apply to adjacent slopes on land abutting the subdivision, provided there is a visual and physical break of at least 10 horizontal usable feet, exclusive of drainage facilities, between the top of the lower slope and the top of the upper slope.

H.    Lettered lots shall not include Type C slopes, unless such slopes will be directly visible from the probable building pad on the lot.

I.      Automatic irrigation systems shall be incorporated into the design of Type A and Type B slopes. An irrigation system connected to the main water system serving the lot shall be incorporated into the design of Type C slopes.

J.      The design of manufactured slopes shall include landscaping in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.12.220 (Landscaping and Screening). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.210 Parks.
Local parks shall be shown on the tentative map in a manner consistent with the General Plan. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.220 Landscaping and Screening.
The design of the areas listed below shall include appropriate landscaping for aesthetic, noise suppression, fire protection, erosion control purposes, and vehicular sight distances:

A.    Manufactured slopes greater than five feet in height;

B.     Common areas;

C.     Roadway medians and parkway areas;

D.    Lot containing existing significant trees or other plants proposed to be preserved;

E.     Fuel breaks; and

F.     Other open space areas. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.230 Rivers and Streams.
A.    Any proposed subdivision fronting upon a public waterway, river, or stream shall be designed to provide reasonable public access by fee or easement from a public highway to and along that portion of the bank of the river or stream bordering or lying within the proposed subdivision. The extent, width, and character of the public easement shall be reasonably defined to achieve reasonable public use of the public waterway, river, or stream consistent with public safety.

B.     The governmental entity to which the access route will be offered for dedication shall be indicated on the map.

C.     In determining what is reasonable public access, the following factors shall be considered:

1.     The easement may be for a foot trail, bicycle trail, or vehicular access;

2.     The size of the subdivision;

3.     The type of riverbank and the various appropriate recreational, educational, and scientific uses, including, but not limited to, swimming, boating, diving, fishing, water skiing, scientific collection, and teaching; and

4.     The likelihood of trespass on private property and reasonable means of avoiding trespass. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.240 Fire Protection.
A.    Any subdivision proposed to be located in an area shown in the General Plan Safety Element to be a high or extreme fire hazard area shall provide appropriate fire protection by means of firebreaks, fuel modification programs, access roads, sufficient water supply, landscaping and open spaces, and other methods that the fire chief has determined will ensure the public health, safety, and welfare of the future occupants of the subdivision and the adjacent area.

B.     The design of any required fuel modification program shall include landscape architectural planning encompassing visual quality standards, watershed impact, and erosion control and wildlife impact and other design features described in the fire hazard reduction design criteria. The program shall include provisions for landscape architectural construction observation, inspection, and maintenance.

C.     The cost of the design and implementation of any fuel modification program shall be the responsibility of the subdivider.

D.    A method or procedure for assuring continued maintenance of any required fuel modification program shall be provided by the subdivider and approved by the fire chief and the Director. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.250 Dangerous Area to Be Removed or Controlled.
Areas proposed to be subdivided which are known to be dangerous by reason of geological conditions, unstable subsurface conditions, groundwater or seepage conditions, flood hazard, or any other dangerous conditions shall be approved for subdivision only when the Planning Commission or Council finds that the conditions or hazards are to be removed or that appropriate measures or controls will be applied which will assure adequate protection to the subject property and to surrounding uses and improvements. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.12.260 Deviations from Standards of Design.
A.    The Planning Commission or Council may approve or conditionally approve tentative maps which deviate from the standards of design contained in the following sections:

16.12.040 Lots.

16.12.050 Arterial Highways.

16.12.070 Restricted Access to Highways.

16.12.080 Street Widths.

16.12.090 Dead-End or Cul-De-Sac Streets.

16.12.100 Local Street and Highway Longitudinal Grades.

16.12.110 Curved Local Street and Highway Radii.

16.12.130 Local Street and Highway Corner Cutoffs and Corner Radii.

16.12.140 Sidewalks and Pedestrian Ways.

16.12.150 Bicycle Trails.

16.12.160 Street Lighting.

16.12.170 Underground Utility Lines.

16.12.200 Manufactured Slopes.

16.12.220 Landscaping and Screening.

16.12.240 Fire Protection.

B.     The deviations from the standards of design contained in the sections listed in subsection A of this section shall be identified by a note on the face of the tentative map, and the subdivider shall submit evidence of justification for each deviation.

C.     Special circumstances which may be cited to justify a deviation from the standards of design listed in subsection A of this section include, but are not limited to, alternative means of pedestrian circulation, environmental considerations, physical constraints, existing nearby uses, and a limited amount of ultimate traffic.

D.    The Planning Commission or Council shall take specific action on each requested deviation. Deviations not specifically approved shall be considered to be denied. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.14 DEDICATIONS
16.14.010 Required Dedication for Public Use or Benefit.
The Planning Commission or Council may require the dedication to the public, to the City, or to another public agency as may be appropriate all real property or fee interest in real property both on and off site required for public use or benefit, including, but not limited, to the following:

A.    Local, streets, arterial highways, and transportation corridors;

B.     Alleys;

C.     Trails, paths, and pedestrian ways;

D.    Flood control facilities;

E.     Parks;

F.     Easements for landscaping maintenance;

G.    Public utility easements;

H.    Public transit facilities; and

I.      Other public easements. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.020 Transfer of Ownership Required for Private Use or Benefit.
The Planning Commission or Council may require that the items listed in Section 16.14.010 (Required Dedication for Public Use or Benefit) be deeded for private use or benefit to a homeowners’ association or other responsible body. However, in no event shall dedications of a fee interest be made to any public or private utility. Dedications required by utilities shall be made in fee simple to the City, which shall provide for utility service pursuant to the terms of the appropriate franchise. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.030 Vehicular Access Rights and Abutters’ Rights to Arterial Highways and Local Streets.
Whenever specified by the Planning Commission or Council, offers of dedication of arterial highways or transportation corridors shall include the release and relinquishment of vehicular access rights to and from facilities from any property shown within a final tract or parcel map abutting thereon. When the Planning Commission or Council finds, based on evidence provided by the Director, that there is a particular circulation problem on a local street, release and relinquishment of access rights to and from the local street may be required. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.040 School Sites.
The applicant submitting a tentative tract map may be required to dedicate land for the school facilities necessary to assure the residents of the subdivision that adequate public school service is provided in accordance with the requirements and procedures identified in the Subdivision Map Act. Whenever the Council imposes such a dedication requirement, it may concurrently approve an alternate tentative map, to be effective in the event the school district affected does not enter into a binding commitment within 30 days to accept the dedication. A dedication pursuant to this section shall only be required at the request of a school district made within 20 working days of the notice given pursuant to Section 16.10.080 (Meetings and Hearings). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.050 Dedication for Utilities.
Dedications required for utility purposes shall be made in fee simple to the City. In no event shall dedications for utility purposes be made to any public or private utility. Such dedications are to be made in fee simple to the City, which shall provide for utility service pursuant to the terms of the appropriate franchise. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.060 Method of Dedication.
A.    Dedications and offers of dedication shall be made by a certificate on the final tract or parcel map. Separate instruments may be used with the approval of the City Engineer, when permitted by law and when the subdivider intends to dedicate or offer for dedication real property prior to the approval of a final tract or parcel map. The City shall record a certificate with the County Recorder of the County of Orange of that dedicated property, except that which is used for open space, parks, or schools. The certificate shall be attached to the map and shall contain the following information:

1.     The name and address of the subdivider dedicating the property;

2.     A legal description of the real property dedicated; and

3.     A statement that the City shall reconvey the property to the subdivider if the City makes a determination that the same public purpose for which the property was dedicated does not exist, or the property or any portion of the property is not needed for public utilities.

B.     The subdivider may request that the City make a determination that the same public purpose for which the dedication was required still exists, after payment of a fee which shall not exceed the amount reasonably required to make the determination. If the City decides to vacate, lease, sell, or otherwise dispose of the dedicated property, the City shall give at least 60 days’ notice to the subdivider whose name appears on the certificate before vacating, leasing, selling, or otherwise disposing of the dedicated property. This notice is not required if the dedicated property will be used for the same public purpose for which it was dedicated. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.14.070 Exceptions.
Dedications required by Section 16.14.010 (Required Dedication for Public Use or Benefit) shall not be required for any remainder parcel which is sufficient as to size and shape to be further divided in compliance with applicable Zoning Regulations, provided the Planning Commission or Council determines that such dedications and improvements are not necessary immediately for public use or benefit and that the property owner will not be excused from a requirement to dedicate and install necessary improvements at a later time. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.16 IMPROVEMENTS, MONUMENTATION, AND SECURITY
16.16.010 Improvements Required.
A.    The subdivider shall grade and improve or agree to grade and improve all land shown on the final tract or parcel map for those dedications listed in Section 16.14.010 (Required Dedication for Public Use or Benefit) in compliance with the requirements of the approved tentative map in such a manner and with such improvements as are necessary for the general use of the lot owners in the subdivision and local traffic and drainage needs as a condition precedent to the approval and acceptance of the final tract or parcel map. All elevations shall be based on current Orange County Surveyor Vertical Datum. The grading plans and improvement plans shall make reference to the benchmark and elevation used for the design and engineering.

B.     The subdivider may be required to improve or agree to improve those dedications which are necessary or convenient to ensure conformity to or implementation of the General Plan. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.020 Subdivisions of Four or Fewer Parcels.
A.    Required improvements shall be noticed by certificate on the final parcel map or the instrument evidencing waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in subsection C of this section, the certificate shall include a requirement for fulfillment of improvements prior to issuance of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the lot or for installation of the improvements at an earlier time as provided in the agreement.

B.     The agreement required by Section 16.16.050 (Agreements in Lieu of Improvements) shall be entered into prior to the City Engineer’s approval of the parcel map for recordation or prior to granting a waiver of the parcel map. Except as otherwise specified in subsection C of this section, the agreement shall provide for installation of the improvements prior to the granting of any building permit or other grant of approval for development of the parcel, or for the installation of the improvements at an earlier time as provided in the agreement.

C.     The requirements for installation of the improvements prior to issuance of building permits may be omitted from a parcel map when a requirement is not a condition of approval of the parcel map or waiver of parcel map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.030 Standards.
Improvements shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards of design contained in Chapter 16.12 (Standards of Design), the standard plans, and any other applicable standards adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.040 Improvement Plans.
All improvement plans of improvements to be installed within or supplemental to the final tract or parcel map must be approved by the Director or other responsible authority prior to approval of the final tract or parcel map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.050 Agreements In Lieu of Improvements.
If any improvements are not completed satisfactorily or any monuments not set before the final tract or parcel map is approved, the subdivider shall enter into an agreement with the City whereby, in consideration of the approval by the City of the final tract or parcel map, the subdivider agrees to perform and to furnish the equipment, material, and labor necessary to complete the required work within the time specified in the agreement. The agreement shall be accompanied by security as provided in Sections 16.16.070 (Improvement Security) and 16.16.090 (Monumentation). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.060 Plan Checking, Engineering, and Inspection Fees.
Subdivider(s) submitting detailed plans and specifications for approval required by Section 16.16.040 (Improvement Plans) shall pay plan checking, engineering, and inspection fees as established by resolution of the Council. The fees shall be paid at the following times:

A.    Engineering fee prior to approval of the Director.

B.     Inspection fee prior to starting construction of bonded improvement at then applicable rates. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.070 Improvement Security.
Security in the form specified by the Subdivision Map Act shall be furnished with every improvement agreement. The amount of the security shall be as follows:

A.    If bonds are furnished by one of the authorized corporate sureties:

1.     A performance bond in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement,

2.     A payment bond in the amount of 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement;

B.     If money, instrument of credit, or negotiable bonds are furnished, 100 percent of the estimated cost of the improvement. The money, instrument of credit, or negotiable bonds shall apply to both faithful performance and payment to the contractor, subcontractors, laborers, materialmen, and other persons employed in the performance of the agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.080 Release of Security.
The Director is authorized to release security in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.090 Monumentation.
A.    Monuments shall be set for each tract and parcel map in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act and in accordance with the rules and procedures approved by the Director.

B.     The agreement referred to in Section 16.16.050 (Agreements in Lieu of Improvements) shall be accompanied by security in a sum not less than the cost of setting the monuments. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.16.100 Extension of Time.
The Director is authorized to grant an extension of time to the agreement as specified in Section 16.16.050 (Agreements in Lieu of Improvements), if, as determined by the Director, a delay in the completion of the improvements is justified and the delay will not cause substantial inconvenience to the general public. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.18 DEDICATION OF LAND FOR PARK FACILITIES AND PAYMENT OF IN-LIEU FEES
16.18.010 Purpose.
This chapter implements the provisions of Government Code Section 66477, which authorizes a City to require the dedication of land for park facilities and/or payment of in-lieu fees incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or parcel map for certain subdivisions. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.020 Parkland Dedication Requirements.
A.    The dedication of land for park facilities shall be required by the Planning Commission or Council incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or parcel map for a subdivision if the subdivision contains 51 or more separate lots, or consists of a condominium project containing 51 or more dwelling units, except any condominium project created by the conversion to a condominium of an existing multi-unit residential building which is more than five years old. In addition, when a condominium project or stock cooperative, as those terms are defined in Civil Code Section 1351, exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of lots may be less than 51.

B.     The land required to be dedicated for park purposes shall be of suitable quality to be used for park purposes. The City may condition the subdivider to fund the cost of a study to determine the suitability of the land proposed to be dedicated for park purposes.

C.     Property to be dedicated shall be free of any and all liens and encumbrances and shall include a California Land Title Association Standard Coverage title insurance policy, including a proper title record provided by the subdivider. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.030 Standards for Determining the Amount of Dedicated Parkland.
The amount of land required to be dedicated to the City for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision shall be consistent with the standards and policies for park facilities adopted in the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, or any Council resolution, and shall bear a reasonable relationship to the need for park facilities by the inhabitants of the subdivision. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.040 Amount of Dedicated Parkland to Be Required.
A.    Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, the number of acres or fraction of an acre of land required to be dedicated to the City for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision shall be 5.0 acres per 1,000 estimated population in the subdivision based on the product of the following:

1.     The maximum number of dwelling units permitted within the subdivision as determined from Title 17 (Zoning Regulations) and the conditionally approved tentative tract map or tentative parcel map applicable to the subdivision, multiplied by

2.     The average number of residents per dwelling unit within the incorporated territory of the City, as determined by the most recent population estimates provided by the State Department of Finance, multiplied by

3.     5.0 acres per 1,000 persons.

B.     If the subdivider provides park and recreational improvements to the dedicated land, the value of the improvements together with any equipment located thereon shall be credited against the payment of fees or dedication of land. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.050 Adjustments to Amount of Dedicated Parkland Which May Be Required to Account for Private Open Space.
A.    Where a tentative tract map or a tentative parcel map is approved for a common interest development, as defined in Civil Code Section 1351, which includes private open space set aside for active recreational purposes, then the maximum number of acres or fraction required to be dedicated to the City for park facilities incident to and as a condition of approval of such tentative tract map or tentative parcel map shall be reduced by an amount equal to 25 percent of the number of acres or fraction of an acre of the private open space set aside for private open space purposes.

B.     For purposes of this section, private open space set aside for active recreational purposes shall include any private open space within the subdivision other than yards, courtyard areas, setbacks, and other open areas required by Zoning Regulations, building regulations, and other regulations of the City which meets all of the following requirements:

1.     The private open space is open to and accessible by all residents of the subdivision;

2.     The private open space includes one or more of the following active recreational elements:

a.     Open spaces dedicated to active recreational pursuits such as soccer, golf, baseball, softball, and football;

b.     Tennis courts, basketball courts, racquetball courts, badminton courts, shuffleboard courts, or similar hard-surfaced areas especially designed and exclusively used for court games; and

c.     Recreational swimming pools or other swimming areas and those fenced areas directly adjacent to such swimming pools or swimming areas.

3.     Use of the private open space is restricted for active recreational purposes by a recorded covenant which runs with the land and which can be terminated only with the prior written consent of the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.060 Application of Parkland Dedication Requirements to Subdivisions Containing Lots Likely to Be Further Subdivided.
Where an application is filed for approval of a tentative map or a final parcel map for a subdivision which contains fewer than 51 lots, the subdivision, nevertheless, shall be deemed to contain 51 or more lots for purposes of land dedication requirements provided for by this chapter where the Planning Commission or Council, based on all available evidence, determines that one or more lots within the subdivision are likely to be further subdivided in a manner which would create a total of 51 or more lots within the entire subdivision. This evidence shall include, but not be limited to, the potential number of lots and/or dwelling units that would be permitted within the subdivision pursuant to the General Plan or any applicable specific plan. Moreover, where a subdivision contains lots likely to be further subdivided, the Planning Commission or Council shall determine the maximum number of acres and/or fraction of an acre to be dedicated to the City for park facilities in the manner provided by this chapter. This number shall be based on the maximum number of dwelling units which would be permitted within the subdivision pursuant to the provisions of the General Plan or any applicable specific plan rather than in the Zoning Regulations applicable to the subdivision. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.070 Improvements to Dedicated Parkland and Adjoining Public Rights-of-Way.
When the Planning Commission or Council has required the dedication of land for park facilities incident to and as a condition of the approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, the Planning Commission or Council, as a further condition of approval, may require the construction and installation of the following public improvements within the dedicated parkland and adjoining public rights-of-way:

A.    Storm drainage facilities necessary for the conveyance and disposal of stormwaters generated within or flowing through the dedicated parkland;

B.     Fencing necessary in order to provide an appropriate buffer between the dedicated parkland and adjoining properties;

C.     Street improvements within the adjoining public rights-of-way including, but not limited to, street paving, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, street trees, and traffic control devices;

D.    Utilities stubbed to the property line; and/or

E.     Any other public improvements which the Planning Commission or Council determines are necessary in order to make the dedicated parkland suitable for development as a park facility. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 684 § 1, 2005; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.080 Use of Dedicated Parkland.
Where parkland has been dedicated to and accepted by the City in accordance with the conditions of approval of a tentative tract map or tentative parcel map for a subdivision, the parkland shall be used for the purpose of developing new or rehabilitating existing neighborhood or community park and recreational facilities in accordance with a parkland development schedule adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

 

16.18.090 Payment of In-Lieu Fees for Park and Recreation Purposes.
A.    The Planning Commission or Council may require payment of in-lieu fees instead of or in combination with the dedication of parkland so long as the fees are equal to the value of the parkland which would otherwise have been dedicated. The subdivider of a subdivision containing 50 or fewer lots shall only be required to pay the in-lieu fees, provided that when a condominium project, stock cooperative, or community apartment project, as those terms are defined in Civil Code Section 1351, exceeds 50 dwelling units, dedication of land may be required notwithstanding that the number of lots may be less than 51.

B.     For any subdivision containing more than 50 lots, the Council may elect, at its sole discretion, to require the payment of in-lieu fees for park and recreation purposes instead of dedication of parkland if the subdivision is not conducive to the development of parks and recreation facilities. The Council’s decision regarding whether to require payment of in-lieu fees shall be based on the subdivision’s location, topography, quality of land resources, design constraints, and related factors.

C.     In-lieu fees required pursuant to this section shall be based upon the fair market value of the amount of land which would otherwise be required to be dedicated pursuant to Section 16.18.040 (Amount of Dedicated Parkland to Be Required), plus the cost of improvements pursuant to Section 16.18.070 (Improvements to Dedicated Parkland and Adjoining Public Rights-of-Way). The amount of the fee shall be fixed by the following formula:

 

       In Lieu Fee = Fair Market Value of the Amount of Land + Cost of Improvements x Park Standard of 5.0 acres of parkland per 1,000 persons x Persons Per Dwelling Unit.

 

The amount of the in-lieu fee shall be established by resolution of the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 634 § 3, 2000)

Chapter 16.20 MAJOR THOROUGHFARE FEES
16.20.010 Applicability.
A subdivider, as a condition of approval of a final tract map or final parcel map, or a building permit applicant, as a condition of issuance of a building permit, shall pay a fee as established in this title to defray the costs of constructing major thoroughfares. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.020 Payment of Major Thoroughfare Fees.
Payment of fees shall not be required unless any major thoroughfare is in addition to, or a widening or reconstruction of, any existing major thoroughfare serving the area at the time of the adoption of the boundaries of the area of benefit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.030 Establishment of Area of Benefit—Hearing.
Action to establish an area of benefit may be initiated by the Council upon its own motion or upon the recommendation of the Director, City Engineer, or other designated City employee. The proposal shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendations at a regular, adjourned, or special meeting. The Planning Commission’s comments and recommendations and the Director’s report shall be transmitted to the Council. The Council will set a public hearing for each proposed area benefitted. Notice of the time and place of the hearing, including preliminary information related to the boundaries of the area of benefit, estimated costs, and the method of fee apportionment, shall be given by first class mail addressed to each property owner within the proposed area of benefit, as shown on the last equalized assessment roll of property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.040 Conduct of Hearing—Protests.
A.    At the public hearing, the Council will consider the testimony, written protests, and other evidence. At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Council may, unless a majority written protest is filed and not withdrawn as specified in subsection C of this section, establish an area of benefit. If established, the Council shall adopt a resolution describing the boundaries of the area of benefit; setting forth the cost, whether actual or estimated; and the method of fee apportionment. A certified copy of such resolution shall be recorded with the County Recorder of the County of Orange. Such apportioned fee may be modified by a joint powers agency in accordance with Government Code Section 66484.3(b)(3).

B.     Such apportioned fees shall be applicable to all property within the area of benefit and shall be payable as a condition of approval of a final map or as a condition of issuing a building permit for the property or portions of the property. Where the area of benefit includes lands not subject to the payment of fees pursuant to this chapter, the Council shall make provisions for payment of the share of improvement costs apportioned to lands from other sources.

C.     Written protest shall be received by the City Clerk any time prior to the close of the public hearing. If written protests are filed by the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted by the improvement, and sufficient protests are not withdrawn so as to reduce the area represented by the protests to less than one-half of the area to be benefitted, then the proposed proceedings shall be abandoned, and the Council shall not, for one year from the filing of the written protests, commence or carry on any proceedings for the same improvement under the provisions of this section, unless the protests are overruled by an affirmative vote of four-fifths of the Council. Any protests may be withdrawn by the owner making the same, in writing, at any time prior to the close of the public hearing.

D.    If any majority protest is directed against only a portion of the improvement, then all further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter to construct that portion of the improvement so protested against shall be barred for a period of one year, but the Council shall not be barred from commencing new proceedings not including any part of the improvement so protested against. The proceedings shall be commenced by a new notice and public hearing as identified in Section 16.20.030 (Establishment of Area of Benefit—Hearing).

E.     Nothing in this section shall prohibit the Council, within such one-year period, from commencing and carrying on new proceedings for the construction of an improvement or portion of the improvements so protested against if it finds, by the affirmative vote of four-fifths of its members, that the owners of more than one-half of the area of the property to be benefitted are in favor of going forward with the improvement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.050 Deposit of Fees in Separate Accounts.
Fees paid pursuant to this chapter shall be deposited in a major thoroughfare fund. A fund shall be established for each planned major thoroughfare project. If the area of benefit is one in which more than one major thoroughfare is required to be constructed, a separate fund may be established covering all of the major thoroughfares in the area of benefit. If the area of benefit encompasses one or more major thoroughfares and all lands within the area of benefit are subject to the same proportionate fee for all thoroughfares, a single fund may be established to account for fees paid. Except as provided in Government Code Section 66484.3(g), moneys in the fund shall be expended solely for the construction or reimbursement for construction of improvements serving the area to be benefitted and from which the fees comprising the fund were collected or to reimburse the City for the costs of constructing the improvement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.060 Consideration in Lieu of Payment.
The Council may approve the acceptance of consideration in lieu of the payment of fees established in this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.070 Advancement of Funds by City.
The City may approve the advancement of money from the general fund or other fund to pay the costs of constructing the improvements covered and may reimburse the general fund or other fund for the advances from major thoroughfares funds established pursuant to this chapter. The sole security for replacement of the indebtedness shall be moneys in the major thoroughfares fund. The City may enter into a joint exercise of powers agreements with other local agencies for the purposes of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.080 Subdivider Construction of Major Thoroughfare—Reimbursement.
If the subdivider, as a condition of approval of the subdivision, or the building permit applicant, as a condition of the issuance of the building permit, is required or desires to construct a major thoroughfare, the Council may enter into a reimbursement agreement with the subdivider or building permit applicant. The agreement may provide for payments to the subdivider or applicant from the major thoroughfare fund covering that specific project to reimburse the subdivider or applicant for costs not allocated to the subdivider’s or applicant’s property in the resolution establishing the area of benefit. If the major thoroughfare fund covers more than one project, reimbursements shall be made on a pro rata basis reflecting the actual or estimated costs of the projects covered by the fund. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.20.090 Joint Powers Authority.
A.    For purposes of carrying out the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with Government Code Section 66484.3, the City may enter into joint exercise of powers agreements with other local agencies and/or may form joint powers authorities and/or joint powers agencies.

B.     Fees paid pursuant to this chapter may be utilized to defray all direct and indirect financing costs related to the construction of major thoroughfares by the joint powers agency. Because the financing costs of major thoroughfares for which a toll charge shall be established or collected represent a necessary element of the total cost of those major thoroughfares, the joint powers agency constructing those facilities may include a charge for financing costs in the calculation of the fee rate. The charge shall be based on the estimated financing cost of any eligible portion of the major thoroughfares for which tolls shall be collected. The eligible portion shall be any or all portions of the major thoroughfare for which a viable financial plan has been adopted by the joint powers agency on the basis of revenues reasonably expected by the joint powers agency to be available to the major thoroughfare, after consultation with representatives of the fee payers.

C.     For purposes of calculating the charge, financing costs shall include only reasonable allowances for payments and charges for principal, interest and premium on indebtedness, letter of credit fees and charges, remarketing fees and charges, underwriters’ discount, and other costs of issuance, less net earnings on major thoroughfare funds by the joint powers agency prior to the opening of the facility to traffic after giving effect to any payments from the fund to preserve the federal income tax exemption on the indebtedness. For purposes of calculating the charge for financing costs in the calculation of the fee rate only, financing costs shall not include any allowance for the cost of any interest paid on indebtedness with regard to each eligible portion after the estimated opening of the portion to traffic as established by the joint powers agency. Any and all challenges to any financial plan or financing costs adopted or calculated pursuant to this section shall be governed by Government Code Section 66484.3(k). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.22 TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS
16.22.010 Certificate from Tax Collector—Treasurer.
Prior to the filing of a final tract map or final parcel map with the Council, the subdivider shall file with the Orange County Surveyor a certificate from the Orange County Tax Collector Treasurer stating that, according to the records of such office, there are no liens against the subdivision or any part of the subdivision for unpaid State, County, municipal, or local taxes or special assessments collected as taxes, except taxes or special assessments collected as taxes not yet payable. As to taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien but not yet payable, the subdivider shall file with the Orange County Surveyor a certificate by the Orange County Tax Collector Treasurer giving his or her estimate of the amount of taxes and special assessments collected as taxes and special assessments collected as taxes which are a lien but not yet payable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.22.020 Security.
Whenever any part of the subdivision is subject to a lien for taxes or special assessments collected as taxes which are not yet payable, the final map shall not be recorded until the owner or subdivider executes and files with the Orange County Surveyor security conditioned upon the payment of all State, County, municipal, and local taxes and the current installment of principal and interest of all special assessments collected as taxes, which at the time the final map is recorded are a lien against the property, but which are not yet payable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.22.030 Apportionment.
The apportionment of security and delinquencies shall be handled in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.24 PARCEL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
16.24.010 Content and Form.
The content and form of parcel maps shall be governed by the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. The Planning Commission or Council may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with the map. The additional information shall be in the form of an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the map and contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes. The additional information may include, but is not limited to, building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping, archaeological sites, and possible boundary or title conflicts. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.24.020 Final Parcel Map Required.
A.    When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative parcel map process, a final parcel map shall be filed for record with the County Recorder and the County Surveyor pursuant to Government Code Section 66466. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until such parcel map has been filed for record and with the County Surveyor unless a waiver has been approved. If a tentative parcel map is filed and approved, the final parcel map shall be approved by the Council in accordance with Government Code Sections 66457 and 66458.

B.     A final parcel map for commercial or industrial zoned properties that identifies lease line or lines for tax purposes may be filed for recording with the County Recorder without being required to comply with the tentative parcel map requirements of this title. Each parcel on the final parcel map shall be identified by letter and shall not be considered to be a separate building site. No transfers of fee title may be made in connection with the final parcel map. Identification shall be shown on the face of the final parcel map as to its purpose, provided that it does not create building sites and that it does not permit transfer of fee title interest. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.24.030 Signatures Required.
A.    When dedications or offers of dedications are made on the final parcel map, all parties having any record title or interest in the real property being subdivided shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the final parcel map by signing the required certificate. The certificate shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easements, or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, provided that:

1.     The Planning Commission determines that division and development of the property in the manner identified on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement;

2.     The map contains a statement that the Planning Commission has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner identified on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and

3.     The public entity or utility has been given the opportunity to object to the determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     When dedications or offers of dedications are not being made, no owners’ or subdividers’ signature shall be required on the final parcel map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.24.040 Method of Approval.
A.    Final Parcel Map. The final parcel map shall be submitted to the Director and the City Engineer, who shall examine the map within 20 days of receipt of the final parcel map. If the City Engineer is satisfied that the map is technically correct and conforms with the approved tentative parcel map and any conditions imposed on the tentative parcel map, he/she shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. The Council shall then review and approve, conditionally approve, or deny the final parcel map.

B.     Agreements and Security. Whenever, as a condition of an approved tentative parcel map, agreements and/or security are required for installation of certain improvements, the agreements and security shall be approved by the Council prior to recordation of the final parcel map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.24.050 Filing with the County Recorder and County Surveyor.
The City Engineer shall transmit the approved final parcel map to the County Recorder for recordation within 20 days from the time that the parcel map is submitted for approval, unless the City Engineer or subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. It shall be the obligation of the subdivider to cause a copy of the approved final parcel map to be filed with the County Surveyor in accordance with Government Code Section 66466. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.26 FINAL MAPS—REQUIREMENTS AND PROCEDURES
16.26.010 Content and Form.
The content and form of final tract maps shall be governed by the provision of the Subdivision Map Act. The Council may require additional information to be filed or recorded simultaneously with the final tract map. The additional information shall be in the form of an additional map sheet which shall indicate its relationship to the map and contain a statement that the additional information is for informational purposes. The additional information may include, but is not limited to, building setback lines, flood hazard zones, seismic lines and setbacks, geologic mapping, archaeological sites, and possible boundary or title conflicts. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.26.020 Final Tract Map Required.
When a subdivision is proposed to be created through the tentative tract map process, a final tract map shall be filed for recording with the County Recorder and the County Surveyor pursuant to Government Code Section 66466. No proposed subdivision shall be complete until the final tract map has been filed for recording. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.26.030 Signatures Required.
All parties having any record title interest in the real property being subdivided shall consent to the preparation and recordation of the final tract map by signing the required certificate. The signatures shall be properly acknowledged. The certificate need not be signed by public entities and public utilities which own rights-of-way, easements, or other interests which cannot ripen into a fee, provided that:

A.    Division and development of the property in the manner identified on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement;

B.     The map contains a statement that the Council has determined that the division and development of the property in the manner identified on the map will not unreasonably interfere with the free and complete exercise of the public entity or public utility right-of-way or easement; and

C.     The public entity or utility has been given an opportunity to object to such a determination in accordance with the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.26.040 Method of Approval.
A.    Final tract maps, together with any required improvement agreements and security, shall be submitted to the Director and the City Engineer for review and preliminary determination as to:

1.     Compliance with any conditions imposed on the approval of the tentative tract map; and

2.     Substantial conformance with the approved tentative tract map and any approved alterations of the tentative tract map.

B.     Following the determination of the City Engineer and Director that the subdivision is either in compliance with, in substantial conformance with, or does not conform to the tentative map, the City Engineer and Director shall forward the final map to the City Council for acceptance or non-acceptance. The Council shall make an advisory ruling to the City Engineer and Director.

C.     Based on direction provided by the Council, within 20 days (or more if requested by the subdivider) after the Council issues its advisory to the City Engineer and Director regarding whether all conditions precedent to the approval of the final tract map have been satisfied and any required improvement agreements and security are in order, the City Engineer shall execute the certificate required by the Subdivision Map Act. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 2, 2012; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.26.050 Filing with the Council.
After the City Engineer executes the certificate, then he/she shall transmit the final tract map to the City Clerk. The City Clerk shall present the map and any required agreements, securities, and approvals to the Council for their approval and execution of the certificate by the City Clerk. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.26.060 Filing with the County Recorder and County Surveyor.
The City Engineer shall transmit the approved final tract map to the County Recorder for recordation, unless the City Engineer or subdivider requests an alternate time schedule for recordation. It shall be the obligation of the subdivider to cause a copy of the approved final tract map to be filed with the County Surveyor in accordance with Government Code Section 66466. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.28 WAIVERS AND EXCEPTIONS
16.28.010 Waivers and Exceptions Permitted.
When requested by the subdivider or by a governmental agency, waivers from the requirement for recording a final parcel map and exceptions to the tentative parcel map process may be approved by the Planning Commission in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. When any such waiver request is approved a certificate of compliance may be recorded in lieu of a parcel map. The requirement for recording a final parcel map shall not be waived when the City Engineer finds that a survey and/or monumentation is necessary. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.28.020 Types of Subdivisions Eligible.
A.    Only the following types of subdivisions are eligible to receive a waiver from the requirement for recording a final parcel map:

1.     Subdivisions containing four or fewer parcels, each of which is a minimum of five acres in area and is proposed for further subdivision;

2.     Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of 20 acres or more and a right of vehicular access for a continuous width of not less than 40 feet to a maintained public street or highway having a right-of-way width of not less than 40 feet;

3.     Subdivisions wherein each parcel will have a gross area of not less than 40 acres;

4.     Subdivisions in accordance with Government Code Section 66428.1 wherein at least two-thirds of the owners of mobile homes who are tenants in the mobile home park sign a petition indicating their intent to purchase the mobile home park for purposes of converting it to tenant-owned, condominium ownership interest and further, a field survey is performed, the requirement for a parcel map as a tentative and final map specified by Government Code Section 66426 shall be waived unless any of the following exist:

a.     There are significant design or improvement requirements necessitated by health or safety concerns,

b.     Subsequent to recordation of the existing final parcel or final tract map, there is an exterior boundary discrepancy that requires recordation of a new parcel or tentative and final map,

c.     The existing lot or lots were not created by a recorded parcel or final tract map,

d.     The conversion would result in the creation of additional parcels, or

e.     The text of the petition to be signed by the tenants shall follow the form as identified in Government Code Section 66428(c).

B.     If pursuant to Government Code Section 66428, the City imposes requirements on the applicant to mitigate health or safety conditions, no improvement bonds or other security device, except an unsecured improvement agreement, may be required. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.28.030 Waiver Procedure.
A waiver from the requirement for recording a parcel map may be approved in compliance with the following procedure:

A.    A tentative parcel map, accurately describing the existing legally created lot and each proposed lot shall be submitted. Such tentative parcel map shall be processed in compliance with the tentative parcel map procedure except that it need not be prepared by a licensed land surveyor or civil engineer and need include only such information that the City Engineer and the Planning Commission find to be necessary to make the required determinations.

B.     A waiver request shall accompany the tentative parcel map. The exception to the tentative parcel map requirements specified in subsection A of this section is permitted only when a tentative parcel map proposes one of the subdivisions specified by Section 16.28.020 (Types of Subdivisions Eligible) and when such map is accompanied by a waiver request.

C.     Prior to any action by the Planning Commission to approve a waiver, the City Engineer shall examine the map and shall identify each proposed lot as a building site or a nonbuilding site.

D.    Prior to any action to approve a waiver, the Planning Commission shall find that the subdivision:

1.     Will comply with City requirements as to area, improvement and design, floodwater drainage control, appropriate improved public roads, sanitary disposal facilities, water supply availability, and environmental protection;

2.     Will satisfy any other requirements pertaining to the subdivision of land as specified in the Subdivision Map Act, this title, and any other applicable City ordinance; and

3.     Will not create any unnecessary conditions or situations that will be incompatible with existing and possible future uses of adjacent properties. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.28.040 Waiver Does Not Establish Lots.
The approval of a waiver of the requirement to record a parcel map does not create a subdivision or satisfy the requirements applicable to the division of a lot of land. Any lots shown on a tentative map for which a parcel map has been waived shall not be considered to be legally established until a certificate of compliance for the lots has been filed in the office of the County Recorder of the County of Orange. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.28.050 Time to Record a Certificate of Compliance.
A waiver of the requirement to record a parcel map is valid only for the time as the subject tentative map is valid, and a waiver approval shall expire concurrently with the expiration of the tentative map approval. After a waiver has been approved and within the period of validity of a tentative map, and when the Director has determined that all conditions and requirements of the tentative map have been satisfied, the Director shall cause a certificate of compliance to be recorded in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 16.32 (Certificate of Compliance). In the event any required conditions have not been satisfied, a conditional certificate of compliance may be recorded within the specified time period. The conditional certificate of compliance shall contain a notice of the conditions that are required to be satisfied prior to the recordation of a certificate of compliance. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.30 REVERSIONS TO ACREAGE
16.30.010 Reversion Authorized.
All subdivided real property may be reverted to acreage pursuant to the provisions of the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.32 CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE
16.32.010 Approval.
Certificates of compliance and conditional certificates of compliance shall be approved by the Director. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.32.020 Procedure.
Requests for a certificate of compliance and conditional certificate of compliance shall be processed and reviewed in compliance with the provisions and procedures identified in Government Code Sections 66412.6 and 66499.35. No certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance shall be valid until it has been recorded in the office of the County Recorder. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.32.030 Appeal to Planning Commission.
Any interested person may appeal any action of the Director on a certificate of compliance or conditional certificate of compliance to the Planning Commission. The appeal shall be made in writing within 10 days of the final action of the Director and shall be addressed to the secretary of the Planning Commission. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.34 LOT LINE ADJUSTMENTS
16.34.010 Application—Approval.
A.    For the purposes of this chapter, a lot line adjustment is any division of land not requiring a subdivision tract map, as specified by the Subdivision Map Act, Government Code Section 66411 et seq., where adjustment is sought between two or more existing adjacent lots, and where the land taken from one lot is added to an adjacent lot, and where a greater number of lots than originally existed is not created, provided the lot line adjustment is approved by the Director as the advisory agency for purposes of the Subdivision Map Act.

B.     The Director shall initially review the application for a lot line adjustment to determine if the application is complete. Thereafter, the Director shall limit his or her review and approval to a determination of whether or not the lots resulting from the lot line adjustment will conform to the Zoning Regulations and building codes. The Director in reviewing lot line adjustments proposals shall not impose conditions or exactions on the approval of a lot line adjustment except to conform to the Zoning Regulations and building codes to facilitate the relocation of existing utilities, infrastructure, or easements, and to require the prepayment of real property taxes prior to the approval of the lot line adjustment.

C.     No tentative map, final parcel map, or final tract map shall be required as a condition to the approval of a lot line adjustment.

D.    Any lot line adjustment approved shall be reflected in a deed which shall be recorded. No record of survey shall be required for a lot line adjustment unless required by Business and Professions Code Section 8762.

E.     The decision to approve or deny a lot line adjustment by the Director, acting as the advisory agency, shall be in writing and sent by mail to the applicant within 50 days from the date the application was complete. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.34.020 Parcel Map Optional.
Nothing in this chapter shall prohibit an applicant for a lot line adjustment from submitting a tentative parcel map in lieu of the procedure outlined in this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.34.030 Appeal.
Any person adversely affected by a decision to approve or deny a lot line adjustment may appeal that decision to the Council. The appeal shall be made in writing within 10 days of the final action of the Director and shall be addressed to the City Clerk. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.36 MERGER OF LOTS
16.36.010 Authority to Merge Lots.
A.    The Director is authorized to accept applications for the merger of two contiguous lots or units of land with a contiguous lot, or units of land held by the same owner if any one of the contiguous lots or units of land held by the same owner does not conform to the standards for minimum lot size under the Zoning Regulations applicable to the lots or units of land if all of the following requirements are satisfied:

1.     At least one of the affected lots is undeveloped by any structure for which a building permit was issued or for which a building permit was not required at the time of construction, or is developed only with an accessory structure or accessory structures, or is developed with a single structure, other than an accessory structure, that is also partially sited on a contiguous lot or unit;

2.     With respect to any affected lot, one or more of the following conditions exists:

a.     The lot comprises less than 5,000 square feet in area at the time of the determination of merger,

b.     The lot was not created in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances in effect at the time of its creation,

c.     The lot does not meet current standards for sewage disposal and domestic water supply,

d.     The lot does not meet slope stability standards,

e.     The lot has no legal access which is adequate for vehicular and safety equipment access and maneuverability,

f.      The lot development would create health or safety hazards, or

g.     The lot is inconsistent with the applicable General Plan and any applicable specific plan, other than minimum lot size or density standards.

B.     For purposes of determining whether contiguous lots are held by the same owner, ownership shall be determined as of the date that notice of intention to determine status is recorded as provided by Section 16.36.030 (Notice of Intent to Determine Status).

C.     The provisions of this chapter shall not apply if any one of the following conditions exist:

1.     On or before July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous lots or units of land is enforceably restricted open space land pursuant to a contract, agreement, scenic restriction, or open space easement, as defined and identified in Revenue and Taxation Code Section 421;

2.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous lots or units of land is timberland as defined in Government Code Section 51104, or is land devoted to an agricultural use as defined in Government Code Section 51201;

3.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous lots or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of the site on which an existing commercial mineral resource extraction use is being made, whether or not the extraction is being made pursuant to a use permit issued by the City;

4.     On July 1, 1981, one or more of the contiguous lots or units of land is located within 2,000 feet of a future commercial mineral extraction site as shown on a plan for which a use permit or other permit authorizing commercial mineral resource extraction has been issued by the City.

D.    For purposes of subsections (C)(3) and (C)(4) of this section, “mineral resource extraction” means gas, oil, hydrocarbon, gravel or sand extraction, geothermal wells, or other similar commercial mining activity. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.020 Recordation of Notice.
A merger of lots becomes effective when the City causes to be filed for record with the Orange County Recorder a notice of merger specifying the names of the record owners and particularly describing the real property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.030 Notice of Intent to Determine Status.
Prior to recording a notice of merger, the City shall cause to be mailed by certified mail to the then current record owner of the property a notice of intention to determine status, notifying the owner that the affected lots may be merged pursuant to the standards in this chapter, and advising the owner of the opportunity to request a hearing on determination of status and to present evidence at the hearing that the property does not meet the criteria for merger. The notice of intention to determine status shall be filed for record with the Orange County Recorder on the date that notice is mailed to the property owner. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.040 Request for Hearing on Determination of Status.
At any time within 30 days after recording of the notice of intention to determine status, the owner of the affected property may file with the City a request for a hearing on determination of status. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.050 Hearing—Time, Date and Place.
A.    Upon receiving a request for a hearing on determination of status from the owner of the affected property pursuant to Section 16.36.040 (Request for Hearing on Determination of Status), the City shall fix a time, date, and place for a hearing to be conducted by the Council, and shall notify the property owner of that time, date, and place for the hearing by certified mail. The hearing shall be conducted not more than 60 days following the City’s receipt of the property owner’s request for the hearing, but may be postponed or continued with the mutual consent of the City and its determination.

B.     A determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.36.010 (Authority to Merge Lots). A determination of merger shall be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Section 16.36.040 (Request for Hearing on Determination of Status). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.060 Hearing—Evidence—Determination of Status.
A.    At the hearing, the property owner shall be given the opportunity to present any evidence that the affected property does not meet the standards for merger specified in this chapter.

B.     At the conclusion of the hearing, the Council shall make a determination that the affected parcels are to be merged or are not to be merged and shall notify the owner of its determination. A determination of nonmerger may be made whether or not the affected property meets the standards for merger specified in Section 16.36.010 (Authority to Merge Lots). A determination of merger shall be recorded within 30 days after conclusion of the hearing, as provided for in Section 16.36.040 (Request for Hearing on Determination of Status). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.070 Failure to Request Hearing—Determination of Merger.
A.    If, within the 30-day period specified in Section 16.36.040 (Request for Hearing on Determination of Status) the owner does not file a request for a hearing in accordance with Section 16.36.040 (Request for Hearing on Determination of Status), the City may, at any time thereafter, make a determination that the affected lots are to be merged or are not to be merged.

B.     A determination of merger shall be recorded as provided for in Section 16.36.020 (Recordation of Notice) no later than 90 days following the mailing of notice required by Section 16.36.030 (Notice of Intent to Determine Status). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.080 Determination Not to Merge—Release of Notice of Intent to Determine Status—Recordation, Clearance Letter.
If, in accordance with Section 16.36.060 (Hearing—Evidence—Determination of Status) or 16.36.070 (Failure to Request Hearing—Determination of Merger), the City determines that the subject property shall not be merged, the City shall cause to be recorded in the manner specified in Section 16.36.020 (Recordation of Notice) a release of the notice of intention to determine status and shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.36.090 Failure to Comply with This Chapter.
A.    The failure of the City to comply with the requirements of this chapter for the merger of contiguous lots or units of land held in common ownership shall render void and ineffective any resulting merger or recorded notice of merger, and no further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing of those contiguous lots or units, or any of them, until such time as the lots or units of land have been lawfully merged by subsequent proceedings initiated by the City which meet the requirements of this chapter.

B.     The failure of the City to comply with the requirements of any prior law establishing requirements for the merger of contiguous lots or units of land held in common ownership shall render voidable any resulting merger or recorded notice of merger. From and after the date the City determines that its actions did not comply with the prior law, or a court enters a judgment declaring that the actions of the City did not comply with the prior law, no further proceedings under the provisions of this chapter shall be required for the purpose of sale, lease, or financing of such contiguous lots or units, or any of them, until such time as the lots or units of land have been lawfully merged by subsequent proceedings initiated by the City which meet the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Chapter 16.38 MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
16.38.010 Exceptions for Lots Recorded Prior to 1963 or Dedicated for Cemetery Purposes.
This title shall not apply to any lot not conforming to the provisions of this title for which a deed is of record or for which a contract of sale was in full force and effect and recorded prior to the 1963-64 assessment roll of the City, nor to any land dedicated for cemetery purposes under the Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 171, 1967)

 

16.38.020 Compliance with Title Required.
No building shall be constructed nor shall a permit for the construction of a building be issued, nor shall any portion of any lot be used when not conforming to this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 171, 1967)

 

16.38.030 Penalty—Injunction.
Any offer to finance, lease, sell, or contract to sell, or any financing of a division of land, lease, or sale contrary to the provisions of this title shall be a misdemeanor, and any person, upon conviction of the misdemeanor, shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $500.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months, or by both fine and imprisonment; except that nothing contained in this title shall be deemed to bar any legal, equitable, or summary remedy to which the City or other political subdivision or any person may otherwise be entitled, and the City or any other political subdivision or any person may file an action in the Superior Court of the State, in and for the County of Orange, to restrain or enjoin any attempted or proposed subdivision or sale in violation of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 171, 1967)

 

16.38.040 Noncomplying Transfer Voidable.
Any transfer or conveyance, or purported transfer or conveyance, or agreement to transfer or convey any lot of land without compliance with the terms of this title shall be voidable at the option of the transferee in accordance with the provisions of Government Code Section 66499.32. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 329 § 9, 1976; Ord. 171, 1967)

 

16.38.050 Environmental Impact.
No parcel or tentative map filed pursuant to the provisions of this title shall be approved unless the parcel or tentative map complies with and is accompanied by appropriate environmental documents in accordance with the California Environmental Quality Act, Public Resources Code Section 21000 et seq. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 329 § 10, 1976)

Chapter 16.40 NOTICES OF VIOLATION
16.40.010 Notice of Intention to Record Notice of Violation.
Whenever the Director or City Engineer has information indicating that real property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title, the Director or City Engineer shall mail by certified mail or other means providing proof of delivery to the then current owner of record of the property a notice of intention to record a notice of violation, describing the real property in detail, naming the owners in violation, and stating that an opportunity will be given to the owner to present evidence on the issue whether the property has been divided in violation of the Subdivision Map Act or this title. The notice shall specify a time, date, and place for a meeting at which the owner may present evidence to the Planning Commission why the notice should not be recorded. The notice shall also contain a description of the violations and an explanation as to why the subject parcel is not lawful under Government Code Section 66412.6. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.40.020 Receipt of Evidence.
The meeting shall take place no sooner than 30 days and no later than 60 days from date of mailing the notice of intention to record a notice of violation. If, within 15 days of receipt of the notice of intention to record a notice of violation the owner of the real property fails to inform the local agency of his or her objection to recording the notice of violation, the Planning Commission shall record the notice of violation with the Orange County Recorder. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.40.030 Planning Commission Determination.
A.    If, after the owner has presented evidence, the Planning Commission determines that there has been no violation, the Director shall mail a clearance letter to the then current owner of record.

B.     If, after the owner has presented evidence, the Planning Commission determines that there has been a violation the Director shall record the notice of violation with the Orange County Recorder. The notice of violation, when recorded, shall be deemed to be constructive notice of the violation to all successors in interest in such property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

 

16.40.040 Release by Certificate of Compliance.
A notice of violation may be released by a certificate of compliance pursuant to Chapter 16.32 (Certificate of Compliance). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 580 § 2, 1994)

Title 17 ZONING
Division 1: ENACTMENT, APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT
Division 2: ZONES, ALLOWABLE USES, AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Division 3: SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Division 4: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
Division 5: LAND USE AND PERMIT PROCEDURES
Division 6: ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION, HEARING PROCEDURES, AND LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS
Division 7: DEFINITIONS

Division 1: ENACTMENT, APPLICABILITY AND ENFORCEMENT
Chapter 17.00 PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY OF THE LOS ALAMITOS ZONING CODE
17.00.010 Title
Title 17 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code shall be known and cited as the “Los Alamitos Zoning Code” or “Zoning Code.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.00.020 Purpose and Authority
The Los Alamitos Zoning Code is intended to regulate the use and development of land within the City consistent with the City of Los Alamitos General Plan. It is also the intent of this Zoning Code to promote orderly development; protect the public health, safety, and general welfare; protect the character, social diversity, and economic vitality of neighborhoods and business districts; and ensure that new uses and development benefit the City.

This Zoning Code is enacted based on the authority vested in the City of Los Alamitos by the State of California, including, but not limited to, the State Constitution, the Planning and Zoning Law (Government Code Section 65000 et seq.), the Subdivision Map Act (Government Code Section 66410 et seq.), and the California Health and Safety Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.00.030 Prior Rights and Violations
The enactment of this Zoning Code shall not terminate nor otherwise affect vested land use development permits, approvals, or agreements authorized under the provisions of any ordinance or resolution, nor shall violation of any prior ordinance or resolution be excused by the adoption of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.00.040 Relationship to General Plan
This Zoning Code and the Zoning Map are the primary tools used by the City of Los Alamitos to implement the goals, objectives, and strategies of the Los Alamitos General Plan, which is the overall policy document of the City, now referred to as the “General Plan.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.00.050 Relationship to CEQA
When a project application subject to the provisions of this Zoning Code is determined to be subject to the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA), the application shall be reviewed in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, CEQA (Public Resources Code, Section 21000 et seq.), the CEQA Guidelines (Title 14, California Code of Regulations, Section 15000 et seq.), and any environmental guidelines and other applicable rules adopted by the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.00.060 Applicability
A.    Generally. This Zoning Code applies to land uses, structures, and development within the City of Los Alamitos, as provided by this section.

B.     New Land Uses or Structures, Changes to Land Uses or Structures. Compliance with the requirements of Section 17.06.020 (General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses) or, where applicable, Chapter 17.66 (Nonconformities), is necessary for a person or public agency to lawfully establish, construct, reconstruct, alter, or replace a use of land or structure.

C.     Issuance of Building or Grading Permits. The Development Services Department may issue building, construction, or grading permits only when the proposed land use or structure satisfies the requirements of subsection B of this section, and other applicable statutes, ordinances, and regulations.

D.    Continuation of an Existing Land Use. An existing land use is lawful only when it was legally established in compliance with applicable regulations, and when it is operated and maintained in compliance with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, including Chapter 17.66 (Nonconformities). Existing land uses that were in violation of this Zoning Code applicable before the effective date of Chapter 17.66 are in violation of this Zoning Code. These uses shall continue to be in violation unless they conform to the current provisions of this Zoning Code, except as otherwise provided herein.

E.     Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this Zoning Code shall be minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety, and general welfare. When this Zoning Code provides for discretion on the part of an applicable review authority, that discretion may be exercised to impose more stringent requirements than identified herein as may be necessary to promote orderly land use development and the purposes of this Zoning Code.

F.     Other Requirements May Still Apply. Nothing in this Zoning Code eliminates the need for obtaining a permit, approval, or entitlement required by other provisions of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code or complying with the regulations of a City department, or a County, regional, State, or Federal agency.

G.    Conflicting Requirements. Conflicts between different requirements of this Zoning Code, or between this Zoning Code and other regulations, shall be resolved in compliance with Section 17.02.020(E) (Rules of Interpretation).

H.    Uses that Contravene State or Federal Law. Notwithstanding any provision in this Zoning Code to the contrary, any use of land, operation, or business that cannot be, or is not, conducted or carried out without being in violation of State or Federal law shall be prohibited in all planning areas, districts, or zones within the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 07-04 § 2, 2007; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.00.070 Severability
If any portion of this Zoning Code is held to be invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable by a court of competent jurisdiction, such determination shall not affect the validity, constitutionality, or enforceability of the remaining portions of this Zoning Code. The Council hereby declares that this article and each chapter, section, subsection, paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, and portion thereof is adopted without regard to the fact that one or more portions of this Zoning Code may be declared invalid, unconstitutional, or unenforceable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.02 INTERPRETATION OF LOS ALAMITOS ZONING CODE PROVISIONS
17.02.010 Purpose and Intent
The purpose of this chapter is to specify the authority and procedures for clarifying any ambiguity in the regulations of this Zoning Code and to ensure consistent interpretation and application of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.02.020 Rules of Interpretation
A.    Authority. The Director has the authority to interpret provisions of this Zoning Code according to Section 17.02.030 (Procedures for Interpretation). Whenever the Director determines that the meaning or applicability of this Zoning Code requirement is subject to interpretation, the Director shall issue a written interpretation. The Director may also refer any issue of interpretation to the Planning Commission for a determination.

B.     Terminology. When used in this Zoning Code, the following rules apply to all provisions.

1.     Language. The words “shall,” “must,” “will,” “is to,” and “are to” are mandatory. “Should” is not mandatory but is strongly recommended, and “may” is permissive.

2.     Tense. The present tense includes the past and future tense, and the future tense includes the present.

3.     Number. The singular number includes the plural number, and the plural the singular, unless the natural construction of the words indicates otherwise.

4.     Calculations.

a.     Residential Density. When the number of dwelling units allowed on a site is calculated based on the minimum site area per dwelling unit, any fraction of a unit shall be rounded down to the next lowest whole number. For projects eligible for a density bonus subject to Government Code Section 65915 or any successor statute, any fractional number of permitted density bonus units shall be rounded up to the next whole number.

b.     Other Calculations. For calculations required by this Zoning Code other than those described in paragraph (4)(a) of this subsection, the fractional/decimal results of calculations shall be rounded to the next highest whole number when the fraction/decimal is 0.4 or more, and to the next lowest whole number when the fraction is less than 0.4.

5.     Conjunctions. “And” indicates that all connected items or provisions shall apply. “Or” indicates that the connected items or provisions may apply singly or in any combination. “Either…or” indicates that the connected items and provisions shall apply singly but not in combination. “Includes” and “including” shall mean “including but not limited to.”

6.     Local Reference. “City” means the City of Los Alamitos, and all public officials, bodies, and agencies referenced are those of the City unless otherwise stated.

7.     Definitions. As defined in Division 7 (Definitions) and/or as determined/interpreted by the Director.

8.     Abbreviated Titles and Phrases. For the purpose of brevity, and unless otherwise indicated, the following phrases, names of personnel and decision-making bodies are shortened in this Zoning Code.

a.     The Development Services Director is referred to as the “Director.”

b.     The City Council is referred to as the “Council.”

c.     The State of California is referred to as the “State.”

d.     The City of Los Alamitos Municipal Code is referred to as the “Municipal Code.”

e.     The California Subdivision Map Act is referred to as the “Map Act.”

C.     Number of Days. Whenever a number of days is specified in this Zoning Code, or in a permit, condition of approval, or notice issued or given as provided herein, the number of days shall be construed as calendar days, unless business days are specified. Time limits shall extend to the following business day where the last of the specified number of days falls on a day that the City is not open for business, except as otherwise provided for by the Map Act.

D.    Minimum Requirements. When interpreting and applying the regulations of this Zoning Code, all provisions shall be considered to be minimum requirements, unless specifically stated otherwise.

E.     Conflicting Requirements. Conflicts between different requirements of this Zoning Code, or between this Zoning Code and other regulations, shall be resolved as follows:

1.     Zoning Code Provisions. In the event of a conflict between the provisions of this Zoning Code, the most restrictive requirement shall apply.

2.     Development Agreements or Specific Plans. In the event of a conflict between the requirements of this Zoning Code and standards adopted as part of a Development Agreement or Specific Plan, the requirements of the Development Agreement or Specific Plan shall apply.

3.     Municipal Code Provisions. In the event of a conflict between requirements of this Zoning Code and other regulations of the City, the most restrictive shall apply.

4.     Private Agreements. It is not intended that the requirements of this Zoning Code shall interfere with, repeal, abrogate or annul an easement, covenant, or other agreement that existed when the ordinance codified in this Zoning Code became effective. This Zoning Code apply to land uses and development regardless of whether it imposes a greater or lesser restriction on the development or use of structures or land than an applicable private agreement or restriction, without affecting the applicability of an agreement or restriction. The City shall not enforce a private covenant or agreement unless it is a party to the covenant or agreement.

F.     Zoning Map Boundaries. If there is uncertainty about the location of a zoning district boundary shown on the official Zoning Map, the following rules are to be used in resolving the uncertainty.

1.     Where the Zoning Map shows a parcel or area within a particular zone, the zone shall extend to the centerline of an adjacent road, street, parkway, or highway.

2.     Where the exact boundaries of a zone cannot be readily or exactly ascertained by reference to the Zoning Map, the boundary shall be deemed to be included within the zone that is more restrictive.

3.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to acreage.

4.     If a zone boundary divides a parcel and the boundary line location is not specified by distances printed on the Zoning Map, the Director shall determine the location of the boundary by using the scale appearing on the Zoning Map.

5.     Where a public street, alley, railroad, or other public right-of-way is officially vacated or abandoned, property that was within the former right-of-way shall be deemed to be included within the zone applicable to the property to which the abandoned right-of-way is being attached.

G.    Measurement of Height and Area Requirements. When this Zoning Code requires that compliance to a standard is met by specific measurements and there is an ambiguity concerning the measurement, the Director shall decide as to the correct measurement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.02.030 Procedures for Interpretation
A.    Authority of Director to Interpret; Referral to Commission. Whenever the Director or designee determines that the meaning or applicability of any of the requirements of this Zoning Code is subject to interpretation generally, or as applied to a specific case, the Director may issue an official interpretation or refer the question to the Planning Commission for determination.

B.     Request for Interpretation. Any party may file a request for an interpretation or determination of this Zoning Code with the Director and shall include with such request the specific provisions in question and any other information necessary to assist the Director in the review.

C.     Findings, Basis for Interpretation. The issuance of an interpretation by the Director/Planning Commission shall include findings stating the basis for the interpretation. The basis for an interpretation may include technological changes or new industry standards. The issuance of an interpretation shall also include a finding documenting the consistency of the interpretation with the General Plan.

D.    Record of Interpretation/Determinations. All interpretations and determinations by the Director and Planning Commission shall be made in writing, and a permanent record of such interpretations and determinations shall be kept.

1.     Interpretations and determinations shall quote the provisions of the Zoning Code being interpreted, together with the applicability in the particular or general circumstances that caused the need for interpretations and the determination; and

2.     A provision of this Zoning Code that is determined by the director to need refinement or revision shall be corrected by amending this Zoning Code as soon as is practical. Until an amendment can occur, the Director shall maintain a record of official interpretations as an appendix to this Zoning Code and indexed by the number of the chapter or section that is the subject of the interpretation.

E.     Referral of Interpretation. The Director has the option of forwarding an interpretation or determination of the meaning or applicability of a provision of this Zoning Code directly to the Planning Commission for consideration.

F.     Appeals. Any interpretation of this Zoning Code by the Director or Planning Commission may be appealed in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.02.040 Uses Not Classified
A.    Use Not Listed Is Not Allowed. If a use of land is not specifically listed in Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Standards), the use shall not be allowed, except as provided below.

B.     Director’s Determination. Based on the authority granted in Section 17.02.030 (Procedures for Interpretation), the Director may determine that a land use that is not listed in Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Standards) may be allowed. In making this determination, the Director shall first make all of the following findings:

1.     The characteristics of, and activities associated with, the use are equivalent to those of one or more of the uses listed in the zone as allowable, and will not involve a greater level of activity, population density, intensity, traffic generation, parking, dust, odor, noise, emissions, or similar impacts than the uses listed in the zone;

2.     The use will meet the purpose/intent of the zone that is applied to the location of the use; and

3.     The use will be consistent with the goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan and/or any applicable Specific Plan.

C.     Applicable Standards and Permit Requirements. When the Director determines that an unlisted land use is equivalent to a listed use, the unlisted use will be treated in the same manner as the listed use in determining where the use is allowed, what permits are required, and what other standards and requirements of this Zoning Code apply. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.02.050 Illustrations
In case of a conflict between the Zoning Code text and any diagram, illustration, or image contained in the Municipal Code, the text shall control. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.02.060 State Law Requirements
Where this Zoning Code refers to provisions of State law (for example, the California Government Code, Subdivision Map Act, Public Resources Code, etc.), the references shall be interpreted to be to the applicable State law provisions as they may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

Division 2: ZONES, ALLOWABLE USES, AND DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS
Chapter 17.04 ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES, ADOPTION OF ZONING MAP
17.04.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes the zones applied to properties within the City, sets forth how the zones are applied on the zoning map, establishes the general permit requirements for development and land uses citywide. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.04.020 Zones Established
The City shall be divided into zones that implement the General Plan land use designations. The zones into which the City is divided are defined in Table 2-01 (Zones and General Plan Designations).

 

Table 2-01: Zones and General Plan Designations

 

Zone Symbol

Zone Name

General Plan Land Use Designation

Residential Zones

 

 

R-1

Single Family Residential Zone

Single-Family Residential

R-2

Limited Multi-Family Residential Zone

Limited Multi-Family Residential

R-3

Multi-Family Residential Zone

Multi-Family Residential

M-H

Mobile Home Park Zone

Limited Multi-Family Residential

Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

C-O

Commercial/Professional Office Zone

Professional Office

C-G

General Commercial Zone

Retail Business

P-L-I

Planned Light Industrial Zone

Planned Industrial

Mixed Use Zones

 

 

TCMU

Town Center Mixed Use Zone

Mixed Use

Special Purpose Zones

 

O-A

Open Area Zone

Open Area/Easement Overlay

C-F

Community Facilities Zone

Community & Institutional and Community & Institutional/JFTB

SP

Specific Plan

Specific Plan

Overlay Zones

 

 

MOZ

Medical Overlay Zone

Medical Overlay

ROZ

Retail Overlay Zone

Retail Overlay

LWOZ

Live/Work Overlay Zone

Limited Multiple Family Residential; Mixed Use

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-03 § 3, 2016; Ord. 15-09 § 2, 2015; Ord. 15-03 § 2, 2015; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.04.030 Zoning Map Adopted
The designations, locations, and boundaries of the zones established are delineated upon the map entitled “Zoning Map of the City of Los Alamitos, California.” Materials, references, data, and other information shown on the zoning map and as amended from time to time are made a part of this Title 17 by reference. The Director shall be responsible for the custody and maintenance of and amendments to the zoning map. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.04.040 Zoning of Annexed Areas and Undesignated Properties
A.    Annexed/Unincorporated Areas. Where adjoining unincorporated land has been prezoned in compliance with the methods provided by this Zoning Code for zoning within the City, the zone applied by the prezoning action shall become effective when lands are annexed to the City.

B.     Undesignated Land. Land now or later included within the City boundaries that is not a public right-of-way or pre-zoned in compliance with subsection A of this section or is designated on the zoning map as being included in a zone shall be designated as R-1 (Single-Family Residential). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.06 LAND USE PERMIT REQUIREMENTS
17.06.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes general requirements for the approval of proposed development and new land uses in the City. The land use permit requirements for specific land uses are established by Division 2 (Zones, Land Uses, and Zone-Specific Standards), and Division 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.06.020 General Requirements for Development and New Land Uses
Uses of land and/or structures shall be established, constructed, reconstructed, altered, or replaced in compliance with the following requirements.

A.    Allowable Uses. The land uses for lots of land shall be identified by Chapter 17.08 (Residential Zones), Chapter 17.10 (Commercial/Industrial Zones), or Chapter 17.14 (Special Purpose and Overlay Zones). The Director may determine whether a land use is allowable in compliance with Section 17.02.020 (Rules of Interpretation)

B.     Permit/Approval Requirements. Land use permits or other approvals required by Section 17.08.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones), Section 17.12.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Zones), and Section 17.14.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose and Overlay Zones) shall be obtained by the applicant before the proposed use is established, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, moved, or otherwise put into operation, unless the proposed use is exempt as provided in Section 17.06.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements).

C.     Development Standards. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with applicable requirements of this Zoning Code, including the zone standards of this article and the provisions of Division 3 (Site Planning and General Development Standards).

D.    Conditions of Approval. The use of land and/or structure shall comply with applicable conditions imposed by a previously granted land use permit or other approval.

E.     Legal Lot. The use of land and/or structure shall only be established on a lot of land that has been legally created in compliance with the Subdivision Map Act (Section 66410 et seq., of the California Government Code) and Title 16 (Subdivisions), as applicable at the time the lot was created. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.06.030 Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements
The land use permit requirements of this Zoning Code shall not apply to the following activities, uses of land, and/or structures:

A.    Governmental Facilities. Facilities of the City, State, Federal government, or special districts (e.g., school district, sanitation district) on land owned or leased by a governmental agency, for governmental operations, to the extent that the facilities are exempted by State or Federal law.

B.     Interior Remodeling. Interior alterations that do not increase the number of rooms or the gross floor area within the structure or change the approved use of the structure.

C.     Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs and routine maintenance that do not result in a change in the approved land use of the site or structure, addition to, or enlargement/expansion of the land use and/or structure. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.06.040 Additional Permits and Approvals May Be Required
A.    An allowed land use that has been granted a land use permit, or is exempt from a land use approval, may still be required to obtain City permits or approvals before the use is constructed or otherwise established and put into operation. Nothing in this chapter shall eliminate the need to obtain permits or approvals required by other Municipal Code provisions or applicable County, State, or Federal agency regulations.

B.     Necessary permits shall be obtained before starting work or establishing a new use. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.08 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
17.08.010 Purpose of Zones
A.    Generally. The purpose of the residential zones is to:

1.     Provide for a full range of housing types and densities consistent with the General Plan;

2.     Preserve, protect, and enhance the character of Los Alamitos’ residential neighborhoods and the quality of life of City residents;

3.     Ensure adequate light, air, privacy, and open space for each dwelling; and

4.     Ensure that the scale and design of new development and alterations to existing structures are compatible with surrounding homes and appropriate to the physical characteristics of the site and the area where the project is proposed.

B.     Individual Zones. The purposes of the individual residential zones and the manners in which they are applied are as follows:

1.     Single-Family Residential Zone (R-1). The R-1 zone identifies lots designed to accommodate single-family dwellings on individual lots and planned-unit developments consisting exclusively of detached single-family dwellings. The maximum permitted density is six dwelling units per net acre. The R-1 zone implements the General Plan Single-Family Residential land use designation.

2.     Limited Multi-Family Residential Zone (R-2). The R-2 zone applies to lots providing low-density multi-family housing consisting of more than one detached individual dwelling unit on one lot or attached dwelling units consisting of no more than three units in one structure. The maximum permitted density is 20 dwelling units per net acre. The R-2 zone implements the General Plan Limited Multi-Family Residential l and use designation.

3.     Multi-Family Residential Zone (R-3). The R-3 zone apples to lots intended to provide multi-family housing. Housing types permitted include those permitted in the R-1 and R-2 zones, as well as structures containing four or more dwelling units. The maximum permitted density is 25 dwelling units per net acre. The R-3 zone implements the General Plan Multi-Family Residential land use designation.

4.     Mobile Home Residential Zone (M-H). The M-H zone is established to accommodate and preserve mobile home park housing developments and subdivisions. The M-H zone implements the General Plan Limited Multi-Family Residential land use designation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.08.020 Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones
A.    Use Regulations. This section, and Table 2-02 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones) in particular, identifies the uses of land that may be allowed within each of the zones established in Section 17.04.020 (Zones Established) and indicates whether any special permit is required for each allowable use.

B.     Permitted Uses, Use Permits, and Uses Not Allowed.

1.     Permitted Use (“P”). A permitted use is a use permitted as a matter of right, subject to compliance with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, including Site Development Permit—Major and Minor (Chapter 17.44) and a building permit or other permit required by the Municipal Code.

2.     Permitted as an Accessory Use (“A”). Accessory uses are uses clearly incidental to a primary permitted or conditionally permitted use are permitted as a matter of right, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code, including Section 17.38.030 (Accessory Structures/Uses—Residential).

3.     Administrative Use Permit (“AUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

4.     Conditional Use Permit (“CUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

5.     Temporary Use Permit (“TUP”). Temporary uses are subject to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit (Chapter 17.46).

6.     Uses Not Allowed (“—”). Uses with an “—” indication in Table 2-02 are not allowed in the specified zone.

C.     Specific Use Regulations. All uses, regardless of the type of permit that may be required, shall comply with applicable provision of this Zoning Code. In addition, if there is a section number in the last column of the Table 2-02 labeled Specific Use Regulations, the use is also subject to the referenced provisions.

D.    Zoning Permit Required. For any use permitted as a matter of right, such use shall require approval of a Zoning Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.50 (Zoning Consistency Review).

E.     Multiple Uses on a Single Site. When a proposed project includes multiple land uses and more than one type of land use permit is required, the most restrictive land use permit shall apply to the entire project application.

F.     Director Determination. Land uses are defined in Division 7 (Definitions). In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification substantially similar in character, pursuant to Section 17.02.020 (Rules of Interpretation). Land uses not listed in Table 2-02 or not found to be substantially similar to the land uses, as determined by the Director, are prohibited.

 

Table 2-02: Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones

 

P: Permitted Use

CUP: Conditional Use Permit

A: Permitted as an Accessory Use

TUP: Temporary Use Permit

AUP: Administrative Use Permit

—: Use Not Allowed

 

Use

Land Use Regulation

Specific Use Regulations

R-1

R-2

R-3

M-H

CANNABIS USES

 

 

 

 

 

Cannabis Delivery

—

—

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cannabis Activities

—

—

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Cultivation, even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

—

—

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

RESIDENTIAL USES

 

 

 

 

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

P

P

P

P

See Section 17.28.020

Accessory Structures and Uses

A

A

A

A

See Section 17.28.030 (Accessory Structures/Uses—Residential)

Boarding House

—

—

CUP

—

 

Group Home—6 residents or fewer

P

 

 

 

 

Live/Work Unit

—

AUP

—

 

Subject to the regulations in Section 17.28.180 (Live/Work Units)

Mobile Home Parks

—

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Multiple-Family Dwelling

—

P

P

—

 

Resident Manager’s Unit

—

AUP

AUP

—

 

Single-Family Dwelling

P

P

P

P

 

Senior Housing

—

P

P

P

 

Supportive Housing

P

P

P

P

 

Transitional Housing

P

P

P

P

 

Two-Unit Dwelling (Duplex)

—

P

P

—

 

PUBLIC ASSEMBLY AND RECREATION USES

 

 

 

Public Assembly Facilities

—

—

CUP

A

Only associated with a mobile home park

Religious Assembly Facilities

—

—

CUP

—

 

Recreation Facilities, Private—Indoor or Outdoor

A

A

A

A

Only associated with the primary permitted use and intended to serve the residents of the associated development

Schools, K-12—Private

—

CUP

CUP

—

 

SERVICE AND CARE USES

 

 

 

 

 

Day Care Centers

—

CUP

CUP

—

See Section 17.28.130 (Day Care, General)

Family Day Care Homes—Large

P

P

P

—

See Section 17.28.140 (Day Care Home—Large Family (9-14 children))

Family Day Care Homes—Small

P

P

P

 

 

Residential Care Facilities—7 or more persons

—

—

CUP

—

 

 

OTHER USES

 

 

 

 

 

Vehicle Charging Facilities

A

A

A

A

Only as accessory to a permitted use

Temporary Uses/Activities

TUP

TUP

TUP

TUP

See Chapter 17.46 (Temporary Use Permits)

Utility Facilities

 

 

 

 

 

Facilities with On-Site Staff

CUP

CUP

CUP

CUP

Ground-mounted equipment in residential zones shall be screened by landscaping to the satisfaction of the Director

Facilities with No On-Site Staff

AUP

AUP

AUP

AUP

 

Wireless Communication Facilities—Major

—

—

—

—

Except as may be pre-empted by Federal law

Section 17.28.270(K) (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Communication Facilities—Minor

—

—

—

—

Except as may be pre-empted by Federal law

Section 17.28.270(L) (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, Satellite Dish Antenna

P

P

P

P

Subject to size limitations per Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities) and as otherwise regulated by this section

(Ord. 20-04 § 3, 2020; Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 17-09 § 3, 2017; Ord. 17-08 § 6, 2017; Ord. 15-11 § 4, 2016; Ord. 14-07 § 2, 2014; Ord. 14-03 § 3, 2014; Ord. 13-04 § 3, 2013; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.08.030 Development Standards in Residential Zones
A.    The general property development standards for the R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH zones shall be as set forth in Table 2-03: Development Standards for Residential Zones.

B.     In the R-2 zone, where a lot has been subdivided for the purpose of establishing one single-family residential unit per lot, the standards for the R-1 zone shall apply, except the minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet and the minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.

C.     In addition to the standards set forth in Table 2-03, Section 17.08.045 (Design Standards for Multi-Family Housing) shall apply.

 

Table 2-03: Development Standards in Residential Zones

 

Development Feature

Requirement by Zone

R-1

R-2

R-3

M-H

Additional Requirements

Lot and Density Standards

 

 

 

 

 

Maximum Density

6 du/ac; 1 du per lot

20 du/ac

25 du/ac

10 du/ac

In MH zone, minimum lot or space size for individual mobile home is 2,000 sq. ft.

Minimum Lot Size

6,000 sq. ft.

9,000 sq. ft.

7,200 sq. ft.

5 acres

 

Minimum Lot Width

 

 

 

 

 

Interior Lot

60 ft.

60 ft.

60 ft.

—

See also Title 16 (Subdivisions) regarding dimensions for cul-de-sac and other unusual lots

Corner Lot

60 ft.

70 ft.

70 ft.

—

Reversed Corner Lot

60 ft.

75 ft.

—

—

Minimum Lot Depth

100 ft.

135 ft.

100 ft.

—

 

Maximum Lot Coverage

50%

60%

50%

—

Excludes swimming pools and any open-sided patio structure

Building Form and Location

 

 

 

 

 

Minimum Dwelling Area

Gross floor area

 

Studio

No minimum for R-1 zone

800 sq. ft.

450 sq. ft.

—

Excludes garage area

1 bedroom

650 sq. ft

2+ bedrooms

800 sq. ft.

Maximum Height

Structures

 

Main

30 ft.

35 ft.

35 ft.

20 ft.

See Section 17.16.040 (Height Measurement and Exceptions)

 

1) Along an interior side yard lot line, any structure taller than 25 feet shall be set back an additional 5 feet minimum (relative to minimum required setback) for any portion of the building taller than 25 feet

 

2) Structures on lots with a common property line with an R-1 zoned property shall not exceed 2 stories and 25 feet in height

Accessory

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

15 ft.

Accessory dwelling units shall conform to the setback requirements for the main structure

Minimum Setbacks

 

 

 

 

See Section 17.28.070 regarding setback exceptions

Front Yard

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

—

 

Turn-Around End of a Cul-de-Sac

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

 

 

Side Yard—Interior

5 ft.

5 ft.

5 ft.

—

 

Side Yard—Corner Lot

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

 

 

Rear Yard

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

—

 

Garage Setback

Applies to garages associated with individual dwelling units

—

 

Street (Front)

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

—

 

Alleyway

10 ft.

10 ft.

10 ft.

—

 

Street (side yard) (corner lot)

20 ft.

20 ft.

20 ft.

—

 

Maximum Rear Yard Coverage by Patio or Accessory Structure

30%

—

—

—

Applies to all rear yard area, not just required rear setback area

Distance (minimum) Between Structures on 1 Lot

—

10 ft.

10 ft.

N/A

A minimum of 10 feet between structures shall be free of any eaves or other projections

When Main Structures Face Across a Court

—

15 ft.

15 ft.

 

 

Storage Space in a Garage or Carport (minimum)

N/A

200 cubic ft./unit

N/A

Storage space shall be required for new developments only

Outdoor Living Space

 

 

 

 

 

Combination of Private and Common Area

—

400 sq. ft. per unit, with a minimum of 100 sq. ft. of private space per unit

200 sq. ft. per unit of common area, with a minimum of 60 sq. ft. of private space per unit

200 sq. ft. per unit of private open space adjacent to the unit, plus 50 sq. ft. per unit of common open space

1) For developments with 5 or more units, at least 1 common open space area with minimum dimensions of 20 feet by 20 feet shall be provided

 

2) For common open space areas, a minimum space of at least 20 feet by 20 feet shall be required. All common open space areas other than swimming pools shall be kept clear of mechanical equipment and other obstructions that would inhibit use of the open areas

 

3) In the MH zone, common outdoor area shall be at least 125 sq. ft. and accessible to all mobile home park residents

 

4) Private open space must be clear of mechanical equipment and other obstructions that would inhibit use of area

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.08.040 R-1 Zone Front Yard Landscaping Requirement
A.    A minimum of 50 percent of the required front yard setback shall be landscaped with plant materials.

B.     The required front yard landscaped area shall include landscaping (plant materials) along each side property line with minimum dimensions of four feet wide by 16 feet in length (see Figure 2-01). This requirement shall only apply to the development of a new residential use or renovation of an existing residential use which includes modifications to the existing garage or front yard that occurs after April 15, 2014.

 

Figure 2-01: Required Front Yard Landscaping



 

C.     The Director shall have the authority, through the Minor Modifications process pursuant to Chapter 17.40 (Minor Modifications), to allow an exception to the requirements of subsections A and B, above, if necessary to provide safe and adequate property ingress and egress.

D.    A Site Development Permit—Minor pursuant to Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor) shall be required to deviate from the requirements of subsections A and B, above, for any purpose—including to allow access to a parking pad in a side or rear setback—other than providing for safe and adequate property ingress and egress. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.08.045 Design Standards for Multi-Family Housing
A.    Building Design.

1.     For buildings higher than two stories, the third story shall step back a minimum of five feet from the story below to minimize building bulk and create façade articulation.

2.     Building facades shall incorporate details such as window trim, window recesses, cornices, changes in material, color, or other design elements in an integrated composition.

3.     Roofs shall be designed to drain away from neighboring properties.

4.     On multi-story buildings, windows shall be placed to provide privacy for adjacent properties, such as avoiding having windows directly facing each other across lot lines.

5.     Carport roofs visible from the public right-of-way or on-site buildings shall incorporate roof slopes and materials to match adjacent buildings.

B.     Pedestrian Access.

1.     Clearly marked pedestrian walkways shall be provided from parking areas to building entryways and shall be designed to minimize pedestrian/vehicle conflicts.

2.     Interior and exterior pedestrian walkways with access within and to the residential or mixed-use projects shall be defined by landscaping and lighting that are consistent with the scale and architecture of the buildings they serve.

C.     Other Design Standards.

1.     Transformers shall not be located within any required private open space area.

2.     Transformers, other on-site utility equipment, and on-site fire department connections shall be screened from view from public rights-of-way by landscaping or ground-mounted structures/fencing of materials and colors that match on-site architecture.

3.     Stormwater retention ponds, where provided, shall be designed as a landscape feature. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.08.050 Laundry Facilities for Multi-Family Housing
If a laundry area is not provided in every unit, a common laundry area shall be provided with a minimum of one washer and one dryer for each eight units. Such common laundry area shall be centrally located to the units to be served. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.08.060 Mobile Home Park and Subdivision Standards
A.    Use.

1.     No mobile home shall be used for any purpose other than a dwelling.

2.     Each mobile home shall be located on an approved mobile home site, and all mobile home sites shall be designed to accommodate independent mobile homes. No home site shall be used as the location for more than one mobile home or trailer.

B.     Property Boundary Setback. Mobile homes and other structures shall not be located closer than five feet from any property line of the mobile home park or subdivision.

C.     Space Boundary Setback. Mobile homes shall not be located closer than three feet from their space boundary line.

D.    Compliance with State Law. All mobile home parks shall comply with the regulations contained in the California Code of Regulations, Title 25, Article I, Chapter 2. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.08.070 Exceptions to Development Standards in Residential Zones
A.    Setbacks—Exceptions.

1.     Front Yard Setback in R-2 and R-3 Zones. When a lot in an R-2 or R-3 zone is approved for single-family residential use by means of a subdivision or lot split and a resulting lot has an area of less than 9,000 square feet, the lot may have a minimum front yard setback of 15 feet.

2.     Front Yard Setback in R-3 Zone. In the R-3 zone, front yard setbacks may vary provided an average building setback of 20 feet is maintained along an entire block face, with no setback less than 15 feet.

 

Figure 2-02: Front Yard Setback in R-3 Zone



 

3.     Side Yard Setback in R-2 and R-3 Zones. Where a dwelling or dwellings have entry from an interior side yard, the entry must open onto an outdoor court. The minimum length of the outer court wall which parallels the side lot line shall be 15 feet and that minimum wall length shall be located directly across from the entry to provide screening. The wall shall have a minimum height of four feet and a maximum height of six feet. The dwelling entry shall be set back a minimum of 15 feet from such side lot line.

 

Figure 2-03: Side Yard Setback for R-2 and R-3 Zones with Interior Side Entry



 

B.     Heights of Institutional Facilities. Private schools, places of religious assembly, and utility facilities may include structures up to 50 feet high. Such additional height above the maximum height requirement for the applicable zone shall be granted through a Conditional Use Permit. Any structure taller than 25 feet shall be set back an additional five feet minimum (relative to minimum required setback) for any portion of the building taller than 25 feet. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.08.080 Other Applicable Regulations in Residential Zones
New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Division 3—Site Planning and General Development Standards and Division 4—Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.10 COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL ZONES
17.10.010 Purpose of Zones
The purposes of the commercial and industrial zones are as follows:

A.    Commercial-Professional Office Zone (C-O). The C-O zone is established to accommodate administrative and professional offices, retail commercial uses, restaurants and other food service uses, and other complementary uses and facilities. The C-O zone implements the General Plan Professional Office land use designation.

B.     General Commercial Zone (C-G). The C-G zone is established to accommodate a wide range of retail sales, business, dining, personal, and professional services, as well as entertainment and lodging. The land uses allowed in this zone will generally serve the entire community and the region. The C-G zone implements the General Plan Retail Business land use designation.

C.     Planned Light Industrial Zone (P-L-I). The P-L-I zone is established to accommodate manufacturing, research and development, product assembly, equipment repair, and other light manufacturing businesses that have limited environmental impact in terms of noise, traffic, odors, hazardous materials use/production, and vibration. Other allowed uses include indoor commercial recreation uses such as fitness studios, sports courts/fields, and sports instructional facilities, provided such uses can be found compatible with and not detrimental to the operations of the primary permitted light industrial uses. The regulation of uses and standards of development identified for the P-L-I zone are those deemed necessary to provide the proper environment for industrial businesses, and to provide the proper safeguards to protect nearby residential, commercial, and public uses. The P-L-I zone implements the General Plan Planned Industrial land use designation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-03 § 4, 2016; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.10.020 Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Zones
A.    Use Regulations. This section, and Table 2-04 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Zones) in particular, identifies the uses of land that may be allowed within each of the zones established in Section 17.04.020 (Zones Established) and indicates whether any special permit is required for each allowable use.

B.     Permitted Uses, Use Permits, and Uses Not Allowed.

1.     Permitted Use (“P”). A permitted use is a use permitted as a matter of right, subject to compliance with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, including Site Development Permit—Major and Minor (Chapter 17.44) and a building permit or other permit required by the Municipal Code.

2.     Permitted as an Accessory Use (“A”). Accessory uses that are clearly incidental to a primary permitted or conditionally permitted use are permitted as a matter of right, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code, including Section 17.28.035 (Accessory Structures—Nonresidential Zones).

3.     Administrative Use Permit (“AUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

4.     Conditional Use Permit (“CUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

5.     Temporary Use Permit (“TUP”). Temporary uses are subject to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit (Chapter 17.46).

6.     Uses Not Allowed (“—”). Uses with an “—” indication in Table 2-04 are not allowed in the specified zone.

C.     Specific Use Regulations. All uses, regardless of the type of permit that may be required, shall comply with applicable provision of this Zoning Code. In addition, if there is a section number in the last column of the Table 2-04 labeled Specific Use Regulations, the use is also subject to the referenced provisions.

D.    Zoning Permit Required. For any use permitted as a matter of right, such use shall require approval of a Zoning Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.50 (Zoning Consistency Review).

E.     Multiple Uses on a Single Site. When a proposed project includes multiple land uses and more than one type of land use permit is required, the most restrictive land use permit shall apply to the entire project application.

F.     Director Determination. Land uses are defined in Division 7 (Definitions). In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in Table 2-04 or not found to be substantially similar to the land uses, as determined by the Director, are prohibited.

G.    Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in all commercial and industrial zones:

1.     All Cannabis Activities, including Cannabis Deliveries, Commercial Cannabis Activities, and Commercial Cultivation, even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

2.     Donation Boxes

3.     Freight and/or Truck Terminals

4.     Gun and Ammunition Stores

5.     Manufacturing—Heavy

6.     Recycling, Large Collection

7.     Recycling, Processing Facility

8.     Salvage Yard

9.     Secondhand Stores

10.   Swap Meets—Indoor or Outdoor

11.   Tobacco and Vape Stores

Table 2-04: Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

P: Permitted Use

CUP: Conditional Use Permit

A: Permitted as an Accessory Use

—: Use not allowed

AUP: Administrative Use Permit

TUP: Temporary Use Permit

 

Use

Permit Required by Zone

Specific Use Regulations

C-O

C-G

P-L-I

AGRICULTURE

 

 

 

 

Agriculture—Commercial Indoor

—

—

CUP

 

Community Gardens

AUP

AUP

—

 

BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE

 

 

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)—Drive-Up

AUP

AUP

AUP

 

Business Support Services

P

P

P

 

Check Cashing and/or Payday Loans

CUP

—

—

 

Financial Institutions and Related Services (without drive-through facilities)

P

P

—

 

Office, Business and Professional (not including Medical and Dental Office)

P

P

CUP

1) In the C-G zone in multi-story structures, offices may occupy up to 100 percent of the gross floor area in the second and higher stories, and up to 15 percent of the ground floor upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space on the ground floor exceed 3,000 square feet total

 

2) In the C-G zone, in single-story structures located in shopping centers, up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of the center is allowed for office uses upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space exceed 3,000 square feet total

Office, Medical and Dental Office

See Medical-Related and Care Uses

 

Office, Public Utility Commercial

P

P/CUP

P

In the C-G zone, permitted on properties with non-arterial street frontage. CUP required for ground-floor tenant spaces on properties with arterial street frontage

CANNABIS USES

 

 

 

 

Cannabis Deliveries

—

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cannabis Activities

—

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cultivation, Even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

—

—

—

 

EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS

 

 

 

Bars, Lounges, Nightclubs, and Tasting Rooms

CUP

P

CUP

 

Food Preparation/Catering (no on-site sales or service)

—

AUP

P

 

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service, Serving Alcohol

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service, No Alcohol Sales

P

P

CUP

 

Restaurant—Accessory Outside Seating Areas

 

 

—

Any outdoor dining area with alcoholic beverage sales shall require a CUP

 

See Section 17.28.200 (Outdoor Dining)

300 sf or less

AUP/CUP

AUP/CUP

301 sf or more

CUP

CUP

Restaurant with Drive-Through Facilities

CUP

CUP

—

 

Snack Bar

A

A

A

 

INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, AND WAREHOUSING

 

Brewery, Winery, or Distillery

—

AUP

CUP

In C-G zone, only as microbrewery, winery, or distillery with associated retail sales or restaurant use

Data Centers

—

—

CUP

 

Hazardous Waste Facilities

—

—

CUP

See Section 17.28.170 (Hazardous Waste Facilities)

Food Processing

—

—

P

 

Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops, and Woodworking Shops (wholesale sales only)

—

—

P

 

Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing

P

P/CUP

P

In C-G zone, CUP required on ground-floor tenant spaces of properties with arterial street frontage

Laundries and Dry-Cleaning Plants

—

—

P

 

Manufacturing—Heavy

—

—

—

 

Manufacturing—Light

—

—

P

Pottery manufacturing and underground bulk storage of petroleum or gas require CUPs

Recycling, Small Collection Facility

—

—

CUP

See also Municipal Code Chapter 8.12 (Integrated Waste Management)

Research and Development

—

—

P

 

Reverse Vending Machine

—

—

CUP

See also Municipal Code Chapter 8.12 (Integrated Waste Management)

Storage—Outdoor

—

—

A

See Section 17.28.220 (Outdoor Storage)

Warehouse, Wholesaling and Distribution

—

—

P

 

LODGING

 

 

 

 

Hotel and Motel

CUP

P

CUP

 

Homeless Shelters—up to 20 beds

—

—

P

See Section 17.28.160 (Emergency Shelters)

Homeless Shelters—more than 20 beds

—

—

CUP

See Section 17.28.160 (Emergency Shelters)

MEDICAL-RELATED AND CARE USES

 

 

 

Ambulance Fleet

—

—

CUP

 

Clinic and Urgent Care

P

P/CUP

P

1) In C-G, CUP required on properties with arterial street frontage

 

2) In P-L-I zone, allowed only as incidental to an allowed industrial use

Day Care Center

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 17.28.130 (Day Care, General)

 

In P-L-I zone, day care limited to use by employees of the primary use

Health Facilities, Therapy and Rehabilitation

P

P/CUP

—

In C-G zone, CUP required on properties with arterial street frontage

Hospital

CUP

CUP

—

 

Office, Medical and Dental Office

P

P/CUP

P

1) In the C-G zone, CUP required on ground-floor tenant spaces on properties with arterial street frontage

 

2) In the C-G zone, in multi-story structures, offices may occupy up to 100 percent of the gross floor area in the second and higher stories, and up to 15 percent of the ground floor upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space on the ground floor exceed 3,000 square feet total. These standards shall apply to all office uses, including Professional. Such determination/ verification shall occur through the Zoning Permit process

 

3) In single-story structures located in shopping centers, up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of the center is allowed for office uses upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space exceed 3,000 square feet total. These standards shall apply to all office uses, including Professional. Such determination/verification shall occur through the Zoning Permit process

 

4) In P-L-I zone, allowed only as incidental to an allowed industrial use

Residential Care Facilities

CUP

CUP

—

 

PUBLIC AND ASSEMBLY USES

 

 

 

 

Cultural Institutions

P

P

—

 

Public Assembly Facilities

CUP

—

—

 

Religious Assembly Facilities

CUP

—

CUP

 

Schools, Private

CUP

CUP

—

 

Trade and Vocational Schools

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Tutoring and Education Centers

AUP

P

—

 

RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT

 

 

 

Arcade (Electronic Game Center)

CUP

CUP

—

See Section 17.28.070 (Arcades)

Commercial Recreation—Indoors

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Commercial Recreation—Outdoors

—

CUP

—

 

Entertainment, Indoor1

CUP2

CUP2

—

1) Excludes uses that are regulated under Section 17.28.40 (Adult Businesses)

 

2) Auditoriums, meeting halls, and theaters allowed in C-G only

Health/Fitness Facilities

CUP

AUP

CUP

 

Health/Fitness Facilities—Small

P

P

P

 

Health/Fitness Facilities—Large

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

RETAIL USES

 

 

 

 

Alcohol Beverage Sales

 

 

 

 

Alcohol Sales, for Off-Site Consumption

—

CUP

—

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Alcoholic Beverage Sales (for on-site or off-site consumption, in conjunction with an allowed use)

CUP

P

—

If alcoholic beverage sales area exceeds 20% or more of total sales area, as determined by the Director, a CUP shall be required

 

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Animal Retail Sales

—

CUP

CUP

 

Building Materials and Services, Indoor

—

CUP

P

 

Building Materials and Services, Outdoor

—

—

CUP

Must be located at least 300 feet away from R-1, R-2, R-3, MH, and C-F zones

Convenience Store

CUP

P

CUP

Any convenience store with alcohol sales requires a CUP

Farmers’ Market

CUP1

P

CUP

CUP for recurring farmers’ market

Grocery Store

—

P

—

 

Nurseries and Garden Centers

—

P

P

 

Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales

TUP

TUP

TUP

 

Recreational Equipment Rentals—Indoor Only

P

P

P

 

Retail Sales—General

P

P

CUP

In P-L-I zone, only allowed in storefronts facing Katella Avenue, Los Alamitos Boulevard, and Cerritos Avenue

Retail Sales—Restricted

CUP

CUP

CUP

In P-L-I zone, only allowed in storefronts facing Katella Avenue, Los Alamitos Boulevard, and Cerritos Avenue

Vehicle Sales and Rental

—

P

P

Incidental repair allowed only in P-L-I zone

Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental

—

—

CUP

 

SERVICE USES

 

 

 

 

Animal Care, Services

 

 

 

 

Animal Boarding/Kennels, Grooming

—

—

CUP

 

Veterinary Services, Large Animal

—

—

CUP

 

Veterinary Services, Small Animal

CUP

CUP

CUP

 

Funeral Parlors and Internment Services

CUP

—

—

 

Instructional Services

P

P

CUP

 

Maintenance and Repair Services—Indoor

—

—

P

 

Moving Companies, Storage Allowed

—

—

CUP

 

Personal Services, General

P

P

P

In P-L-I zone, allowed only as incidental to an allowed industrial use

Personal Services, Restricted

—

CUP

CUP

 

Recording Studio

—

—

P

 

Social Service Facilities

CUP

—

—

 

Storage

 

 

 

 

Storage—Personal

—

—

CUP

 

Storage—Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage

—

—

CUP

 

Vehicle Repair and Services

 

 

 

 

Service/Fueling Station

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 17.28.080 (Automobile Service Stations and Automobile Repair Uses)

Vehicle Washing/Detailing

—

CUP

CUP

Mobile vehicle washing/detailing permitted if meets National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System requirements

Vehicle Service, Major

—

—

AUP

1) Vehicle storage and repair activities shall be conducted within an enclosed structure or an area enclosed by solid, decorative masonry walls with decorative solid gates not less than 6 feet in height

 

2) Vehicles shall be screened from public view and shall not be visible above the block wall

 

3) Vehicles may not be stored outside the enclosed yard area

 

4) Vehicle storage areas shall be paved and landscaped in compliance with applicable standards

Vehicle Service, Minor

—

CUP

P

 

TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATION, AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES

 

Car Sharing—Parking

AUP

AUP

AUP

Car sharing parking spaces may not occupy any space required for another use

Parking Facility—Temporary

TUP

TUP

TUP

 

Utility Facilities—Staffed

CUP

CUP

P

 

Utility Facility—Unstaffed

AUP

AUP

AUP

 

Vehicle Charging Stations—Commercial

AUP

AUP

AUP

Does not include private parking spaces

Vehicle Storage

—

—

CUP

 

Wireless Communication Facilities—Minor

AUP

AUP

AUP

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Communication Facilities—Major

CUP

CUP

CUP

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, Satellite Dish Antenna

P

P

P

Subject to Site Development Permit—Minor (see Section 17.44.020(C))

 

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

OTHER USES

 

 

 

 

Caretaker Quarters

—

—

AUP

Permitted only when used exclusively by a caretaker or superintendent incidental to an allowed primary use

Donation Boxes—Outdoors

—

—

—

 

Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities

CUP

CUP

—

 

Vending Machine

A

A

A

Allowed indoors only as accessory to a permitted use

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 17-09 § 4, 2017; Ord. 16-05 § 1, 2016; Ord. 16-03 § 5, 2016; Ord. 15-12 § 3, 2016; Ord. 15-11 § 5, 2016; Ord. 15-08 § 2, 2015; Ord. 14-09 § 2, 2014; Ord. 14-08 § 2, 2014; Ord. 14-03 § 4, 2014; Ord. 13-04 § 4, 2013; Ord. 13-02 § 1, 2013; Ord. 11-06 § 2, 2011; Ord. 09-09 § 1, 2009; Ord. 691 § 1, 2006; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.10.030 Development Standards for Commercial and Industrial Zones
The general property development standards for the C-O, C-G, and P-L-I zones shall be as set forth in Table 2-05: General Development Standards for Commercial and Industrial Zones. Exceptions to these standards are set forth in Section 17.10.040 (Exceptions to Development Standards in Commercial and Industrial Zones).

 

Table 2-05: General Development Standards for Commercial and Industrial Zones

 

Development Feature

Requirement by Zone

Additional Requirements

C-O

C-G

P-L-I

Lot size

Minimum area, width, and depth for newly created lots

 

Lot area

No requirement

6,000 sq. ft.

6,000 sq. ft.

 

Lot width

No requirement

60 ft.

60 ft.; 160 ft. when adjacent to a residential zone, school, or park

 

Lot depth

No requirement

100 ft.

100 ft.; 200 ft. when adjacent to a residential zone, school, or park

 

Floor area ratio (FAR)

1.50 FAR

1.00 FAR

1.50 FAR

 

Height limit—Main structures

3 stories or 40 ft.

3 stories or 40 ft.

3 stories or 40 ft.

1) See Sections 17.16.040 (Height Measurement and Exceptions) for exceptions and 17.16.020(C) for restrictions adjacent to residential zones

 

2) In all zones, buildings up to 60 feet in height allowed with a Conditional Use Permit

Setbacks

Minimum setbacks required. Also see Section 17.16.130 (Sight Safety Triangle)

 

Front

15 ft.

None required

15 ft.

See Section 17.10.040 (Front Setbacks in CO Zone)

Sides

Not required unless abutting a residential zone, then 10 ft.

Not required unless abutting a residential zone, then 15 ft.

Not required unless abutting a residential zone, then 40 ft.

 

Street side yard (Corner lot)

10 ft.

None required

15 ft.

 

Rear

10 ft.; where rear lot abuts a C-G or P-L-I zone, no setback is required

Not required unless abutting a residential zone, then 15 ft.

10 ft., unless abutting a residential zone, then 40 ft.

 

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-03 § 6, 2016; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.10.040 Exceptions to Development Standards in Commercial and Industrial Zones
A.    Height of Public Facilities Structures. Structures at schools, religious institutions, hospitals, and other permitted institutional uses may have a maximum height of 50 feet. For any structure that exceeds the height limit for the zone in which it is located, the front, rear, and side setbacks shall be increased one foot for each one foot by which each structure exceeds the height limit established for the zone.

B.     Additional Height via CUP. For all other uses, a maximum height of five stories/60 feet may be allowed upon approval of a Conditional Use Permit. Factors to be considered by the Planning Commission in whether to grant the additional height are as follows:

1.     A structure with increased height shall be located at least 100 feet from a residential zone.

2.     The Planning Commission may require that vision into adjacent residences be limited from a structure with increased height.

3.     Open space shall constitute 10 percent of the total site area, in addition to any amount required to be landscaped.

4.     The structure shall have no more gross floor area than could have been achieved if the structure were 40 feet or less in height. In computation of gross floor area, floor area devoted to parking shall be disregarded.

C.     C-O Height Restrictions Adjacent to Residential Zone. When adjacent to a residential zone, in the C-O zone height limits shall be:

1.     25 feet/one story within 25 feet of a residential zone.

2.     35 feet/two stories within 25 to 75 feet of a residential zone.

3.     50 feet/three stories within 76 to 150 feet of a residential zone.

D.    Front Setbacks within C-O Zone. Front setbacks within the C-O zone shall extend across the full width of the lot (except for access drives, walks, fences, and minor ornamental structures). The Planning Commission may allow staggering of setbacks as part of a total development plan, but in no case shall a setback of less than 10 feet be allowed.

E.     Metal Structures Setbacks in P-L-I Zone.

1.     Metal structures may be located closer than 100 feet to the street if the following conditions prevail:

a.     The sheet metal comprises 25 percent or less of the exterior wall area of the structure; or

b.     The sheet metal consists of panels with baked enamel or similar finish; or

c.     The structure is concealed from view from the public street by walls, fences, landscaping, or other structures.

2.     Metal structures shall be set back a minimum of 150 feet from any property line along a freeway or major/secondary highway, and 100 feet from the property line along any other street. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.10.050 Other Applicable Regulations
New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Division 3—Site Planning and General Development Standards and Division 4—Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.12 TOWN CENTER MIXED-USE ZONE
17.12.010 Purpose of Zone
The Town Center Mixed Use (TCMU) zone is established to provide opportunities for commercial and residential mixed-use development that takes advantage of easy access to transit and proximity to commerce, and that encourages pedestrian activity. A wide range of integrated commercial and residential uses are appropriate. The Town Center Mixed Use zone requires the inclusion of a ground-floor, street-frontage commercial components for all projects. Exclusive residential structures are not allowed. This zone implements the General Plan Mixed Use land use designation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.020 Land Uses and Permit Requirements
A.    Use Regulations. This section, and Table 2-06 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone) in particular, identifies the uses of land that may be allowed within the TCMU zone and indicates whether any special permit is required for each allowable use.

B.     Permitted Uses, Use Permits, and Uses Not Allowed.

1.     Permitted Use (“P”). A permitted use is a use permitted as a matter of right, subject to compliance with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, including Site Development Permit—Major and Minor (Chapter 17.44) and a building permit or other permit required by the Municipal Code.

2.     Permitted as an Accessory Use (“A”). Accessory uses that are clearly incidental to a primary permitted or conditionally permitted use are permitted as a matter of right, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code, including Section 17.28.035 (Accessory Structures—Nonresidential Zones).

3.     Administrative Use Permit (“AUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

4.     Conditional Use Permit (“CUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

5.     Temporary Use Permit (“TUP”). Temporary uses are subject to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit (Chapter 17.46).

6.     Uses Not Allowed (“—”). Uses with an “—” indication in Table 2-06 are not allowed in the specified zone.

C.     Specific Use Regulations. All uses, regardless of the type of permit that may be required, shall comply with applicable provision of this Zoning Code. In addition, if there is a section number in the last column of the Table 2-06 labeled Specific Use Regulations, the use is also subject to the referenced provisions.

D.    Zoning Permit Required. For any use permitted as a matter of right, such use shall require approval of a Zoning Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.50 (Zoning Consistency Review).

E.     Multiple Uses on a Single Site. When a proposed project includes multiple land uses and more than one type of land use permit is required, the most restrictive land use permit shall apply to the entire project application.

F.     Director Determination. Land uses are defined in Division 7 (Definitions). In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in Table 2-06 or not found to be substantially similar to the land uses, as determined by the Director, are prohibited.

G.    Prohibited Uses. The following uses are specifically prohibited in the TCMU zone:

1.     All Cannabis Activities, including Cannabis Deliveries, Commercial Cannabis Activities, and Commercial Cultivation, even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

2.     Donation Boxes

3.     Freight and/or Truck Terminals

4.     Gun and Ammunition Stores

5.     Manufacturing—Heavy

6.     Recycling, Large Collection

7.     Recycling, Processing Facility

8.     Salvage Yard

9.     Secondhand Stores

10.   Swap Meets—Indoor or Outdoor

11.   Tobacco and Vape Stores. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.030 Commercial Uses Required along Street Frontages
To maintain an active pedestrian environment in the TCMU zone, commercial uses shall be the predominant along street frontages. At least 75 percent of the ground floor frontage along Katella Avenue and Los Alamitos Boulevard shall be occupied by commercial uses.

 

Table 2-06: Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone

 

P: Permitted Use

CUP: Conditional Use Permit

A: Permitted as an Accessory Use

—: Use not allowed

AUP: Administrative Use Permit

TUP: Temporary Use Permit

 

UF: Permitted Only on Upper Floor(s)

 

Land Use

TCMU

Special Use Regulations

BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, AND PROFESSIONAL

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)—Drive Up

—

 

Business Support Services

P

 

Check Cashing and/or Payday Loans

—

 

Financial Institutions and Related Services (without drive-through facilities)

P

 

Offices—Business, and Professional (but not including Medical and Dental Office)

P

1) In multi-story structures, offices may occupy up to 100 percent of the gross floor area in the second and higher stories, and up to 15 percent of the ground floor upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space on the ground floor exceed 3,000 square feet total

 

2) In single-story structures located in shopping centers, up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of the center is allowed for office uses upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space exceed 3,000 square feet total

CANNABIS USES

 

 

Cannabis Deliveries

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cannabis Activities

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cultivation, even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS

Bars, Lounges, Nightclubs, and Tasting Rooms

CUP

 

Restaurant—No Alcohol Sales

P

 

Restaurant—Accessory Outside Seating Areas

AUP

See Section 17.28.200 (Outdoor Dining) and Chapter 17.32 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits)

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service with Late Hours (open between midnight and 6:00 a.m.)

CUP

 

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service, Serving Alcohol

CUP

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Restaurant with Drive-Through Facilities

—

 

EDUCATION

 

 

Schools, Private

CUP

 

Trade and Vocational Schools

CUP

 

Tutoring and Education Centers

CUP

 

LODGING

 

 

Hotel and Motel

CUP

 

Homeless Shelters—up to 20 beds

—

 

Homeless Shelters—more than 20 beds

—

 

MEDICAL-RELATED AND CARE USES

 

 

Ambulance Services

—

 

Clinic and Urgent Care

—

 

Day Care Center

CUP

17.28.130 (Day Care, General)

Health Facilities, Therapy and Rehabilitation

CUP

Prohibited on ground floor. No larger than 3,000 sq. ft.

Hospital

—

 

Medical and Dental Office

P/CUP

1) CUP required on ground-floor tenant spaces on properties with arterial street frontage

 

2) In multi-story structures, offices may occupy up to 100 percent of the gross floor area in the second and higher stories, and up to 15 percent of the ground floor upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space on the ground floor exceed 3,000 square feet total. These standards shall apply to all office uses, including Professional. Such determination/verification shall occur through the Zoning Permit process

 

3) In single-story structures located in shopping centers, up to 15 percent of the gross floor area of the center is allowed for office uses upon verification of the square footage by the Director. In no case shall any single office space exceed 3,000 square feet total. These standards shall apply to all office uses, including Professional. Such determination/verification shall occur through the Zoning Permit process

Residential Care Facilities

—

 

RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT

 

 

Arcade (Electronic Game Center)

CUP

See Section 17.28.070 (Arcades)

Commercial Recreation—Indoors

CUP

 

Commercial Recreation—Outdoors

—

 

Entertainment, Indoor

CUP

Excludes uses that are regulated under Section 17.28.040 (Adult Businesses)

Health/Fitness Facilities, Small

AUP

 

Health/Fitness Facilities, Large

CUP

 

RESIDENTIAL

 

 

Live/Work Unit

AUP

 

Multi-Family Dwelling

AUP

Required to be integrated into a project as either horizontal or vertical mixed use, but not permitted as a stand-alone use

Senior Residential Housing Projects

P

See Section 17.28.250 (Senior Citizen Housing)

Single-Family Dwelling

—

 

Supportive Housing—Housing Type

AUP

 

Transitional Housing—Housing Type

AUP

 

RETAIL SALES

 

 

Alcohol Beverage Sales

 

 

Alcohol Sales, for Off-Site Consumption

CUP

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Alcoholic Beverage Sales (for on-site or off-site consumption, in conjunction with an allowed use)

CUP

See Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales)

Animal Retail Sales

—

 

Building Materials and Services, Indoor

—

 

Building Materials and Services, Outdoor

—

 

Convenience Store

CUP

 

Farmers’ Market

TUP

 

Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales

TUP

 

Recreational Equipment Rentals—Indoor Only

P

 

Retail—General

P

 

Retail—Restricted

CUP

 

Vehicle Sales and Rental

P

Office only; no storage of cars on property.

Large Vehicle, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental

—

 

SERVICE USES

 

 

Animal Boarding/Kennels, Grooming

—

 

Cultural Institutions

CUP

 

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services

—

 

Instructional Services

P

 

Maintenance and Repair Services—Indoor

—

 

Personal Services, General

P

 

Personal Services, Restricted

CUP

 

Moving Companies, Storage Allowed

—

 

Social Service Facilities

—

 

Vehicle Repair and Services

—

 

Service/Fueling Station

—

 

Vehicle Washing/Detailing

—

 

Vehicle Service, Major

—

 

Veterinary Services, Large Animal

—

 

Veterinary Services, Small Animal

CUP

All operations must be conducted completely within a masonry structure. No overnight boarding permitted

TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES

Car Sharing—Parking

AUP

Car sharing parking spaces may not occupy any space required for another use

Freight/Truck Terminals

—

 

Vehicle Charging Stations

A

 

Utility Facilities

CUP

 

Vehicle Storage

—

 

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities—Minor

AUP

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities—Major

CUP

See Section 17.28.270 (K) (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, Satellite Dish Antenna

P

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

OTHER USES

 

 

Caretaker Quarters

—

 

Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities

—

 

Public Assembly Facilities

CUP

 

Religious Assembly Facilities

CUP

 

Vending Machine

A

Allowed indoors only accessory to an allowable use

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.040 Development Standards for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone
A.    General. The general property development standards for the TCMU zone shall be as set forth in Table 2-07: General Development Standards for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone.

B.     Calculation of Density and Intensity.

1.     Horizontal Mixed Use. For residential and nonresidential uses on the same development site but separate legal lots, the residential density shall be calculated for the lot or lots dedicated solely to residential use. The FAR for the nonresidential use shall be calculated for the lot or lots dedicated solely to the nonresidential use.

2.     Vertical Mixed Use. For a development project consisting of residential and nonresidential uses in the same building or group of buildings, the residential density and FAR shall be additive, meaning that the residential density shall be calculated for the residential component and the FAR for nonresidential component.

 

Table 2-07: General Development Standards for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone

 

Development Feature

Requirement by Zone

Additional Requirements

TCMU

Minimum Lot Area (for new mixed-use development)

10,000 sq. ft.

For new mixed-use development. Single-purpose uses can be constructed on lots smaller than 10,000 sq. ft.

Structure Form and Location Standards

 

 

Residential Density—Maximum

30 units/acre

 

FAR Maximum—Nonresidential Components

2.00

 

Storefront Width—Minimum

50% of street frontage lot width

 

Minimum Setback

 

 

Front or Adjacent to a Street

0 ft. minimum; 10 ft. maximum

 

Side—Interior

 

 

Abutting Nonresidential or Mixed-Use Zone

0 ft. minimum

 

Abutting Residential Zone

10 ft. minimum

 

Side—Street Side

10 ft. minimum

 

Rear

 

 

Abutting Nonresidential Zone

0 ft. minimum

 

Abutting Residential Zone

15 ft. minimum

 

Height—Maximum

60 ft.

 

Open Space for Residential Uses

200 sq. ft. per unit combined common and private

 

 

C.     Parking Restricted within Front and/or Street Side Setbacks. Parking shall only be allowed within required front and/or street side setbacks where the responsible review authority finds that no feasible alternative exists to design a project and further, where such parking can be well integrated into overall project design and can adequately screened.

D.    Minimum Ground Floor Height. The minimum ground-floor height for structures with commercial uses on the ground floor shall be not less than 12 feet, six inches. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.050 Design Standards
A.    Generally. All new development shall be designed to achieve the following objectives:

1.     Site and building design shall provide for internal compatibility among the different uses in terms of noise, hours of operation, vehicle and pedestrian circulation, access, use of open space, and similar operating characteristics.

2.     Potential noise, odors, glare, pedestrian traffic, and other potentially significant impacts on residents shall be minimized to allow a compatible mix of residential and nonresidential uses on the same site.

3.     The design of any live/work or mixed-use project shall take into consideration potential impacts, including, but not limited to, noise, odors, and hours of operation, on adjacent properties. The design shall include specific design features to minimize potential impacts.

4.     The design of the mixed-use project shall ensure that the residential units are of a residential character and that privacy between residential units and between other uses on the site is maximized.

5.     The design of the structures and site planning shall encourage integration of the street pedestrian environment with the nonresidential uses through the use of plazas, paseos, courtyards, and walkways, as well as pedestrian scale amenities and street furniture.

6.     Site planning and building design shall be compatible with and enhance the adjacent and surrounding built environment in terms of scale, building design, color, exterior materials, roof styles, lighting, landscaping, and signage.

7.     Any mixed-use development in which two-thirds or more of the gross floor area is developed with residential uses, in addition to complying with the design standards set forth in this section, shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.08.045 (Design Standards for Multi-Family Housing).

B.     Building Orientation, Entrances, and Articulation.

1.     Orientation. The main building of a development shall be oriented to face a public street. Building frontages shall be generally parallel to streets. For all residential, retail, and office uses, at least one primary entrance to a ground-floor use shall face the adjacent street right-of-way. Ground-related entrances include entrances to ground-floor uses.

2.     Ground Floor Transparency. At least 65 percent of the exterior walls on the ground floor facing the street shall include windows, doors, or other openings.

3.     Nonresidential Entrances. Entries shall include clearly defined features of front façades and be of a scale that is in proportion to the size of the building and number of units being accessed. Larger buildings shall have a more prominent building entrance while maintaining a pedestrian scale.

4.     Transitional Space at Residential Entries. New residential buildings shall provide transitional spaces in the form of stoops, overhangs, and porches between public areas fronting the primary street(s) and entrances. This type of element or equivalent shall be required for each unit or group of units, but no less than one of this type of element shall be provided.

5.     Building Articulation. No street frontage wall may run in a continuous plane for more than 25 feet without building openings or offsets, or as approved by the Review Authority if the project is constrained by unusual parcel size, shape, use, or other features that the responsible Review Authority accepts as rendering this requirement infeasible. Offsets shall vary in depth and/or direction of at least 18 inches, or a repeated pattern of offsets, recesses, or projections of similar depth.

6.     Structured Parking. Structured parking facing public streets shall be fronted or wrapped with actively occupied spaces such as storefronts, live/work units, residential community amenities, and lobbies. Access to parking shall be designed so that it is not prominent and ties into the adjacent architectural style. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.060 Live/Work Standards
All live/work units shall comply with the regulations established in Division 4, Section 17.28.180 (Live/Work Units) of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.070 Open Space Requirements for Residential Uses
A.    Type. Open space shall be in the form of private or common open space such as balconies, courtyards, at-grade patios (rear and side of the units), rooftop gardens, or terraces. Open standards for the R-3 zone shall apply.

B.     Minimum Dimension. Balconies that are 30 inches or less in width or depth shall not be counted as open space.

C.     Encroachment. Balconies that project over a public right-of-way shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.080 Mixed-Use Lot Consolidation Incentive Program
To encourage the assemblage of smaller lots into larger lots that can be developed more efficiently into a mixed-use project, the following incentives may be provided to a qualifying development at the Director’s discretion:

A.    Reduction of planning permit application fees.

B.     Priority in permit processing. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.12.090 Other Applicable Regulations
New land uses and structures, and alterations to existing land uses and structures, shall be designed, constructed, and/or established in compliance with the requirements in Division 3—Site Planning and General Development Standards and Division 4—Regulations for Specific Land Uses and Activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.14 SPECIAL PURPOSE AND OVERLAY ZONES
17.14.010 Purpose of Zones
A.    Applicability. This chapter establishes regulations applicable to development and new land uses in the special purpose zones established by Section 17.04.020 (Zones Established). The regulations for the overlay zones are supplemental to the standards of the primary zone. Overlay zones shall be indicated in parentheses following the primary zone, for example R-2 (LW).

B.     Purpose. The purposes of the individual special purpose or overlay zones and the manner in which they are applied are as follows:

1.     Open Area Zone (O-A). The O-A zone is intended to provide regulations and standards for areas reserved for parks, recreation, open space, and governmental public uses, or in areas where a physical hazard to the public may exist. The O-A zone implements the General Plan Special Use land use designation. Development standards will be determined through the Conditional Use Permit and/or Site Plan approval process.

2.     Community Facilities Zone (C-F). The C-F zone is intended to provide for the orderly establishment of public facilities, expansion of their operations, or change in the use of lands owned by governmental agencies and for the orderly establishment of semi-public institutional uses. The C-F zone implements the General Plan Special Use land use designation. Development standards will be determined through the Conditional Use Permit and/or Site Development Permit approval process.

3.     Medical Overlay Zone (M).

a.     Use Regulations. The (M) overlay zone is intended to encourage and permit medical businesses as primary uses on certain lots north of the Los Alamitos Medical Center campus, while still maintaining the underlying zone. The uses allowed in the (M) overlay zone shall be those uses listed under the category Medical-Related and Care Uses in Table 2-04 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial/Industrial Zones) in the same manner that such uses are allowed or conditionally allowed in the Commercial Office (C-O) zone, as well as all uses allowed or conditionally allowed in the primary zone.

b.     Development Standards. The development standards for any medical service shall be the same as in the C-O zone. The development standards for any use allowed or conditionally allowed in the primary zone shall be as set forth in that zone.

4.     Retail Overlay Zone (R).

a.     Purpose of Zone. The (R) overlay zone is intended to allow the development of retail businesses on certain lots, while still maintaining the primary zoning.

b.     Uses Allowed. The uses allowed in the (R) overlay zone shall be those uses allowed in the General Commercial (C-G) Zone as set forth in Table 2-04 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial/Industrial Zones) in the same manner that such uses are allowed or conditionally allowed in the C-G zone, as well as all uses allowed or conditionally allowed in the primary zone.

c.     Development Standards. The development standards for the primary zone shall apply to the (R) overlay zone.

5.     Live/Work Overlay Zone (LW).

a.     Purpose of Zone. The (LW) overlay zone is intended to allow live/work development and uses on certain lots, while still maintaining the primary zoning.

b.     Uses Allowed. In addition to the uses allowed in the primary zone, the following uses shall be allowed in the (LW) overlay zone as a matter of right:

i.      Business and Professional Offices

ii.     Instructional Services

iii.    Personal Services—General

c.     Development Standards. All live/work uses in the (LW) overlay zone shall comply with the development standards applicable to the primary zone and the supplemental standards established in Section 17.28.180 (Live/Work Standards). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-03 § 7, 2016; Ord. 15-09 § 3, 2015; Ord. 15-03 § 3, 2015; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.14.020 Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose and Overlay Zones
A.    Use Regulations. This section, and Table 2-08 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose Zones) in particular, identifies the uses of land that may be allowed within the Special Purpose zones and indicates whether any special permit is required for each allowable use.

B.     Permitted Uses, Use Permits, and Uses Not Allowed.

1.     Permitted Use (“P”). A permitted use is a use permitted as a matter of right, subject to compliance with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, including Site Development Permit—Major and Minor (Chapter 17.44) and a building permit or other permit required by the Municipal Code.

2.     Permitted as an Accessory Use (“A”). Accessory uses that are clearly incidental to a primary permitted or conditionally permitted use are permitted as a matter of right, subject to the requirements of this Zoning Code, including Section 17.28.035 (Accessory Structures—Nonresidential Zones).

3.     Administrative Use Permit (“AUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

4.     Conditional Use Permit (“CUP”). Uses that are allowed subject to the approval of a Conditional Use Permit (Chapter 17.32).

5.     Temporary Use Permit (“TUP”). Temporary uses are subject to the approval of a Temporary Use Permit (Chapter 17.46).

6.     Uses Not Allowed (“—”). Uses with an “—” indication in Table 2-08 are not allowed in the specified zone.

C.     Specific Use Regulations. All uses, regardless of the type of permit that may be required, shall comply with applicable provision of this Zoning Code. In addition, if there is a section number in the last column of the Table 2-08 labeled Specific Use Regulations, the use is also subject to the referenced provisions.

D.    Zoning Permit Required. For any use permitted as a matter of right, such use shall require approval of a Zoning Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.50 (Zoning Consistency Review).

E.     Multiple Uses on a Single Site. When a proposed project includes multiple land uses and more than one type of land use permit is required, the most restrictive land use permit shall apply to the entire project application.

F.     Director Determination. Land uses are defined in Division 7 (Definitions). In cases where a specific land use or activity is not defined, the Director shall assign the land use or activity to a classification substantially similar in character. Land uses not listed in Table 2-08 or not found to be substantially similar to the land uses, as determined by the Director, are prohibited.

G.    Uses Not Listed. Land uses that are not listed in Table 2-08 or not shown in a zone are not allowed, except as otherwise provided by Section 17.02.020 (Rules of Interpretation) or Section 17.06.030 (Exemptions from Land Use Permit Requirements).

 

Table 2-08: Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Special Purpose and Overlay Zones

 

P: Permitted Use

CUP: Conditional Use Permit

A: Permitted as an Accessory Use

—: Use not allowed

AUP: Administrative Use Permit

TUP: Temporary Use Permit

 

Land Use

Permit Required by Zone

Specific Use Regulations

O-A

C-F

AGRICULTURE AND OPEN SPACE

 

 

 

Agriculture

CUP

—

 

Facilities Necessary to Preserve Open Space, Including Public Facilities

AUP

AUP

 

Parks and Playgrounds—Public

P

P

 

Parks and Playgrounds—Private

CUP

CUP

 

CANNABIS USES

 

 

 

Cannabis Delivery

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Commercial Cannabis Activities

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

Cultivation, even by Qualified Patients and Caregivers

—

—

See Section 17.28.090 (Cannabis Uses)

EDUCATION, PUBLIC ASSEMBLY, AND RECREATION

 

Commercial Recreation Establishments, Outdoor

CUP

CUP

 

Community/Cultural Centers

CUP

CUP

 

Educational and Research Institutions

CUP

CUP

 

Schools—Private

—

CUP

 

Golf Courses/Country Clubs

CUP

CUP

 

Religious Assembly Facilities

—

CUP

 

RESIDENTIAL

 

 

 

Senior Residential Housing Projects for Low- and Very Low-Income Households

—

CUP

See Sections 17.28.250 (Senior Citizen Housing) and 17.28.050 (Affordable Housing)

SERVICE USES

 

 

 

Animal Shelters

—

CUP

 

Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities

—

CUP

 

Hospitals

—

CUP

 

TRANSPORATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND INFRASTRUCTURE USES

Utility Facilities—Staffed

CUP

CUP

 

Utility Facilities—Unstaffed

AUP

AUP

 

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities—Minor

AUP

AUP

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities—Major

CUP

CUP

See Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, Satellite Dish Antenna

P

P

Subject to Site Development Permit—Minor (See Section 17.44.020(C))

 

See also Section 17.28.270 (Wireless Communications Facilities)

OTHER USES

 

 

 

Accessory Structures, Incidental to Allowed/Conditional Uses on the Same Lot

A

A

 

Corporation Yards (City)

—

P

 

Flood Control Facilities

P

P

 

Public Safety Facilities

P

P

 

Temporary Uses/Activities

TUP

TUP

Chapter 17.46

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 17-09 § 5, 2017; Ord. 16-03 § 8, 2016; Ord. 15-11 § 6, 2016; Ord. 14-08 § 3, 2014; Ord. 14-03 § 5, 2014; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

Division 3: SITE PLANNING AND GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
Chapter 17.16 GENERAL DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
17.16.010 Purpose
The purpose of this division is to prescribe development and site regulations that apply, except where specifically stated, to development in all zones. These standards shall be used in conjunction with the standards for each zone established in Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations). In any case of conflict, the standards specific to the zone shall override these regulations. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.020 Fences, Hedges, and Walls
A.    Purpose and Application.

1.     Purpose. The purpose of these regulations is to achieve a balance between concerns for privacy and public concerns for enhancement of the community appearance, visual image of the streetscape, and overall character of neighborhoods, and to ensure the provision of adequate light, air, and public safety.

2.     Application.

a.     These regulations apply to any type of visible or tangible obstruction that has the effect of forming a physical or visual barrier between properties or between property lines and the public right-of-way, including but not limited to any type of artificially constructed barriers of wood, metal, or concrete posts connected by boards, rails, panels, wire, or mesh, and any type of natural growth such as hedges and screen plantings.

b.     The regulations in this section shall not apply to fences required by other agencies.

c.     In addition to the regulations identified in this section, fences shall be constructed and maintained so that they do not constitute a hazard to traffic, persons, or property.

B.     Residential Zones. Fences, hedges, and walls installed in residential zones shall be subject to the following requirements:

1.     Fences, walls, and hedges are allowed but not required unless specifically stated to be required.

2.     Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height above the interior finished grade immediately abutting the fence, wall, or hedge.

 

Figure 3-01: Fence, Wall, and Hedge Height

 



 

3.     Fences or structures exceeding seven feet in height to enclose sports courts and fields, when such fences enclose the rear half of a parcel, may be installed subject to the granting of a Site Development Permit—Minor.

4.     Where a solid fence, wall, or hedge is located in the required front yard setback or corner cut-off, the fence, wall, or hedge shall not exceed three feet in height; see Section 17.16.130 (Site Safety Triangle).

5.     Open wrought iron fences (minimum 90 percent open) are allowed in any front, side, or rear yard to a maximum height of seven feet.

6.     Chain link fences are not allowed in any front yard area.

7.     The Director, through a Site Development Permit—Minor, may allow fences, walls, or hedges that exceed seven feet in height in the required front, side, or rear setback where the setback abuts a street or alley.

C.     Non-Residential Zones.

1.     Requirements. Fences, hedges, and walls installed in non-residential zones, including mixed-use zones, shall be subject to the following requirements:

a.     Fences, walls, and hedges are allowed but not required.

b.     Fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed seven feet in height above the finished grade immediately abutting the fence, wall, or hedge.

c.     Fences or structures exceeding seven feet in height erected to enclose sports courts and fields may be installed subject to the granting of a Site Development Permit—Minor.

d.     Where a solid fence, wall, or hedge is located in the required front yard setback or corner cut-off, the fence, wall, or hedge shall not exceed three feet in height; see Section 17.16.130 (Site Safety Triangle).

e.     Open wrought iron fences (minimum 90 percent open) are allowed in any front, side, or rear yard to a maximum height of seven feet.

f.      The Director, through a Site Development Permit—Minor, may allow fences, walls, or hedges that exceed seven feet in height in the required front, side, or rear setback where the setback abuts a street or alley.

g.     Approval for walls that exceed the maximum height of seven feet shall be subject to Site Development Review—Minor.

2.     Required Walls Abutting Residential Districts.

a.     Building sites abutting a residential zone or property used for residential purposes shall have a wall not exceeding eight feet in height along the lot line abutting the residential zone or use. Where a street or alley is located along the border or in between the residential district or property and the non-residential use, no wall shall be required unless determined through the site plan or use permit review process that such wall is necessary to guard against potentially adverse impacts on the residential zone or use.

b.     Required walls six feet or more in height shall be constructed of decorative masonry material.

c.     Required walls less than six feet in height may be constructed of other permanent material.

D.    Prohibited Fencing Materials. The following fencing materials shall be prohibited: barbed or razor wire, electrified wire, chicken wire and similar small-gauge wire or mesh product, plastic, and chain-link fencing, unless such chain-link fencing is provided with wood, plastic, or other slats. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.030 Floor Area Ratio and Density Calculations
A.    Purpose and Applicability. This section establishes a standard measurement of development intensity for commercial, industrial, and mixed-use developments.

B.     Measurement—Floor Area Ratio. Building intensity, when expressed as the floor area ratio (FAR), shall exclude surface parking areas, below-grade parking areas, public rights-of-way, and any portion of a site dedicated for public use. For mixed-use developments, the floor area of all portions of the building shall be included in the FAR calculation, and the residential portion shall also comply with any applicable density limits.

C.     Density. Density limits, as applied to residential developments and the mixed-use portion of a mixed-use development, shall be calculated as net density, meaning that any public rights-of-way, public alleys, and any easements used for public circulation purposes shall not be included in the calculation of any lot area. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.16.040 Height Measurement and Exceptions
A.    Height Measurement. Maximum height shall be measured as the vertical distance from the top of the nearest curb to an imaginary plane located the allowed distance above and parallel to the top of the nearest curb.

 

Figure 3-02: Maximum Height Measurement



 

B.     Allowed Projections Above Height. The following building elements may exceed the allowed height of the zone in which they are located, up to an additional six feet above the maximum height limit in the zone:

1.     Plumbing vents and chimneys.

2.     Fire and parapet walls.

3.     Roof structures for the housing of air conditioners, elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, and similar equipment.

4.     Skylights. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.050 Lighting
A.    Purpose.

1.     These outdoor lighting regulations are intended to encourage lighting practices and systems that will:

a.     Permit reasonable uses of outdoor lighting for nighttime safety, utility, security, and enjoyment while preserving the ambience of night,

b.     Minimize glare and obtrusive light by limiting outdoor lighting that is misdirected, excessive, or unnecessary,

c.     Help protect the natural environment from the damaging effects of night lighting;

2.     Other laws or ordinances may require minimum illumination levels for specific applications and may conflict with these regulations. In such cases, those laws or ordinances shall govern.

B.     Applicability. Unless specifically exempted, this section applies to any exterior lighting that is not within a fully enclosed building or structure.

C.     Exemptions. The following lighting fixtures are exempt from the requirements of this section:

1.     Neon and Signage Lighting. Neon and other low-intensity outdoor lighting fixtures used for signage or architectural decoration that are approved through associated discretionary review processes.

2.     Public Rights-of-Way Lighting. Outdoor lighting fixtures on public rights-of-way.

3.     Emergency Aviation Lighting. Emergency lighting operated by public agencies or for the purpose of aviation safety.

4.     Infrastructure Construction Lighting. All temporary lighting used for the construction or repair of roadways, utilities, and other public infrastructure.

5.     Temporary and Seasonal Lighting. Temporary lighting equipment and seasonal lighting equipment, provided that individual lamps are 10 watts or less. Temporary lighting that does not comply with the regulations contained in this section is subject to review and approval through the applicable Temporary Use Permit. In granting a request for approval of temporary lighting that does not comply with these regulations, the Director shall make all the following findings:

a.     The purpose for which the lighting is proposed is not intended to extend beyond 30 days; and

b.     The proposed lighting is designed in such a manner as to minimize light pollution and trespass as much as feasible.

6.     Decorative Patio and Landscape Accent Lighting. Low-level outdoor patio and landscape accent lighting, where individual lamps are 10 watts or less, used by commercial businesses to provide ambiance.

D.    General Standards for Exterior Lighting.

1.     Outdoor lighting shall be designed, installed, and maintained to minimize nighttime sky light pollution, and use energy efficiently by lighting only those areas or objects necessary for safety and security.

2.     Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjacent properties and public rights-of-way.

3.     The level of parking lot light projected onto any ground or wall surface shall not be less than two foot-candles nor more than five foot-candles at the base of the light fixture. The electrical plan or lighting plan shall demonstrate the dispersal of light on the ground surface and compliance with the requirements of this subsection. Building-mounted decorative lights shall not exceed five foot-candles measured five feet from the light source.

E.     Prohibited Lighting.

1.     Flashing. Outdoor lighting shall not blink, flash, or rotate, except as used in conjunction with a security alarm system.

2.     Projection Above Horizontal Plane. Outdoor flood light projection above the horizontal plane, as shown in Figure 3-03 (Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane) is prohibited, unless allowed by subsection F of this section.

3.     Search Lights. Search lights, laser source lights, or any similar high-intensity light are prohibited, unless allowed by subsection F of this section.

4.     Light Interference. Any light that imitates or causes visual interference with a traffic signal or other necessary safety or emergency light.

 

Figure 3-03: Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane



 

F.     New Development. New development projects shall incorporate the following regulations to minimize glare and light trespass and facilitate better vision at night.

1.     Fully Shielded. Outdoor lighting fixtures, including lighting for outdoor recreational facilities, shall be shielded with full cutoff or recessed fixtures designed and installed so that no emitted light will break a horizontal plane passing through the lowest point of the fixture (see Figure 3-03: Outdoor Lighting Horizontal Plane). Cutoff fixtures shall be installed using a horizontal lamp position.

2.     Design. Lighting fixtures should be of a design that complements building design and landscaping.

3.     Height, Intensity, and Scale. Lighting fixtures shall be appropriate in height, intensity, and scale to the use they are serving. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.060 Lot Coverage Calculation
The following shall be excluded from the lot coverage calculation:

A.    Uncovered decks, porches, landings, balconies, and stairways that are 30 inches or less in height, as measured from the adjacent existing grade.

B.     Roof eaves which project 30 inches or less from the structure.

C.     Swimming pools and hot tubs that are not enclosed in roofed structures or decks.

D.    Up to two small, non-habitable accessory structures under 120 square feet and under seven feet in height. Any additional structures above the quantity of two shall be included in lot coverage. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.16.070 Paving of Required Front Yard Setback—Residential Zones
A.    Not more than 50 percent of the required front yard setback area shall be covered with paving and similar impervious surfaces.

B.     Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, this requirement only applies to development of a new residential use, or renovation of an existing residential use which includes modifications to the existing garage or front yard, that occurs after April 15, 2014.

C.     The Director may allow an exception from the requirements set forth in subsections A and B, if necessary, to provide safe and adequate ingress and egress for the site. Any such request for an exception to this requirement shall require a Site Development Permit—Minor. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 14-02 § 3, 2014; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.080 Projections into Required Setbacks
A.    Allowed Projections into Required Setback Areas. The following features are allowed projections into required setback areas:

1.     Architectural Features. Architectural features on the main structure (e.g., cornices, canopies, eaves, buttresses, chimneys, solar collectors, shading louvers, reflectors, water heater enclosures, and bay or other projecting windows that do not include usable floor space) may extend a maximum of 30 inches into a required side setback. Fireplaces, not exceeding eight feet in width, may extend up to 30 inches into a required side, front, or rear setback.

2.     Balconies, Porches, Stairways, and Decks. Uncovered balconies, uncovered porches, outside stairways, and decks may extend not more than six feet into the required setback distance.

3.     Exits. Fire escapes, exit stairs, or other required exits shall comply with setback standards established in the Building and Fire Codes.

4.     Utility and Mechanical Equipment. Mechanical equipment shall comply with required setbacks, with the following exceptions:

a.     Tankless water heaters may encroach into the required side and rear setbacks up to 30 inches.

b.     Filter and heating systems for pools, spas, jacuzzis, and hot tubs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any dwelling other than the owner’s. All such equipment shall be acoustically shielded as needed to comply with Chapter 17.20 (Noise).

c.     All ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment may be placed in the side yard setback areas in the R-1 zone, provided that the equipment does not project more than 24 inches into a required side yard setback area, and in no case shall the equipment be placed closer than 36 inches to a side property line. The placement of the ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment shall also be located at least 12 feet from any window of a neighboring dwelling, as measured from the farthest projected edge of the equipment to the closest edge of window. The placement of ground-mounted heating and air conditioning equipment shall comply with the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.20 (Noise). Mitigations such as block wall enclosures may be required to mitigate sound impacts at the property line.

5.     Fences, Hedges, and Walls. Fences, walls, and hedges may occupy setbacks to the extent provided in Section 17.16.020 (Fences, Hedges, and Walls).

6.     Unenclosed Parking Spaces in Side and Rear Setbacks. Unenclosed parking spaces and parking aisles may be located within side and rear setbacks.

B.     Awnings. Awnings are allowed to overhang on the public right-of-way in all zones, subject to the following provisions:

1.     A building permit and any other applicable permit(s) shall be obtained before installing an awning within or over a public right-of-way.

2.     Awnings shall be constructed with noncombustible frames and coverings. Every awning shall be collapsible, retractable, or capable of being folded against the face of the structure to which it is attached. When collapsed, retracted, or folded, the design of the awning shall not block any required exit.

3.     Awnings may extend over public property not more than seven feet from the face of a supporting structure, but no portion shall extend nearer than two feet to the face of the nearest curb line measured horizontally. In no case shall the awning extend over public property greater than two-thirds of the distance from the property line to the nearest curb in front of the structure site.

4.     Supporting elements of an awning shall be at least eight feet above a public walkway. A valance attached to an awning shall not extend more than 12 inches below the roof of the awning at the point of attachment, and in no case shall a portion of a valance be less than seven feet in height above a public walk-way.

5.     Awnings shall be maintained in a clean and untattered condition. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 09-02 § 1, 2009; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.090 Refuse and Recycling Storage Areas
A.    Purpose and Applicability.

1.     Purpose. This section establishes standards for the location, development, and operations of refuse and recycling storage areas required by the Municipal Code or by State law to ensure that the storage of refuse (trash) and recyclable materials does not have significant adverse health and environmental consequences and minimizes adverse impacts on surrounding properties.

2.     Applicability. This section applies to all nonresidential, mixed-use, and multi-family residential developments with five or more dwelling units that are required by the Municipal Code or by State law to provide refuse and recycling storage areas and where such developments provide a common refuse collection area.

B.     Enclosure Required. Enclosures are required for any common outdoor refuse and recycling storage areas.

1.     Multi-Family and Mixed-Use Residential. Multi-family development projects with five or more dwelling units shall provide at least one enclosure, as described in this section, to contain all its required outdoor refuse and recycling storage areas. If a project contains 10 dwelling units or more, at least two enclosures or a larger enclosure shall be provided, the location and size of which shall be subject to the review and approval of the Director.

2.     Nonresidential. All commercial development with more than one tenant, all industrial developments, and all other non-residential developments shall contain at least one outdoor refuse and recycling materials enclosure.

C.     Location.

1.     Outdoor refuse and recycling enclosures required under this section shall not be located within any front or street-facing yard areas and shall conform to setback requirements.

2.     No outdoor refuse and recycling enclosure shall be located within any required landscaped areas, required off-street parking spaces, public rights-of-way, or in any location where it would obstruct pedestrian walkways, obstruct vehicular ingress and egress, reduce motor vehicle sightline, or in any way create a hazard to health and safety.

D.    Design of Enclosure Area.

1.     Size. The enclosure shall have a minimum width and minimum depth sufficient to enclose all required refuse and recycling containers with minimum clearance of one foot on all sides between the containers and the interior enclosure walls. Curbs or similar buffers shall be provided in the interior to protect the walls.

2.     Exterior. All refuse and recycling enclosures shall have three sides consisting of minimum six-foot-high, fully grouted, decorative masonry walls, with the fourth side consisting of a solid metal gate with latch, painted a color compatible with the enclosure walls. The gate shall be located on one of the wide sides of the enclosure. The top one-foot of the gate shall be open work, with screening; the remaining section of the gates shall have solid metal backing. The exterior wall shall be of a material and colors that complement the architecture of the buildings they serve or shall have exterior landscape planting that screens the walls.

3.     Access. The interior dimensions of the refuse and recyclables enclosure shall provide convenient and secure access to the containers to prevent access by unauthorized persons and to minimize scavenging, while allowing authorized persons access for disposal and collection of materials.

4.     Roofs. All trash enclosures shall have full roofs to reduce storm water pollution and to screen unsightly views. The design of the roof and the materials used shall be compatible with materials and colors of the enclosure and shall have adequate height clearance to enable ready access to any containers.

5.     Security. The gate shall be equipped with latches that allow the gate to be locked.

 

Figure 3-04: Refuse and Recycling Enclosure

Top View of Enclosure



 

Front View of Enclosure



 

E.     Maintenance. Outdoor refuse and recyclables enclosures shall be maintained in the following manner:

1.     There shall be the prompt removal of visible signs of overflow of garbage, smells emanating from enclosure, graffiti, pests, and vermin.

2.     Trash enclosure covers shall be closed when not in use.

3.     Trash enclosures shall be easily accessible for garbage and recyclables collection.

4.     Trash enclosures shall be regularly emptied of garbage. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.100 Screening and Buffering
A.    Purpose and Applicability. This section establishes standards for the screening and separation of residential from adjoining nonresidential land uses, equipment and outdoor storage areas, and surface parking areas.

B.     Mechanical Equipment, Loading Docks, and Refuse Areas.

1.     Ground-mounted mechanical equipment (e.g., air conditioning, heating, ventilation ducts, and exhaust, etc.), loading docks, refuse storage areas, and utility facilities shall be screened from view from adjoining public rights-of-way and area(s) zoned for residential or open space uses by a minimum six-foot-high decorative masonry wall or structures.

2.     The method of screening shall be architecturally compatible with other on-site development in terms of colors, materials, and architectural style.

3.     Landscaping shall be installed adjacent to the walls, at the discretion of the Director, in compliance with Chapter 17.18 (Landscaping).

C.     Drive-Through Facilities. Queuing aisles that abut a public right-of-way shall be screened from view from the right-of-way with a minimum three-foot-high landscaped hedge or combination wall and landscape screening. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.110 Setbacks—Measurement
A.    Purpose. This section establishes standards for the measurement of setbacks and required setback areas. These provisions, in conjunction with other applicable provisions of the Zoning Code, are intended to help determine the pattern of building masses and open areas within neighborhoods. They also provide separation between combustible materials in neighboring buildings. Setback areas are further intended to help provide landscape beauty, air circulation, views, and exposure to sunlight for both natural illumination and use of solar energy.

B.     Measurement of Setbacks.

1.     General. All setback distances shall be measured at right angles from the designated property line to the building or structure, and the setback line shall be drawn parallel to and at the specified distance from the corresponding front, side, or rear property line. Where the front property line is located beyond the curb (i.e., within a street or common driveway), the front setback is defined as the minimum distance between a structure and the edge of curb.

2.     Flag Lots. For flag lots, the pole portion of the parcel shall not be used for defining setback lines. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.16.120 Vehicular Access—Residential Zones
A.    All Residential Zones.

1.     Parcels shall have vehicular access from a dedicated street or alley or from a private street established by a subdivision map.

2.     Driveway access to garages or carports shall be of permanent construction material, concrete or asphalt or other material approved by the Director.

3.     Driveways shall be kept and maintained free and clear of inoperative vehicles, debris, waste, junk, litter, building materials, boxes, structures, and other items, equipment or matter which block or limit access.

B.     Multiple-Family Residential Zones. Where a parcel, building site, or parcel abuts upon an alley, the primary vehicular ingress and egress to and from the garages, accessory structures, carports, or open parking spaces housing or intended to house or park motor vehicles, shall be accessed from the alley. The responsible review authority shall have the ability to allow an alternative ingress and egress arrangement based on site-specific circumstances.

C.     Mobile Home Residential Zone.

1.     Dwelling units must be served by internal private streets within the mobile home park. There shall be no direct access from a mobile home unit to a public street or alley.

2.     Internal public streets shall be of a permanent construction material such as concrete, asphalt, or other material approved by the Director.

3.     Internal private streets shall be a minimum of 30 feet in length.

4.     Accessways shall be kept free and clear of nonmobile vehicles, materials, and equipment. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.130 Sight Safety Triangle
A.    Sight Safety Triangle. All parcels shall be developed in a manner that ensures visibility across the corners of the intersecting streets, alleys, and private driveways. The sight safety triangle area shall be described as a triangular shaped area on a corner parcel formed by measuring 15 feet from the intersection of the front and street side property lines, or an intersecting alley or driveway, and connecting the lines diagonally across the property making a 90-degree triangle, as shown in Figure 3-05 (Sight Safety Triangle Area) below.

 

Figure 3-05: Sight Safety Triangle Area



 

B.     Height of Obstructions. The maximum height cutback of any object (e.g., fence, landscaping, signs, walls, etc.) located in the sight safety triangle area shall be three feet, measured from the adjoining top of curb. The three-foot height limit shall not apply to traffic safety devices, trees trimmed to eight feet above the adjacent top of curb, utility poles, and other government or utility installed devices. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.16.140 Swimming Pools and Spas
A.    Location.

1.     Swimming pools in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones shall be constructed on the rear one-half of the parcel or 50 feet from the front property line, whichever is the less, or unless a different location is approved by the Director via an Administrative Use Permit. Swimming pools shall not be located closer than five feet from any rear, or side parcel line. On the street side of any corner parcel, where the rear parcel line abuts a side parcel line, the pool shall not be located closer than 10 feet from the side parcel line. The Director may reduce these requirements by 50 percent on approval of an Administrative Use Permit.

2.     Filter and heating systems for swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any dwelling other than the dwelling on the property on which the swimming pool, spa, or hot tub is located.

B.     Parcel Coverage. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs collectively shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the required rear setback. Coverage by swimming pool, spa, or hot tub shall not be considered in measuring maximum parcel coverage.

C.     Fencing Required. Swimming pools, spas, and hot tubs shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least five feet in height, and gates shall be self-closing and self-latching. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 10-01 § 1, 2010; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.18 LANDSCAPING
17.18.010 Purpose and Intent
The City promotes the value and benefits of landscapes while recognizing the need to conserve water and other resources as efficiently as possible. This section establishes minimum landscape standards for all uses in compliance with applicable State standards and guidelines and to promote sustainable development. The purpose of this chapter is to establish a structure for planning, designing, installing, maintaining, and managing water-efficient landscapes in new construction and rehabilitated projects. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.18.020 Applicability
A.    General. This section shall supplement the Water Efficient Landscaping Ordinance (Chapter 13.05) and shall apply to all landscape projects listed in Section 13.05.020 (Applicability).

B.     Exemptions. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

1.     Registered local, State, or Federal historical sites.

2.     Ecological restoration projects that do not require a permanent irrigation system.

3.     Single-family residential land uses with landscaped areas of less than 5,000 square feet that are not developer-installed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.18.030 Landscape Area Requirements
A.    Nonresidential and Multiple-Family Uses. Each land use, except single-family residential, shall provide and maintain a minimum of 15 percent of the site in landscaped areas. The landscape area requirement may include setback areas and other unused areas of the site that are not intended for future use. Parking lot landscaping may be counted towards meeting this requirement.

B.     New Residential Subdivisions. Setback areas visible from the public right-of-way shall be landscaped within six months of certificate of occupancy. Landscaping shall be provided as required in Section 17.08.040 (R-1 Zone Front Yard Landscaping Requirement).

C.     Unused Areas. Any area of a project site not intended for a specific use, including pad sites in shopping centers held for future development, shall be landscaped unless it is determined by the Director that landscaping is not necessary to fulfill the purposes of this chapter.

D.    Landscape Techniques. The design and installation of all proposed landscape improvements subject to this chapter shall be in compliance with the following general provisions:

1.     Landscape design shall include a selection of plant materials based upon their adaptability to the climatic, geologic, and topographical conditions of the site. The protection, preservation, and enhancement of native species and natural areas are encouraged.

2.     Landscape design shall provide for the grouping of plant materials having similar water demands so as to facilitate appropriate and efficient water applications.

3.     Landscape design shall address the functional aspects of landscaping (e.g., grading, drainage, minimal runoff, erosion prevention, wind barriers, provisions for shade and reduction of glare, etc.).

4.     Landscape design shall demonstrate a concern for solar access, including exposure and shading of window areas.

5.     Landscape design shall address the retention of existing mature landscaping that is in good, healthful condition, incorporating the landscaping into the landscape plan where feasible.

6.     Landscape design shall provide for the planting of all unpaved areas with an effective combination of trees, groundcover, live turf, shrubbery, and/or approved dry landscape materials. At the discretion of the Director, artificial turf may be used as a substitute for live turf.

7.     Landscape design shall include provisions to protect plant materials from damage by the encroachment or overhang of motor vehicles. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.18.040 Submittal of Plans Required
A.    Both landscape and irrigation plans shall be submitted for plan check and approval by the City.

B.     Landscape and irrigation plans shall include all materials specified in Section 13.05.030 (Implementation Procedures). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.18.050 Water-Efficient Landscape Principles
A.    Purpose. The use of water-efficient landscape principles is intended to reduce the consumption of water used in landscaped areas and to offer as much latitude as possible when designing required landscape and irrigation. These provisions are intended to encourage landscapes that can be maintained with low water use irrigation systems which will not overuse or waste the available water supply and that are consistent with the requirements of this section.

B.     Applicability of Water-Efficient Landscape Principles. The requirements of this section shall apply to new and rehabilitated landscaping for public agency and private development projects that require a permit, and to developer-installed landscaping in single-family and multiple-family projects. This section shall not apply to:

1.     Homeowner-provided landscaping at single-family and multiple-family projects;

2.     Existing commercial and industrial developments, unless landscaping is rehabilitated; and

3.     A project with an aggregate landscaped area requiring less than 2,500 square feet.

C.     Criteria. Landscape and irrigation plans shall be reviewed for compliance with the criteria in Chapter 13.05 (Water Efficient Landscaping) the City’s landscape guidelines. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.20 NOISE
17.20.010 Purpose
A.    The City establishes the noise regulations in this chapter to control unnecessary, excessive, and annoying sounds emanating from all properties and land uses in the City. It is the declared policy of the City to prohibit these sounds generated from all sources, as specified in this chapter.

B.     The City recognizes and declares, based on published scientific and health data, that certain noise levels are detrimental to the public health, welfare, and general safety and contrary to public interest. Therefore, the Council does ordain and declare that creating, maintaining, causing, or allowing to create, maintain, or cause any noise in a manner prohibited by, or not in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, is a public nuisance and shall be abated and when such abated is not achieved, to be punishable as a public nuisance pursuant to Section 17.20.080 (Manner of Enforcement) of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.020 Exemptions
The following activities shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter.

A.    School bands, school athletic events, and school entertainment events, provided these events are conducted on school property or authorized by special permit from the City;

B.     Activities lawfully conducted in public parks, public playgrounds, and public or private school grounds;

C.     A mechanical device, apparatus, or equipment used, related to, or connected with emergency machinery, vehicle, or work;

D.    Noise sources associated with construction, repair, remodeling, or grading of any real property, provided a permit has been obtained from the City, and further provided the activities do not take place between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. on weekdays and on Saturdays, or at any time on Sundays or Federal holidays;

E.     Noise sources associated with the maintenance of real property, provided the activities take place between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. on weekdays and on Saturdays, or between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on Sunday or a Federal holiday;

F.     An activity or equipment to the extent that design regulation of it has been preempted by State or Federal laws. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.030 Noise Level Measurement Criteria
Noise level measurements made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall be performed using a sound level meter as defined in Division 7 (Definitions). The location selected for measuring exterior noise levels shall be at any point on the property line of the offender or anywhere on the affected property. Interior noise measurements shall be made within the affected building. The measurement shall be made at a point in the affected building at least four feet from the wall, ceiling, or floor nearest the noise source. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.040 Designated Noise Districts
A.    Noise Districts. For the purposes of controlling noise and its impacts, the City shall be divided into noise districts defined as follows:

1.     Noise District 1: All properties zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH.

2.     Noise District 2: All properties zoned C-O, C-F, and O-A, and with an MOZ overlay.

3.     Noise District 3: All properties zoned C-G and TCMU, and with the ROZ overlay.

4.     Noise District 4: All properties zoned P-L-I.

B.     Unclassified. For any property or group of properties zoned SP, the Director shall assign an applicable noise district based upon the prevailing land uses within the specific plan area. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.050 Exterior Noise Standards
A.    Baseline. The following noise standards, unless otherwise specifically indicated, shall apply to properties within the identified noise districts. No person shall cause any noise to occur that exceeds these standards except as authorized in subsection B, below.

 

Table 3-01: Exterior Noise Standards

 

Noise District

Maximum Noise Level

Time Period

1—Daytime

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

1—Nighttime

50 dB(A)

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

2

55 dB(A)

Anytime

3

60 dB(A)

Anytime

4

70 dB(A)

Anytime

 

B.     Temporary Exceedances. It is unlawful for any person to create noise, or to allow the creation of noise, on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by a person, that causes the baseline noise levels established in subsection A, either within or outside of the City, to exceed the applicable noise standard as follows:

1.     For a cumulative period of more than 30 minutes in any hour;

2.     Plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than 15 minutes in any hour;

3.     Plus 10 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in any hour;

4.     Plus 15 dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in any hour; or

5.     Plus 20 dB(A) for any period of time.

C.     Maximum Allowable Noise Levels. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the noise limit categories described in subsections (B)(1) through (5) of this section above, the cumulative period applicable to the category shall be increased to reflect the ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the fifth noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under that category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.060 Interior Noise Standards
A.    Baseline. Interior noise standards established by the State Health and Safety Code (California Code of Regulations, Title 24, Part 2) shall apply to all multi-family residential construction and uses. For all other uses, the following interior noise standards shall apply.

 

Table 3-02: Interior Noise Standards

 

Noise District

Maximum Noise Level

Time Period

1—Daytime

55 dB(A)

7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.

1—Nighttime

45 dB(A)

10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.

2, 3, 4

55 dB(A)

Anytime

 

B.     Temporary Exceedances. It is unlawful for any person to create noise, or to allow the creation of noise, on property owned, leased, occupied, or otherwise controlled by a person, that causes the noise level, when measured within structures in the applicable noise district, to exceed:

1.     The noise standard for a cumulative period of more than five minutes in an hour;

2.     The noise standard plus five dB(A) for a cumulative period of more than one minute in an hour; or

3.     The noise standard plus ten 10 dB(A) for any period of time.

C.     Maximum Allowable Noise Levels. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds either of the first two noise limit categories described in subsections (B)(1) and (2) of this section, the cumulative period applicable to the category shall be increased to reflect the ambient noise level. In the event the ambient noise level exceeds the third noise limit category, the maximum allowable noise level under that category shall be increased to reflect the maximum ambient noise level.

D.    Different Noise Districts. In the event that the noise source and the affected property are within different noise districts, the noise standards of the affected property shall apply. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.070 Special Provisions—Schools, Hospitals, and Places of Public Assembly
It is unlawful for a person to create noise that causes the noise level at a school, hospital, or place of public assembly—while the facility is in use—to exceed the noise limits specified for exterior noise in this chapter, or which noise level unreasonably interferes with the use of the facility or which unreasonably disturbs or annoys patients in a hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in three separate locations within one-tenth of a mile of the school, hospital, or place of public assembly indicating the presence of such school, hospital, or place of public assembly. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.080 Manner of Enforcement
A.    The Director and duly authorized representatives are directed to enforce the provisions of this chapter. The Police Chief and duly authorized representatives are authorized in compliance with Penal Code Section 836.5 to arrest any person without a warrant when they have reasonable cause to believe that a person has committed a misdemeanor in their presence.

B.     Persons shall not interfere with, oppose, or resist an authorized person charged with enforcement of this chapter while any person is engaged in the performance of his or her duty. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.20.090 Relief from Standards—Application Procedure
A.    Application Requirements. The owner or operator of a noise source that violates any of the provisions of this chapter may file an application with the Director for relief from the provisions, and the owner or operator shall detail all actions taken to comply with the provisions, the reasons why immediate compliance cannot be achieved, a proposed method of achieving compliance, and a proposed time schedule for its accomplishment. The application shall be accompanied by a fee as established by resolution of the Council.

B.     Separate Applications. A separate application shall be filed for each noise source. However, in the circumstance that several mobile sources are under common ownership, or several fixed sources occur on a single property, such request for relief may be combined into one application. Upon receipt of the application and fee, the Director shall refer it with his/her recommendation in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.

C.     Compliance Required Until Relief Granted. An applicant for relief shall remain subject to prosecution under the terms of this title until such relief is granted.

D.    Review Authority. The Planning Commission shall evaluate all applications for relief from the requirements of this chapter and may grant relief with respect to time for compliance subject to the terms, conditions, and requirements as it may deem reasonable to achieve maximum compliance with the provisions of this chapter. These terms, conditions, and requirements may include, but shall not be limited to, limitations on noise levels and operating hours. Each relief application granted shall identify in detail the approved method of achieving maximum compliance and a time schedule for its accomplishment.

E.     Factors to Be Considered. In its determinations, the Planning Commission shall consider the magnitude of nuisance caused by the offensive noise; the uses of property within the area of impingement by the noise; the time factors related to study, design, financing and construction of remedial work; the economic factors related to age and useful life of equipment; and the general public interest and welfare.

F.     Violations. Any relief granted shall be by resolution and shall be transmitted to the Director for enforcement. A violation of the terms of the relief is unlawful. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.22 PARKING AND LOADING
17.22.010 Purpose and Applicability
A.    Purpose. The purposes of this chapter are to:

1.     Ensure that adequate off-street parking is provided for new land uses and major alterations to existing uses, considering the demands likely to result from various uses, combinations of uses, and settings, and to avoid the negative impacts associated with spillover parking into adjacent neighborhoods and districts;

2.     Minimize the negative environmental and urban design impacts that can result from parking lots, driveways, and drive aisles within parking lots;

3.     Where possible, consolidate parking and minimize the area devoted exclusively to parking and driveways when typical demands may be satisfied more efficiently by shared facilities;

4.     Ensure that parking and loading areas are designed to operate efficiently and effectively and in a manner compatible with onsite and surrounding land uses;

5.     Ensure that adequate off-street bicycle parking facilities are provided;

6.     Promote parking lot designs that offer safe and attractive pedestrian routes; and

7.     Encourage bicycling, transit use, walking, carpooling, and other modes of transportation (other than by motor vehicle).

B.     Applicability. The standards for off-street parking shall apply to new structures, alterations of existing structures, and when new or intensified uses of existing structures or parcels of land occur. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.020 General Parking Regulations
A.    Requirements by Type of Use.

1.     Except as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code, for every structure erected or enlarged and for any land or structure devoted to a new use requiring more spaces according to the schedule set out in this chapter, the indicated minimum number of off-street parking spaces located on the site of the use shall be provided. The right to occupy and use any premises shall be contingent on preserving the required parking and maintaining its availability to the intended users, including residents, staff, and/or customers. In no case shall required parking spaces for a use be rented or leased to off-site uses or used for other purposes, unless specifically allowed by this chapter.

2.     Additional parking or alternative parking development standards may be required as a condition of permit approval.

B.     Uses Not Listed. The Director shall determine the parking requirement for uses that are not listed in Table 3-04: Parking Requirements by Use. The Director’s determination shall be based on similarity to listed uses. The decision of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission.

C.     Parking Calculations.

1.     Floor Area. Where parking requirements are based on floor area, the parking requirement calculation shall be based on the gross floor area of the entire use, unless stated otherwise.

2.     Sites with Multiple Uses. If more than one use is located on a site (including a mix of uses or a mixed-use development), the number of required onsite parking spaces shall be equal to the sum of the requirements calculated separately for each use unless a reduction is approved pursuant to Section 17.22.030.B (Alternative Parking Standards). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-06 § 4, 2018; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.030 Required Parking Spaces
A.    Minimum Number of Spaces Required. Each land use shall be provided with at least the number of on-site parking spaces stated in this section and Table 3-05 (Parking Requirements by Use).

B.     Alternative Parking Standards. As an alternative to providing the required parking spaces specified in Table 3-05 (Parking Requirements by Use), an applicant may prepare an independent parking study identifying alternative parking demand for the uses proposed. Such study shall be prepared by a licensed traffic engineer or other qualified professional, as determined by the Director. Where no discretionary approval is required for the proposed use, the Director shall have the authority to review the parking study and determine whether alternative parking standards can be applied. Where a Conditional Use Permit or other discretionary action of the Planning Commission is required for the proposed use, the Commission shall have the authority to review the parking study.

 

Table 3-05: Parking Requirements by Use

 

Use Classification

Required Parking Spaces

AGRICULTURE

 

Agriculture—Commercial Indoor

1 space/2,000 sf of floor or greenhouse area

Community Garden

No spaces required when on-street parking is available immediately adjacent to the garden. If no on-street parking is available, then a minimum of eight spaces.

BUSINESS, FINANCIAL, AND PROFESSIONAL OFFICE

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs)

No requirement

Banks and Credit Unions

1 space/200 sf

Business Support Services

1 space/300 sf

Check Cashing Shops/Payday Loans

1 space/300 sf

Office, Business and Professional

1 space/250 sf

Office, Medical and Dental Office

See Medical and Care Uses

Office, Public Utility Commercial

See Office, Business and Professional

EATING AND DRINKING ESTABLISHMENTS

Bars, Lounges, and Nightclubs

1 space/75 sf of public area

Food Preparation/Catering (no on-site sales or service)

1 space/1,500 sf of use area plus 1 space/300 sf of office area

Restaurant with Drive-Through Facilities

A. 1 space/100 sf of gross area of the structure up to 5,000 sf, plus 1 space/150 sf of gross structure area in excess of 5,000 sf

 

B. Outdoor dining areas:

 

1) For outdoor dining areas ancillary to indoor dining areas, no parking shall be required for outdoor dining areas 300 sf or less in size. For any outdoor dining area in excess of 300 sf, parking for the outdoor area shall be provided at a ratio of 1 space/150 sf of outdoor dining area

 

2) For uses with no indoor dining area, parking for the outdoor dining area shall be provided as indicated in A above

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service

A. 1 space/75 sf of customer seating area

 

B. Outdoor dining areas:

 

1) For outdoor dining areas ancillary to indoor dining areas, no parking shall be required for outdoor dining areas 300 sf or less in size. For any outdoor dining area in excess of 300 sf, parking for the outdoor area shall be provided at a ratio of 1 space/150 sf of outdoor dining area

 

2) For uses with no indoor dining area, parking for the outdoor dining area shall be provided as indicated in A above

Take-Out Restaurant with No Seating On Site

1 space/300 sf of GFA of structure

INDUSTRY, MANUFACTURING AND PROCESSING, AND WAREHOUSING USES

Brewery, Winery, or Distillery

1 space/1,000 sf of production space, plus any additional required for associated office, dining, and customer service space

Data Centers

See Warehouse, Wholesaling and Distribution

Hazardous Waste Facilities

See Manufacturing—Light

Food Processing

1 space/1,000 sf of production space, plus any required spaces for dedicated office area

Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops, and Woodworking Shops (wholesale only)

1 space/1,000 sf of production space, plus any required spaces for dedicated office area

Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing

1 space/1,000 sf of combined laboratory and office space

Laundries and Dry-Cleaning Plants

1 space/1,000 sf of plant space, plus any additional required for associated office and customer service space

Manufacturing—Light

1 space/500 sf

Recycling, Processing Facility

As provided in approved use permit

Recycling, Collection Facility

None required

Research and Development

1 space/1,000 sf of combined assembly/fabrication space (indoor and outdoor) and office space

Storage—Outdoor

As required for primary permitted use

Storage—Personal

1 space/6,000 sf of combined storage space and business/sales office

Warehouse, Wholesaling and Distribution

1 space/1,000 sf

LODGING

 

Homeless Shelter

2 spaces for the facility plus 1 space for each six occupants at maximum allowed occupancy

Hotels and Motels

1 space/guest room, plus any spaces required for conference/meeting facilities and restaurants open to the public

MEDICAL AND CARE USES

 

Ambulance Fleet Services

1 space/1,000 sf of indoor space, plus any required spaces for dedicated office area and 1 space for each fleet vehicle

Day Care Homes—Large

2 on-site parking spaces in addition to any spaces required for the primary residential use

Hospital

1.75 spaces/patient bed

Health Facilities, Therapy and Rehabilitation

1 space/400 sf

Office - Medical, and Dental

1 space/200 sf

Residential Care Facilities

0.25 space to 1.5 spaces per unit or room, to be determined by the Planning Commission based on the age of residents, type of transportation facilities provided, and on-site amenities to be provided. The applicant shall submit a study prepared by a City-approved independent consultant that provides justification for the parking proposed

Urgent Care/Clinic

1 space/200 sf

MIXED-USE CLASSIFICATIONS

 

Mixed-Use Development

As required for each separate use in the mixed-use development

PUBLIC AND ASSEMBLY USES

 

Cultural Institutions

Live Theater: 1 space/3 fixed seats or for every 30 sf of public assembly area where there are no fixed seats

All other uses: 1 space/400 sf of public assembly area

Public Assembly Facilities

1 space/3 fixed seats or for every 30 sf of public assembly area where there are no fixed seats

Places of Religious Assembly

1 space/3 fixed seats or for every 30 sf of public assembly area where there are no fixed seats, plus any additional required for ancillary uses such as classrooms

Schools, Private

1 space/5 seats, but not less than 1 space/30 sf

Trade and Vocational Schools

0.75 spaces/employee plus 0.75 spaces/student at maximum enrollment

Tutoring and Education Centers

1 space/200 sf of public or instruction area

RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT

 

Arcade (Electronic Game Center)

1 space/250 sf

Commercial Recreation—Indoor and Outdoor

1 space/200 sf of indoor space, plus 1 space/500 sf of outdoor space

Entertainment, Indoor

As provided in approved use permit

Health/Fitness Facilities

1 space/200 sf

Theaters

1 space/3 fixed seats or for every 30 sf of public assembly area where there are no fixed seats

RESIDENTIAL

 

Accessory Dwelling Unit

1 space (see Section 17.28.020(F) regarding parking for ADUs)

Live/Work Unit

2 covered spaces per unit, plus one customer space, which can be in a driveway

Mobile Home Parks

2 covered tandem parking spaces/dwelling unit, plus 0.5 space/dwelling unit for guest parking

Multi-Family Dwellings

 

Studio

1.5 spaces/unit

In addition:

• Project with 4 or fewer units: A minimum of 1 unassigned, designated guest space

• Project with 5 or more units: A minimum of 0.33 unassigned designated guest spaces per unit

 

• Plus, where a common recreation room is provided, 2 spaces

 

The total number of parking spaces required is determined by the aggregate number of units within the project as a whole

One-Bedroom Unit

2 spaces/unit

Two-Bedroom Unit

2.75 spaces/unit

Three-Bedroom Unit

3.5 spaces/unit

Four-Bedroom Unit and Larger

4 spaces/unit for 4-bedroom unit

0.5 additional parking spaces for each additional bedroom in excess of the first 4 bedrooms

Affordable Housing Developments (moderate income and below)

1 space for each studio

1 space for each affordable 1-bedroom unit

2 spaces for each affordable dwelling unit with 2+ bedrooms, regardless of the number of bedrooms

Senior Residential Housing Projects

1.1 spaces/unit

Single-Family Dwelling

2 covered spaces for each dwelling unit for units with up to 4 bedrooms. For units with 5 or more bedrooms, 3 covered spaces

RETAIL USES

 

Alcohol Sales, Off-Sale

1 space/250 sf

Animal Retail Sales

1 space/250 sf

Building Materials and Services—Indoor

1 space/1,000 sf of indoor space

Building Materials and Services—Outdoor

1 space/1,500 sf of outdoor space

Convenience Store

1 space/200 sf

Nurseries and Garden Centers—Indoor Sales Only

1 space/500 sf of floor area

Nurseries and Garden Centers—Indoor and Outdoor Sales

1 space/500 sf of floor area, plus 1 space per 2,000 sf of outdoor display area

Produce Stand

1 space/300 sf gross floor area

Recreational Equipment Rentals—Indoor Only

See Retail Sales—General

Retail Sales—General (including shopping centers and grocery stores) and Restricted

1 space/250 sf

Secondhand Stores

See Retail Sales—General and Restricted

Vehicle Sales and Rental

1 space/300 sf of office area, plus 1 space/500 sf of parts/sales/service area, plus 1 space/2,000 sf of outdoor sales area

SERVICES USES

 

Animal Care and Services

 

Animal Boarding/Kennels

1 space/1,000 sf of indoor area

Animal Grooming

1 space/250 sf

Veterinary Services, Large Animal

1 space/500 sf of indoor area

Veterinary Services, Small Animal

1 space/300 sf of indoor area

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services

1 space/3 fixed seats in assembly areas or for every 20 sf of seating area where there are no fixed seats, plus 1 space/400 sf of floor area outside the assembly area

Instructional Services

1 space/250 sf

Maintenance and Repair Services—Indoor

1 space/600 sf, plus 1 space for each fleet vehicle

Personal Services—General and Restricted

1 space/300 sf

Moving Companies, Storage Allowed

1 space/1,000 sf

Social Service Facilities

See Office, Business and Professional

Vehicle Repair and Services

 

Service Station

4 spaces/service bay, if service bays are included on site 1 space/250 sf of any retail on site

Vehicle Washing/Detailing

1 space/250 sf of any indoor sales, office, or lounge areas

Vehicle Service, Major and Minor

1 space plus 4 spaces/service bay, plus 1 space/250 sf of any retail or office on site

TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, AND UTILITIES

Light Fleet Services

1 space/1,000 sf of indoor space, plus any required spaces for dedicated office area, plus 1 space/fleet vehicle

Public Safety Facilities

1 space/500 sf

Utilities Facilities

 

Facilities with On-Site Staff

1 space/1,500 sf of indoor area

Facilities with No On-Site Staff (no staff)

No requirement

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-04 § 2, 2018; Ord. 17-08 § 3, 2017; Ord. 14-03 § 6, 2014; Ord. 13-04 § 5, 2013; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.040 Parking for Electric Vehicles
A.    Parking spaces for electric vehicles shall be provided for all uses in accordance with the requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code and any local amendments thereto.

B.     All EV-ready spaces, as defined in this title, shall be equipped with full electric vehicle charging equipment, including an electric vehicle charging station, the use of which the property owner or operator may require payment, at his or her discretion. All EV capable spaces, as defined in this title, shall be served by an empty raceway to supply power for future EV charging stations at any given time.

C.     Any charging or similar equipment shall not be placed within the required parking space dimensions and shall not obstruct any pedestrian path of travel.

D.    EV-ready and EV-capable spaces and the associated electric vehicle charging equipment shall be provided for all new developments and whenever a substantial addition to an existing development is proposed. For the purposes of this subsection, a substantial addition shall be defined as building area of more that 2,500 square feet (gross) of new construction.

E.     Where an existing legal, nonconforming parking condition exists, the EV spaces requirement shall be based on the existing number of parking spaces, not the required number of parking spaces. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.22.050 Bicycle Parking Standards
A.    Applicability.

1.     The provisions of this section shall apply to:

a.     New multi-family residential developments, non-residential developments, and community and institutional facilities.

b.     Existing nonresidential developments that involve a change in use. A change in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant.

c.     Existing multi-family residential and nonresidential developments that involve expansion, intensification, addition, or any other changes to the site requiring a Site Development Permit—Major.

2.     The provisions of this section shall not apply to:

a.     Single-family residential dwellings or accessory dwelling units.

b.     Any site where there is less than 2,500 square feet of gross building area.

B.     Required Bicycle Spaces. Parking for bicycles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of the California Green Building Standards Code and any local amendments thereto.

C.     Required Bicycle Parking Location and Standards. All bicycle parking spaces shall be provided on the same parcel as the building or use to which such spaces are required, unless the City has established programs allowing for shared parking arrangements at bicycle corrals. All short-term bicycle spaces shall be located at the ground-floor level and near or within visual site distance of building entrances. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.22.060 Motorcycle Parking Standards
Each use or development that requires 20 or more motor vehicle parking spaces shall provide facilities for parking motorcycles at the rate of one space for each 20 car spaces. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.22.070 Nonconforming Parking
For additions or changes in use for existing uses or structures that do not meet current parking standards, the following standards shall apply.

A.    Nonresidential Additions and Reconstruction. When expansion of floor area creates an increase of 10 percent or more in the number of required onsite parking spaces in an existing nonresidential building, additional onsite parking shall be provided for such addition and not for the entire building or site. Additional parking spaces are not required for the reconstruction of an existing building when there is no increase in floor area.

B.     Residential Additions. At least one legally conforming space shall be provided for each existing unit, in addition to all parking required for the addition itself, unless otherwise exempted for an approved accessory dwelling unit.

C.     Use Changes. Changes in use that increase the total parking demand from existing legal uses that are nonconforming because they do not meet current parking requirements may be allowed so long as the number of spaces equal to the difference between the number required by the previous use and the number required by the new use is provided, in addition to all spaces already provided for the previous use. The existing parking shall be maintained. If the number of existing parking spaces is greater than the requirements for such use, the number of spaces in excess of the prescribed minimum may be counted toward meeting the parking requirements for the addition, enlargement, or change in use. A change in occupancy is not considered a change in use unless the new occupant is in a different use classification than the former occupant. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.22.080 Joint Use or Shared Parking
Joint or shared use of required off-street parking facilities may be allowed, provided a Conditional Use Permit is first obtained in compliance with Chapter 17.32 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits) and the following requirements:

A.    Parking Management Plan. The Conditional Use Permit application shall be accompanied by a parking management plan that contains requirements listed below and shall be the basis for issuance of the Conditional Use Permit.

1.     A comprehensive list of uses by type and area (gross floor area);

2.     An analysis of parking demands by uses for morning, midday and evening periods for each 24-hour period, seven days a week;

3.     A peak demand calculation by adding the various components together to determine the parking demand. The highest figure represents the minimum number of spaces to be provided;

4.     Private parking agreements or easements encumbering required parking.

B.     Findings. In addition to the findings required for a Conditional Use Permit, the Planning Commission shall make the following findings to approve joint use parking:

1.     Adequate parking will be available at all times for employees and customers of the uses affected by the joint use parking plan;

2.     Surrounding property owners, residents, and businesses shall not be adversely affected by the joint-use parking plan.

C.     Review of Permit. A Conditional Use Permit issued in compliance with this section shall be subject to review, modification, or revocation if any of the following events occur:

1.     A substantial change in any of the participating uses occurs; and/or

2.     Additional or other users commence legal use of the jointly used facilities or which changes substantially the factors described in the parking management plan which are the basis for the permit.

D.    Off-Site Parking. The Planning Commission may, by approving a Conditional Use Permit Chapter 17.32 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits), allow some or all required parking to be located on a site different from the use. Such off-site parking shall be within a zone where the use is allowed or conditionally allowed, or within an office, commercial or manufacturing zone. It shall be within 300 feet of the use served and shall not be separated from the use by any feature that would make pedestrian access inconvenient or hazardous. The site on which the parking is located shall be owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the party controlling the use.

E.     Deed Restriction. A Conditional Use Permit issued in compliance with this section shall require a recorded deed restriction in the office of the County Recorder. The deed restriction shall include the terms and restrictions of the Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.090 Residential Parking and Storage Standards
A.    Carports and Garages. Garages and/or carports shall be provided for required parking spaces in residential zones as follows:

1.     Single-Family Dwellings. For single-family dwellings, required parking spaces for each dwelling unit shall be located in an enclosed garage. The exception shall be in the case of a garage having been legally converted to an Accessory Dwelling Unit, in which case the required replacement parking may be provided as either enclosed spaces, in a carport, or as open spaces at approved on-site locations.

2.     Multiple-Family Dwellings. For multiple-family dwellings, the following parking standards apply:

a.     For condominiums, two of the required parking spaces shall be located in a fully enclosed garage space equipped with a functional, automatic garage door opener.

b.     For all other multiple-family dwellings, one of the required parking spaces shall be located in a fully enclosed garage space equipped with a functional, automatic garage door opener.

3.     Carports or open space parking spaces are allowed for required guest spaces for dwelling units.

4.     Any carport constructed as part of a new development shall include an enclosed personal storage space that does not encroach into the required parking space(s). The dimensions of this space may be included to comply with the outdoor storage requirements for R-2 and R-3 zones.

5.     Covered parking spaces (garages or carports) shall have a minimum interior measurement of 10 feet by 20 feet, clear of any encroachments such as laundry facilities and water heaters, except for tankless water heaters which are mounted a minimum of four feet above a finished floor.

B.     Vehicles and Recreational Vehicles. Vehicles and recreational vehicles, which includes empty tow trailers, shall not be parked, stored, or left standing on or upon an outdoor portion of a residentially zoned district or parcel used for residential purposes, except in compliance with the following standards:

1.     Vehicle as Residence. Vehicles and recreational vehicles shall not be used either temporarily or permanently for sleeping or living purposes.

2.     Location. Vehicles—including recreational vehicles, recreational items, trailers, or utility trailers—shall not project into any public right-of-way or be parked on a parcel in any manner that adversely affects traffic or pedestrian safety by obstructing vision or movement.

3.     Front Setback Area and Driveway.

a.     In a front setback area, all vehicles—including recreational vehicles, recreational items, trailers, and utility trailers—shall be parked or left standing only on a paved driveway and shall not be parked or left standing on another part of the front setback area. See Figure 3-06 (Parking Diagram for Vehicles).

b.     In the area between the front setback line and the dwelling unit, including the dwelling’s related garage and other accessory structures, vehicle—including recreational vehicles, recreational items, trailers, and utility trailers—shall be parked or left standing only on a driveway unless completely screened from view from the public right-of-way and adjacent property. See Figure 3-06 (Parking Diagram for Vehicles).

c.     Vehicles, recreational vehicles, recreational items, trailers, or utility trailers shall not be parked or left standing within five feet of an adjacent property line in a front setback area, except that operable, currently registered automobiles and light-duty, noncommercial trucks not otherwise prohibited from being parked on residential property may be parked or left standing on a driveway located in any front setback area. See Figure 3-06 (Parking Diagram for Vehicles).

 

Figure 3-06: Parking Diagram for Vehicles



 

d.     Detached parts (e.g., camper shells or bodies, racks or jacks, and similar items) shall not be stored on any portion of a front setback area or driveway. These parts may be stored in a front yard behind the front setback line and in the side setback area if screened from view.

e.     Driveways shall lead to a garage or carport and shall not exceed the width of the garage or carport or 50 percent of the parcel width at the street, whichever is less. A minimum driveway width of 12 feet is required.

f.      A minimum straight, unobstructed, perpendicular backup distance of 24 feet is required behind all 90-degree parking spaces.

g.     Only one curb cut, driveway, and driveway apron shall be allowed for each residential parcel unless a Site Development Permit-Minor is approved in accordance with Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor). Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, this requirement only applies to development of a new residential use or renovation of an existing residential use which includes modifications to the existing garage or front yard that occurs after April 15, 2014.

4.     Side and Rear Setbacks. Recreational vehicles, recreational items, trailers, or utility trailers not exceeding a total of two in any combination may be parked or left standing on any portion of a side or rear setback area or the area between the setback line and the dwelling unit, including the dwelling’s related garage and other accessory structures, provided that the view to a recreational vehicle, recreational item, trailer, or utility trailer from an observer standing at ground level on an adjoining right-of-way or adjoining property is totally obscured by a wall or similar durable screen not exceeding seven feet in height. Any recreational vehicle, recreational item, trailer, or utility trailer that cannot be totally obscured from view from an adjoining right-of-way or adjoining property in this manner shall also be located a minimum of five feet from all property lines.

        Operable, currently registered automobiles and light-duty, noncommercial trucks not otherwise prohibited from being parked on residential property may be parked or left standing on a driveway located in any rear or side setback area or the area between the setback line and the dwelling unit, including the dwelling’s related garage or other accessory structures.

5.     Operational Status. Motor and recreational vehicles on driveways and in front setback areas shall be operational and currently registered (if required).

C.     Commercial Vehicles and Equipment. Commercial vehicles and equipment shall not be parked, stored, or left standing on or upon an outdoor portion of a residentially zoned district or residentially used parcel, except in compliance with the following standards:

1.     Commercial vehicles not more than 22 feet in length nor more than 5,500 pounds unladen weight may be parked on residential properties subject to the same limitations for vehicles including recreational vehicles, trailers, utility trailers, and recreational items contained in this chapter.

2.     Commercial vehicles exceeding 22 feet in length or 5,500 pounds unladen weight shall not be parked upon any portion of a property used or zoned for residential purposes except while delivering or picking up materials used in conjunction with construction on the property for which a City building permit has been obtained or while delivering or picking up merchandise, goods, or wares necessary or incidental to the residential use. Vehicle length shall be the gross distance between the forward edge of the front bumper and the rear edge of the rear bumper.

3.     Construction or maintenance equipment used in the conduct of a business or trade (e.g., concrete mixers, insulation blowers, asphalt mixers, and similar equipment) shall not be stored on any unenclosed portion of a property used or zoned for residential purposes. Equipment may be allowed on property used or zoned for residential purposes when used in conjunction with construction or improvements on a property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-06 § 5, 2018; Ord. 14-02 § 4, 2014; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.100 Residential Condominium Conversion Parking Standards
A.    Buildings converted to condominiums may utilize the parking spaces that exist prior to the conversion only and need not provide additional parking, even if the spaces are not in compliance with the parking requirements and standards established for newly constructed multi-family residential structures in the R-2 and R-3 zones, unless additional or alternative parking spaces exist as determined by City staff.

B.     In all other respects, off-street parking requirements and standards shall be governed by the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-06 § 6, 2018)

 

17.22.110 Development Standards for Exterior Residential Parking Spaces
A.    Parking Space Area. Each off-street parking space shall consist of an area, together with drives, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, and have direct or indirect access at all times to a public street or alley. Every parking space shall be designed and established to allow motorists to maneuver easily into the space. The minimum dimensions of parking spaces and aisles shall be provided in compliance with this section and Table 3-06 (Parking Dimensions).

 

Table 3-06: Parking Dimensions

 

Standard Parking Space and Drive Aisles—Minimum Dimensions

Angle

Space Width

Space Length

Space Depth

Aisle Width

Total Module Width

One-Way Aisle

Two-Way Aisle

0°

8′

21′

9′

12′

24′

30′

30°

9′

19′

17′- 5″

13′

24′

48′

45°

9′

19′

20′

15′

24′

55′

60°

9′

19′

21′

18′

24′

60′

90°

9′

19′

19′

24′

24′

62′

*      Other angle/dimensions may be considered where it can be shown to accommodate aisle width and circulation.

 

B.     Parking Area Development. Off-street parking areas shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the following:

1.     Grading and drainage shall be constructed to the specifications of the City engineering staff.

2.     All striping and identification of parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with specifications established by the City Engineer and kept on file in the Development Services Department.

3.     Lighting shall be provided in the parking area. Such lighting shall be arranged or shielded so that direct rays do not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into public rights-of-way (See Figure 3-07 Parking Area Development).

 

Figure 3-07: Parking Area Development



 

4.     New and reconstructed parking areas and driveways shall be permanently surfaced with cement concrete or other permeable surface over compacted native soil. The required pavement section shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer as appropriate to on-site soil conditions.

C.     Compact Spaces. Compact car parking spaces shall not be allowed for required parking.

D.    Tandem Parking Spaces. Tandem parking spaces shall not be allowed except as provided for accessory dwelling units or in a mobile home park for individual mobile home sites. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-06 § 8, 2018; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.120 Development Standards for Exterior Parking Spaces in Non-Residential and Mixed-Use Zones
A.    Parking Space Area. Each off-street parking space shall consist of an area together with drives, aisles, turning and maneuvering areas, and shall have access at all time to a public street or alley or private street. The minimum dimensions of parking spaces and aisles in parking lots shall comply with specifications established by the City Engineer and kept on file in the Development Services Department.

B.     Landscaping. Each off-street parking area shall provide an area, or areas, landscaped equivalent to 20 square feet for each parking space. Landscaping shall be provided along the periphery of the parking area and shall consist of trees and plant material. At least one minimum-sized 15-gallon tree shall be provided for every five parking spaces. In addition, one minimum-sized 15-gallon tree minimum shall be provided in the interior portions of the parking area for each 1,500 square feet of parking area. This landscaped area may be included as part of the overall required landscape coverage for a development.

C.     Unused Areas. Unused areas resulting from the layout of the parking area shall be landscaped.

D.    Irrigation Required. Required landscaped areas shall be provided with a permanent and adequate means of irrigation and shall be adequately maintained.

E.     Plans Required. Landscape and irrigation plans, including the type and location of plant materials to be used, shall be subject to the approval of the City Engineer.

F.     Parking Area Development. Off-street parking areas shall be constructed and maintained to provide the following:

1.     Grading and drainage shall be constructed to the specifications of the City Engineer.

2.     Parking spaces in the commercial and industrial districts shall be delineated in accordance with specifications established by the City Engineer and kept on file in the Development Services Department.

3.     Wheel stops and/or six-inch concrete curbs shall be required for parking stalls, installed in a manner to prevent vehicles from overhanging into any adjacent landscaped areas.

4.     Lighting shall be provided in the parking area and shall be arranged or shielded so that direct rays do not shine or reflect onto adjacent property or into public rights-of-way.

5.     New and reconstructed parking areas and driveways shall be permanently surfaced with asphalt concrete, Portland cement, or other acceptable material over compacted native soil. The required pavement section shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer as appropriate to on-site soil conditions.

6.     Curbs, where provided, shall be installed at a minimum of two and one-half feet from face of buildings, walls, fences, or other structures, and landscaping.

7.     There shall be a minimum of 10 feet from the first parking space at any driveway leading to a public right-of-way.

G.    Compact Spaces. Compact car parking spaces shall not be allowed for required spaces.

H.    Tandem Parking Spaces. Tandem parking spaces shall not be allowed for required spaces. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.22.130 Location of Spaces
Off-street parking facilities shall be located as required in this section. Where a distance is specified, the distance shall be measured from the nearest point of the parking facility to the nearest point of the structure or use served by this parking.

A.    Single-family and multiple-family unit dwellings and hotel/motel parking shall be located on the parcel occupied by the structure or use to be served.

B.     Parking facilities for all uses not specified above shall be located not more than 300 feet from the structure or use served, unless a shared parking agreement is approved pursuant to this chapter.

C.     Mechanical Parking Lifts. In commercial zones, industrial zones, and mixed-use and multi-family developments, mechanical parking lifts may be used to satisfy all or a portion of vehicle parking requirements.

1.     Up to 25 percent of the required minimum amount of spaces may be required to be provided as non-mechanical parking for lift systems unable to accommodate a range of vehicles, including trucks, vans, SUVs, and large sedans.

2.     Application submittals shall include any information deemed necessary by the Director to determine that parking can adequately and feasibly be provided and that the following performance standards can be met and the following findings for approval can be made:

a.     The use of mechanical lift parking results in superior design and implementation of City goals and policies.

b.     Mechanical lift parking systems shall comply with all development standards including but not limited to height and setback requirements and parking and driveway standards, except for minimum parking stall sizes, which shall be established by lift specifications.

c.     Mechanical parking systems shall be safely operated and maintained in continual operation except for limited periods of maintenance.

3.     For proposed mechanical lift systems to be located in an unenclosed space (not in a structure or not in an underground garage), such system shall be screened and shall be subject to review via the Site Development Permit-Minor process where no other discretionary permit is required. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.22.140 Loading Requirements
A.    Required Loading Spaces in Certain Zones. In the C-O, C-G, P-L-I, M, and TCMU zones, every new building and every building enlarged by more than 5,000 square feet of gross floor area that is to be occupied by a manufacturing—light establishment; warehousing, storage, and distribution facility; retail sales; eating and drinking establishment; general market; hotel; hospital; funeral parlor and internment service; or other use similarly requiring the receipt or distribution by vehicles or trucks of material or merchandise, shall provide off-street loading and unloading areas as follows:

 

Table 3-07: Loading Spaces Required by Gross Floor Area

 

Gross Floor Area of Building

Number of Spaces Required

3,000 sf or less

None

3,001 to 15,000 sf

1

15,001 to 40,000 sf

2

40,001 sf and over

3

 

B.     Reduction in Number of Loading Spaces Required. The loading space requirement may be waived by a minor modification (Chapter 17.40 Minor Modifications), if the Director finds that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that, due to the nature of the proposed use, such loading space will not be needed.

C.     Additional Loading Spaces Required. The required number of loading spaces may be increased to ensure that trucks will not be loaded, unloaded, or stored on public streets. Such requirement shall be based on the anticipated frequency of truck pick-ups and deliveries and of the truck storage requirements of the use for which the onsite loading spaces are required.

D.    Loading Space Location. All required loading berths shall be located on the same site as the use served. No loading berth for vehicles over two-ton capacity shall be closer than 50 feet to any property in a residential zone unless completely enclosed by building walls, or a uniformly solid fence or wall, or any combination thereof, not less than six feet in height. No permitted or required loading berth shall be located within 25 feet of the nearest point of any street intersection.

E.     Minimum Size. Each onsite loading space required by this section shall not be less than 12 feet wide, 20 feet long, and 15 feet high, exclusive of driveways for ingress and egress, maneuvering areas, and setbacks. The minimum size requirement may be modified by minor modification (Chapter 17.40 Minor Modifications), if the Director finds that the applicant has satisfactorily demonstrated that, due to the nature of the proposed use, such size will not be needed.

F.     Driveways for Ingress and Egress and Maneuvering Areas. Each onsite loading space required by this section shall be provided with driveways for ingress and egress and maneuvering space of the same type and meeting the same criteria required for onsite parking spaces. Truck maneuvering areas shall not encroach into required parking areas, travelways, or street rights-of-way. This requirement may be modified by Minor Modification (Chapter 17.40 Minor Modifications), if the Director finds that sufficient space is provided so that truck maneuvering areas will not interfere with traffic and pedestrian circulation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.24 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
17.24.010 Purpose and Applicability
A.    Purpose. This chapter provides uniform performance standards designed to minimize and mitigate the potential impacts of development within the City and promote compatibility with surrounding areas and land uses.

B.     Applicability. The standards in this chapter shall apply to all uses in all zones, unless a contrary standard is specifically stated in this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.020 Fire and Explosive Hazards
Activities involving, and storage of, inflammable and explosive materials shall be provided with adequate safety devices against the hazard of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire-suppression equipment and device standards in industry and as approved by the fire department. Incineration is prohibited throughout the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.030 Hazardous Materials
No existing or proposed use, activity, or process or portion thereof shall discharge from any source whatsoever such quantities of odorous gases or other odorous matter which would cause injury to the public or endanger the comfort, repose, health, and safety of any persons, or would cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.24.040 Light and Glare
A.    Shielding of Light Source. Where the light source is visible from outside the project boundary, shielding shall be required to reduce glare so that neither the light source nor its image from a reflective surface shall be directly visible from a point five feet or more beyond the property line. The requirement shall not apply to traffic safety lighting or public street lighting.

B.     Mechanical or Chemical Processes. Light, heat, or glare from mechanical or chemical processes, or from reflective materials used or stored on a site, shall be shielded or modified to prevent emission of light or glare beyond the property line.

C.     Sky-Reflected Glare. Sky-reflected glare shall be controlled. Glare will not inconvenience or annoy persons or interfere with the use and enjoyment of nearby property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.050 Liquid or Solid Wastes
Discharge into a public sewer, private sewage disposal system, or stream or into the ground, of materials of a nature or temperature as can contaminate a water supply, interfere with bacterial processes in offensive elements, is not allowed, except in accord with standards approved by the State Department of Public Health or another governmental agency as shall have jurisdiction of these activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.060 Odor
No use or activity shall create noxious odors in any manner so as to be readily detectable beyond the boundaries of the site. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.070 Property Maintenance
A.    Public Nuisance.

1.     Public Nuisance Defined. Structures, and the land upon which the structures are located, and vacant land in the City maintained in a condition that results in the following, shall be deemed to be a public nuisance and a violation of this zoning code. A public nuisance:

a.     Is detrimental to the property of others;

b.     Is a hazardous, inappropriate, and/or unsightly condition; and/or

c.     Causes a reduction in the enjoyment, benefit, or use of adjoining properties.

2.     Nuisances Prohibited. A person who owns, maintains, or possesses a structure or land in a condition identified in subsection (A)(1) of this section shall not allow the nuisance condition to exist.

B.     Prohibited Conditions Applicable to All Structures and Properties. Prohibited conditions applicable to all structures and properties shall include:

1.     Neglected or improperly maintained landscaping (e.g., grass, groundcovers, hedges, shrubs, and trees) in conflict with the provisions of Chapter 17.18 (Landscaping). This shall include dead, overgrown in excess of 12 inches in height or weed-infested vegetation; vegetation dying likely to harbor rodents, vermin, insects, or other nuisances; vegetation which overhangs, impedes or obstructs vehicular traffic on a sidewalk, street, or other public right-of-way; and required landscaping removed without proper City approval; and

2.     Damaged, dilapidated, and inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices or signs related to uses no longer conducted on the subject parcel, except for those identified in subsection (E)(2) (Vacant Nonresidential Structures or Properties), of this section.

C.     Prohibited Conditions Applicable to Residential Structures and Properties. Prohibited conditions applicable to residential structures and properties shall include:

1.     Debris, junk, trash, or salvaged materials readily visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property;

2.     Garbage, trash, or refuse bins, boxes, cans, or other containers stored for more than 24 hours on the public right-of-way or within the required front or street side setbacks;

3.     Abandoned, discarded, or unused cabinets, freezers, furniture, refrigerators, sinks, stoves, toilets, or other household fixtures or equipment that are visible at ground level from a public street, alley, or adjoining property;

4.     Construction equipment or machinery parked or stored on a residential property when the equipment is visible to the general public, except while construction, demolition, or excavation operations covered by an active building permit are in effect on the subject, or immediately adjoining property;

5.     Other conditions related to fences, structures, or walls that are in need of correction, repair, or adequate and proper maintenance, including the existence of broken windows, graffiti, physical damage or general dilapidation, and surface(s) in need of paint, stain, varnish, or similar coating; and

6.     Clothing, laundry, linens, rugs, towels, and other similar materials hung on balconies, fences, open windows, railings, shrubbery, trees, or walks in the front or side yard or visible from the public right-of-way; and

7.     Accumulation of animal waste.

D.    Prohibited Conditions Applicable to Occupied Nonresidential Structures or Properties. Prohibited conditions applicable to occupied nonresidential structures of properties shall include:

1.     Construction, debris, junk, trash, salvaged materials, or waste materials located anywhere on the property, except in approved solid waste storage or pickup areas;

2.     Damaged, dilapidated, and inadequately or improperly maintained structures left in a state of partial completion and not covered by an active building permit;

3.     Garbage, trash, or refuse bins, boxes, cans, or other containers stored for more than 24 hours before pickup or after pickup on the right-of-way or within the required front or street side setbacks;

4.     Business activities, including manufacturing and the sale and storage of merchandise or materials, not conducted entirely within a totally enclosed structure, except as allowed by Section 17.28.220 (Outdoor Storage);

5.     Other conditions related to fences, structures, or walls that are in need of correction, repair, or adequate and proper maintenance, including the existence of broken windows, graffiti, physical damage or general dilapidation, and surfaces in need of paint, stain, varnish, or similar coating.

E.     Prohibited Conditions Applicable to Vacant Nonresidential Structures or Properties. Prohibited conditions applicable to vacant nonresidential structures or properties shall include:

1.     Property maintenance requirements for vacant nonresidential structures or premises shall be the same as for occupied nonresidential structures or properties described in subsection D of this section, where applicable, along with additional requirements described in subsection (E)(2) of this section;

2.     Damaged, dilapidated, or inadequately or improperly maintained signs or other identification or advertising devices or signs related to uses no longer conducted on the subject parcel;

3.     Discarded lumber, junk, trash, construction debris, salvaged materials, or waste materials located anywhere on the vacant property;

4.     Vehicles, including automobiles, boats, camper shells, construction equipment, mobile homes, motor homes, trailers, and trucks, regardless of condition or capability of self-powered movement, parked or stored on vacant private property, except as allowed by other provisions of this subsection or the City’s building code; or

5.     Abandoned, discarded, stored, or unused business, household, or industrial equipment, fixtures, furniture, or materials located anywhere on the vacant property.

F.     Abatement of Public Nuisances. Procedures for the abatement of public nuisances are outlined in Chapter 8.32 (Nuisance Abatement) of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.080 Radioactive or Electrical Disturbances
Devices that radiate radio-frequency energy shall be operated so as not to cause interference with an activity carried on beyond the boundary line of the property upon which the device is located. Further, no radiation shall be emitted in quantities that are dangerous to humans. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.090 Vibration
Vibration that causes a noticeable tremor, measurable without instruments at the parcel line shall not be allowed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.24.100 Smoke
No existing or proposed use, activity, or process or portion thereof shall from any source whatsoever discharge smoke or other particulate matter into the atmosphere, except as may be allowed by the South Coast Air Quality Management District. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.26 SIGNS
17.26.010 Purpose
A.    This chapter provides a reasonable system for the regulation of the location, size, type, illumination, and number of signs, with the goal of enhancing the quality of the City’s visual appearance.

B.     The intent of this chapter is to:

1.     Recognize that the primary purpose of signage is to identify, locate, and encourage businesses and events;

2.     Provide a balance between the City’s economic needs and protecting the visual appearance of the community’s character;

3.     Eliminate potential traffic and safety hazards to motorists and pedestrians;

4.     Preserve and maintain the attractiveness of the community and enhance the character of the City as a desirable place to live, work, play, and visit;

5.     Promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the residents and business community of the City;

6.     Protect public and private investments in structures and open spaces; and

7.     Provide clear and unambiguous sign standards that enable fair and consistent enforcement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.020 Applicability
The requirements and development standards in this chapter shall apply to all zones in the City. Only signs authorized by this chapter shall be allowed in that zone unless otherwise expressly provided in this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.030 Permit Requirements
A.    Permits Required.

1.     Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, signs shall not be erected, re-erected, constructed, or altered until a sign permit for it has been issued by the Development Services Department, or until a Conditional Use Permit has been granted by the Planning Commission in instances in which a Conditional Use Permit is required.

2.     A separate permit shall be required for each sign or group of signs in one location. In addition to the requirements identified in this section, applicable building and electrical permits shall be obtained in compliance with the Uniform Building Code and the Uniform Electrical Code.

B.     Permit Application. Applications for sign permits shall be made in writing upon forms provided by the Department. The application shall be signed by the owner of the property or property manager where the sign is to be located. The sign permit application shall include all information specified on the application form. A sign permit and plan check fee for each sign permit shall be paid before the issuance of a Sign Permit. Permit fees shall be established by a resolution of the council.

C.     Issuance of Sign Permit. The Director or designee shall determine whether the proposed sign and related discretionary approvals with respect to sign area, construction, location, color, and materials conform to applicable City regulations and the provisions of this chapter. In considering a sign permit application, the factors noted below shall be used in determining whether a submitted sign proposal furthers the intent and purpose established by this chapter and may or may not be allowed:

1.     The proposed sign will be legible under normal viewing conditions, based on its location and the design of its visual content;

2.     The proposed sign will not obscure from view or detract from existing signs based on its location, shape, height, color, placement, and the proximity of the proposed sign to adjacent properties and surroundings;

3.     The proposed structure, sign, or display will be constructed so that it will not constitute a hazard to the public. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.040 Exempt Signs
A.    Sign permits shall not be required for exempt signs. The provisions and regulations of this chapter shall not apply to the following exempt signs, nor shall the area of these signs be counted toward the maximum allowable sign area for any premises or use. However, if a building permit is required in compliance with the building regulations of the City of Los Alamitos, appropriate building permits shall be secured before the construction of any such exempt sign.

1.     Nameplates, directional, or informational signs, (e.g., “no trespassing,” “no parking”) and other warning signs, or signs intended for public convenience, provided that any such individual sign does not exceed three square feet in area, is no taller than six feet, is intended solely for directional or informational purposes, and is located entirely on the residential or business premises.

2.     Interior signs located in a manner so that they are not to be visible (meaning capable of being seen, regardless of actually being read) outside the building or structure where the sign is located.

3.     Window signs not exceeding 25 percent of the aggregate window area on which they are affixed or viewed from.

4.     Signs exclusively regulated by the State; traffic, directional, warning, or informational signs required by any public body; signs required by law; railroad crossing signs; legal notices; and emergency or danger notices.

5.     Signs used for the sole purpose of advertising a property for sale, lease, or rental, provided that:

a.     The signs are posted on the subject private property only.

b.     Signs shall not be permanent in nature and shall only be allowed for the time the subject property or structure is available for sale, lease, or rent.

c.     Property with residential units for sale, lease, or rent may have one sign per street frontage erected solely for the purpose of advertising that property for sale, rent, or lease. The sign area shall not exceed the following dimensions:

i.      Single-family residential use: six square feet in area and five feet in height.

ii.     Multiple-family residential use: 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

d.     Developed or undeveloped land for sale in nonresidential zones may have one such sign per street frontage. More than one sign may be allowed for parcels with street frontages greater than 250 linear feet. Minimum distances between signs shall be 250 linear feet. These signs are limited to 32 square feet in area and eight feet in height.

e.     Signs shall be maintained in a clean, orderly fashion and shall be removed upon the close of escrow or when the rental or lease has been accomplished, whichever occurs first.

6.     The flag of the United States of America, State of California, the City, or corporate flag, provided that not more than three flags are displayed on any one site. Flags shall be maintained and displayed in a state of good repair and in compliance with appropriate protocol.

7.     Memorial signs on tablets or plaques, including names of structures or sites, and dates of erection when cut into or attached to the surface or the facade of the building and which the Director deems to be a memorial sign.

8.     Holiday decorations commonly associated with national or religious holidays, provided such decorations are displayed for a period not exceeding 30 consecutive calendar days and a maximum of 60 cumulative days per calendar year. Decorations shall be displayed in compliance with City fire and other safety codes.

9.     Signs erected on private property for the purpose of announcing a garage sale. Such signs shall be removed on the final day of the sale. The maximum number of days such signs may be posted is three days every calendar year.

10.   On a site for which an active building permit has been issued, one sign may be erected for the purpose of displaying information about the project under construction. In the R-1 zone, the sign shall not exceed six square feet in area and five feet in height. In all other zones, the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and six feet in height.

11.   Temporary signs displaying noncommercial messages shall not require a Temporary Sign Permit, provided such signs comply with the following:

a.     No individual such sign shall exceed an area of 24 square feet and a height of eight feet.

b.     No such sign shall be placed within or on, nor extend over, any public right-of-way, public property, public easement, or public utility pole. The City shall have the authority to assess a charge against the identified responsible party for the cost incurred in the removal pursuant to subparagraph e, below.

c.     Permission of the property owner shall be required for placing such signs on private property.

d.     For any such sign associated with a specific event, such sign shall be erected no more than 60 days prior to the event and shall be removed within seven calendar days of the conclusion of the event.

e.     If the Director finds that any temporary noncommercial message sign has been posted or is being maintained in violation of the provisions of this subsection, or has not been removed as required following the conclusion of an event, the person(s) responsible for the sign(s) shall be given notice to remove the sign(s) within 24 hours from the time of the notice. The notice shall include a brief statement of the reasons for requiring removal. If the person receiving the notification fails to correct the violation or remove the sign(s), the Director may cause the sign(s) to be removed without further notice. If the owner of the sign cannot in good faith be located within a reasonable time, the sign shall be deemed abandoned. The Director may cause the abandoned signs and signs which constitute an immediate peril to persons or property to be removed summarily and without prior notice. The City shall have the authority to assess a charge against the identified responsible party posting or placing signs in violation of this subsection for the cost incurred in the removal.

B.     Sign permits shall not be required in the following situations:

1.     The changing of advertising copy or messages on announcement or bulletin boards and similar signs erected in conformance with this chapter, specifically designed for the use of replaceable or changeable copy, unless electrical alterations are made.

2.     Repainting with existing colors and cleaning of a sign or advertising structure, unless a change in structure size, height, location, or paint color is made. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.050 Prohibited Signs
Signs that are not expressly allowed in this chapter shall be expressly prohibited, including those listed below.

A.    Signs Not Specifically Allowed or Illegally Erected. A sign, sign structure, or advertising device that is not specifically allowed by the zone regulations in which the sign is located, or which may have been erected in violation of the laws in effect at time of erection, is prohibited.

B.     Signs Constituting a Traffic Hazard. Persons shall not install or maintain or cause to be installed or maintained a sign which simulates or imitates in size, color, lettering or design a traffic sign or signal, or which makes use of the words “stop, look, danger,” or other words, phrases, symbols or characters that interfere with, mislead, or confuse vehicular or pedestrian traffic.

C.     Signs on or Projection over a Public Property or Right-of-Way. Signs on a public property or anywhere on a public right-of-way are prohibited. Projecting signs shall not extend over or into a public right-of-way, except as may otherwise be permitted in this chapter.

D.    Signs on Doors, Windows, or Fire Escapes. Signs shall not be installed, relocated, or maintained in any manner that prevents free ingress to or egress from any door, window, or fire escape. Signs of any kind shall not be attached to a standpipe or fire escape, except those signs as required by other adopted codes.

E.     Animated or Moving Signs. Signs consisting of any moving, swinging, rotating, flashing, blinking, indexing, scintillating, fluctuating, or otherwise animated light are prohibited, except for time and temperature displays and permitted LED signs.

F.     Offsite Outdoor Advertising Signs (Billboards). Installed for the purpose of advertising a project, event, person, or subject not related to the premises upon which the sign is located is prohibited.

G.    Vehicle Signs. Signs located on or affixed to trucks, automobiles, trailers, or other vehicles which advertise, identify, or provide direction to a use or activity not related to or being used for the bona fide deliveries or sales of merchandise or rendering of services from vehicles are prohibited.

H.    Signs Blocking the Visibility of Other Signs. Signs shall not be placed that obscure visibility of signs on adjacent properties.

I.      Inflatable Devices. Persons shall not anchor, tie, or secure an inflatable device to or on the ground or a structure and cause the inflatable device to fly, float, or remain suspended in the airspace over business premises or a part of the City as a sign or for the purpose of attracting or drawing the public to the property for commercial purposes. For the purposes of this subsection, other shapes capable of being inflated with air, helium, or other gaseous matter are prohibited.

J.      Portable Signs. Portable signs including, but not limited to, animals, human beings, A-frames, and those of a similar nature.

K.    Pennants and Banners. Temporary or permanent pennants and banners attached to poles or structures or on a pole stuck into the ground.

L.     Roof Signs. Any sign wholly mounted on a roof above the roof eave line shall be prohibited unless approved as part of a planned sign program.

M.    Audible Signs. Any sign which emits audible sounds shall be prohibited. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.060 General Requirements for All Signs
A.    Content Neutrality. It is the City’s policy to regulate signs in a constitutional manner that is content neutral with respect to both noncommercial and commercial messages. For the purposes of this chapter, a content-neutral regulation is a so-called “time, place, or manner” regulation, which, as the name suggests, does no more than place limits on when, where, and how a message may be displayed or conveyed.

B.     Sign Removal or Replacement. When a sign is removed, all brackets, poles, and other structural elements that supported the sign shall also be removed, and any electrical components shall be removed and/or capped, and any resulting holes filled. Affected building surfaces shall be restored to match the adjacent portion of the building.

C.     Materials and Mounting Required.

1.     Materials. Signs shall be made of sturdy, durable materials capable of withstanding weathering over the life of the sign with reasonable maintenance. Paper, fabric, cardboard, plywood, and other materials subject to rapid deterioration may only be used for temporary signs or as permitted awning signs.

2.     Mounting Required. All permanent signs shall be firmly anchored, shall comply with all requirements for public safety, and shall satisfy all applicable safety codes and all other applicable governmental enactments, rules, regulations, or policies.

3.     Quality Design. All permanent signs shall be designed by professionals (e.g., architects, building designers, landscape architects, interior designers, or those whose principal business is the design, manufacture, or sale of signs), or others who, in the opinion of the Director based on presented evidence, are capable of producing professional results.

4.     Quality Construction. All permanent signs shall be constructed by persons whose principal business is building construction or a related trade, including sign manufacturing and installation businesses or others who, in the opinion of the Director based on presented evidence, are capable of producing professional results. The intent is to ensure public safety, achieve signs of careful construction, neat and readable copy, and durability to reduce maintenance costs and prevent dilapidation.

D.    Sign Illumination. The following standards shall apply to all illuminated signs:

1.     Shielding. Sign illumination shall not interfere with the use and enjoyment of adjacent properties, create a public nuisance, or create public safety hazards. Exterior light sources shall be shielded from view and directed to illuminate only the sign face.

2.     Illumination. Signs may be internally or externally illuminated.

3.     Residential Properties in Direct Line of Sight. The light from an illuminated sign shall not be of an intensity or brightness or directed in a manner that will negatively impact residential properties in direct line of sight to the sign.

4.     Colored Lights. Colored lights shall not be used at a location or in a manner to be confused or construed as traffic control devices.

5.     Bulb Face Exposure. Reflective-type bulbs and incandescent lamps that exceed 15 watts shall not be used on the exterior surface of signs so that the face of the bulb or lamp is exposed to a public right-of-way or adjacent property, unless approved by the Director. This provision does not apply to light-emitting diode (LED) signs.

6.     Energy Efficiency. Light sources shall utilize energy-efficient fixtures to the greatest extent possible.

7.     No Flashing. Lights illuminating signs shall not flash, blink, flutter, include intermittent or chasing lights, or provide any illumination that is in motion or appears to be in motion. With regard to digital signs, see Section 17.26.080 (Digital Sign Standards).

E.     Sign Maintenance. All signs and associated supporting structures shall be maintained in good condition, without rips, tears, and similar damage.

F.     Deteriorated Signs. Any sign or sign structure that is sagging, leaning, fallen, decayed, broken, deteriorated, missing or has inoperative lights, or is in an otherwise dilapidated condition shall be promptly repaired, to the satisfaction of the Director, or removed.

G.    Maintenance Standards. All parts, portions, units, and materials composing a sign, together with the frame, background, surface, support, or enclosure, shall be maintained in a safe condition, painted, and adequately protected from weathering with all braces, bolts, and structural parts, supporting frames, and fastenings reasonably free from deterioration, rot, rust, and loosening so that they do not create a hazard to persons or property or constitute a nuisance. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.070 Rules for Sign Measurement
A.    Measuring Sign Height. The height of a sign shall be measured from the highest part of the sign, including any decorative features, to the height of the adjoining grade directly beneath the sign.

B.     Measuring Sign Clearance. Sign clearance shall be measured as the smallest vertical distance between finished grade and the lowest point of the sign, including any framework or other embellishments.

C.     Measuring Building Frontage. Building frontage is the building facade that directly abuts a public street, private street, parking lot driveway, or parking spaces. For buildings with two or more frontages, the length of the wall and allowable sign area shall be calculated separately for each building frontage.

D.    Calculating Sign Area: General. Supporting structures such as sign bases and columns are not included in the sign area, provided that they contain no lettering or graphics except for addresses or required tags. See Figure 3-08.

 

Figure 3-08: Calculation of Freestanding Sign Area



 

E.     Calculating Sign Area: Single-Faced Signs (Four Sides or Fewer). For sign faces with four or fewer sides, sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of one triangle, square, or rectangle (consisting of no more than four corners) that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including but not limited to sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. See Figure 3-09 (Calculation of Sign Area on Single-Faced Signs (Four Sides or Fewer)).

 

Figure 3-09: Calculation of Sign Area on Single-Faced Signs (Four Sides or Fewer)



 

F.     Calculating Sign Area: Single-Faced Signs (Five Sides or More). For sign faces with five or more sides, sign area shall include the entire area within a single continuous perimeter composed of squares or rectangles (consisting of horizontal and vertical lines and no more than 12 corners) that enclose the extreme limits of all sign elements, including, but not limited to, sign structures or borders, written copy, logos, symbols, illustrations, and color. See Figure 3-10 (Calculation of Sign Area on Single-Faced Signs (Five Sides or More)).

 

Figure 3-10: Calculation of Sign Area on Single-Faced Signs (Five Sides or More)



 

G.    Calculating Sign Area: Double-Faced Signs. Only one face of a double-faced sign shall be counted in computing the permitted area of the sign. Double-faced (back-to-back) signs shall be regarded as a single sign when the sign is mounted on a single structure and the distance between each sign face does not exceed two feet at any point. Where two faces of a double-faced sign are located more than two feet from one another at any point, both sign faces shall be counted toward sign area. Where the two faces are not equal in size, the larger sign face shall be used.

H.    Calculating Sign Area: Multi-Faced Signs. On a three-faced sign, the combined sum of the area of two faces (the largest and smallest face) shall be counted in computing the permitted area of the sign.

I.      Calculating Sign Area: Three-Dimensional Signs. On spherical, free-form, sculptural, or other non-planar signs, sign area equivalent to 50 percent of the sum of the areas using only the four vertical sides of the smallest cube that will encompass the sign structure, as shown in Figure 3-11 (Calculation of Sign Area on Three-Dimensional Signs), shall be counted in computing the permitted area of the sign.

 

Figure 3-11: Calculation of Sign Area on Three-Dimensional Signs



(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.26.080 Digital Sign Standards
Digital signs shall be allowed as freestanding permanent signs and as window signs in the C-O, C-G, and TCMU zones subject to the following standards:

A.    No Flashing. Digital signs shall not flash, blink, flutter, include intermittent or chasing lights, or display video messages (i.e., any illumination or message that is in motion or appears to be in motion).

B.     Display Change. Digital signs may display changing messages, provided that each message is displayed for no fewer than eight consecutive seconds. The transition or blank screen time between one display message and the next shall not exceed one second.

C.     Night-Time Brightness.

1.     Night-time brightness shall be measured with an illuminance meter set to measure foot-candles accurate to at least two decimals. Illuminance shall be measured with the electronic message off, and again with the electronic message displaying a white image for a full color-capable electronic message or a solid message for a single-color electronic message.

2.     All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to the face of the electronic message at the following distance:



The difference between the off and solid message measurements shall not exceed 0.3 foot-candles at night.

D.    Ambient Light Sensor. Digital signs shall be equipped with a sensor or other device that automatically determines the ambient illumination and programmed to automatically dim according to ambient light conditions (e.g., photocell technology), or that can be adjusted to comply with the 0.3 foot-candle requirement.

E.     Turn Off. Digital signs located within 500 feet and in a direct line of sight of a residentially zoned property shall be turned off daily at the close of business, or at such a time as specified by the Development Services Director, and in no case shall be permitted to be turned on between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m.

F.     Sign Types. Awning, canopy, and driveway/onsite directional signs shall not include digital copy.

G.    Certification of Compliance. The owner of any digital sign shall arrange for certification by an independent contractor showing compliance with brightness standards. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.26.090 Regulations for Permitted Signs by Zone
Tables 3-08 through 3-12, inclusive, identify the signs allowed in each zone. In addition to the regulations set forth in the tables, signs shall comply with other provisions of this chapter, except for those signs specifically addressed in Section 17.26.040 (Exempt Signs) and approved Planned Sign Programs. Where a contradiction in regulations exists, the more restrictive standard shall apply. In addition to the listed requirements, each sign shall comply with the requirements detailed in each specific zone and other applicable City standards and ordinances.

 

Table 3-08: Signs Allowed in R-1, R-2, R-3, and MH Zones

 

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Illumination Allowed?

Additional Regulations

1. Single Family Residential Subdivision Development

a. Monument or Wall

1 per street frontage or 1 on each side of main neighborhood entrance

1 square foot per linear foot of street frontage; maximum 50 square feet

6 ft

External illumination only

Permitted only at major entrances to projects or neighborhoods.

 

Maintenance responsibility shall be assigned to community association.

 

Digital signs not permitted.

2. Institutional and Places of Assembly Uses in Residential Zones

a. Monument

1 per front entrance

30 sf per sign

6 ft

Permitted

Changeable copy sign permitted.

b. Wall

1 per street frontage

24 sf per sign

Must be below eave line

Permitted

 

3. Multiple Family and Mobile Home Developments in R-2, R-3, and M-H Zones

a. Wall

1 per street frontage or 1 on each side of main entrance

Aggregate sign area: 1 square foot per linear foot of street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet total

Must be below eave line

Permitted

Only a wall sign or a monument sign shall be permitted.

b. Monument

1 per street frontage or 1 on each side of main entrance

Aggregate sign area: 1 square foot per linear foot of street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet total

 

Permitted

Only a wall sign or a monument sign shall be permitted.

c. Sign Provided for Sole Purpose of Identifying Tenants

1 sign total

10 square feet

N/A

Permitted

Sign must be located near main building entrance and oriented to pedestrians.

 

Table 3-09: CO, CG, P-L-I, and TCMU Zones—Katella Avenue and Los Alamitos Avenue

 

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Illumination Allowed?

Additional Regulations

1. Single Tenant Sites

a. Freestanding

1 per parcel or street frontage

1 square foot per linear foot of parcel street frontage, not to exceed 50 square feet

C-O: 8 feet

 

C-G:

Pylon—20 feet

Monument—8 feet

 

P-L-I: 15 feet

Permitted

a. Signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter or private parkway.

 

b. Where a parcel has more than 1 street frontage, 1 additional sign is permitted on the additional frontage. Signs shall be separated by 100 or more linear feet.

b. Wall, Canopy, Under Canopy, Projecting

Multiple signs are permitted but shall not exceed the aggregate maximum area permitted for wall signs based on linear building feet.

1 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way

Shall be located below the eave line

Permitted

Signs shall be affixed to a permanent wall.

c. Awning

1 per awning

1/2 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way

Shall be located only on the front of the awning and shall be wholly contained within the awning face

No

 

d. Menu Board (for permitted drive-through businesses only)

2 per business or as approved as part of a Planned Sign Program

48 square feet aggregated for all menu boards

6 feet

Permitted

a. Menu board signs shall be approved as part of a Planned Sign Program.

 

b. Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way.

 

c. Audible or noise-producing signs shall not exceed the standards in Chapter 17.20 (Noise).

2. Multiple Tenant Sites

a. Freestanding (Center Identification Sign)

1 per parcel or street frontage

1 square foot per linear foot of parcel street frontage, not to exceed 50 square feet total

C-O: 8 feet

 

C-G:

Pylon—20 feet Monument—8 feet

 

P-L-I: 15 feet

Permitted

a. Signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter or private parkway.

 

b. Where a parcel has more than 1 street frontage, 1 additional sign is permitted on the additional frontage. Signs shall be separated by 100 or more linear feet.

b. Wall, Canopy, Under Canopy, Projecting

Multiple signs are permitted but shall not exceed the aggregate area permitted for wall signs.

1 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way, not to exceed 24 square feet per tenant

 

In the P-L-I zone, for industrial buildings over 50,000 square feet in size, up to 48 square feet total sign area is permitted

Below the eave line

Permitted

a. Signs shall be affixed to a permanent wall.

 

b. Aggregate area shall not exceed 1/2 square foot of area per linear frontage of the buildings or tenant lease, whichever is less.

c. Awning

1 per awning

1/2 square foot of sign area on an awning per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way

Shall be located only on the front of the awning and shall be wholly contained within the awning face

No

 

d. Menu Board (for permitted drive-through businesses only)

2 per business or as approved as part of a Planned Sign Program

48 square feet aggregated for all menu boards

6 feet

Permitted

a. Menu board signs shall be approved as part of a Planned Sign Program.

 

b. Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way.

 

c. Audible or noise-producing signs shall not exceed the standards in Chapter 17.20 (Noise)

e. Business Directory for Multiple Tenants

1 per site

24 square feet

Freestanding—6 feet

 

Wall—Below the eave line

Permitted

Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way.

 

Table 3-10: CO, CG, P-L-I, and TCMU Zones—Non-Arterial Roadways

 

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Illumination Allowed?

Additional Regulations

1. Single Tenant Sites

a. Freestanding

1 per parcel or street frontage

1 square foot per linear foot of parcel street frontage, not to exceed 32 square feet

C-O: 8 feet

 

C-G: 8 feet

 

P-L-I: 8 feet

Permitted

a. Signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter or private parkway.

 

b. Where a parcel has more than 1 street frontage, 1 additional sign is permitted on the additional frontage. Signs shall be separated by 100 or more linear feet.

b. Wall, Canopy, Under Canopy, Projecting

Multiple signs are permitted but shall not exceed the aggregate area permitted for wall signs

1 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way; not to exceed 24 square feet

Shall be located below the eave line

Permitted

Signs shall be affixed to a permanent wall.

c. Menu Board (for permitted drive-through businesses only)

2 per business or as approved as part of a Planned Sign Program

48 square feet aggregated for all menu boards

6 feet

Permitted

a. Menu board signs shall be approved as part of a Planned Sign Program.

 

b. Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way.

 

c. Audible or noise-producing signs shall not exceed the standards in Chapter 17.20 (Noise).

2. Multiple Tenant Sites

a. Freestanding (Center Identification Sign)

1 per parcel or street frontage

1 square foot per linear foot of parcel street frontage, not to exceed 50 square feet total

C-O: 8 feet

 

C-G: 8 feet

 

P-L-I: 8 feet

Permitted

a. Signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter or private parkway.

 

b. Where a parcel has more than 1 street frontage and more than 1 sign is proposed, signs shall be separated by 100 or more linear feet.

b. Wall, Canopy, Under Canopy, Projecting

Multiple signs are permitted but shall not exceed the aggregate area permitted for wall signs.

1 square foot of sign area per linear foot of building on a public right-of-way, not to exceed 24 square feet per tenant

Below the eave line

Permitted

a. Signs shall be affixed to a permanent wall.

 

b. Where individual buildings are located in a row perpendicular to a front property line, each building or tenant space to the rear of the building frontage may have wall signs affixed to the building side closest to the street. Aggregate area shall not exceed 1/2 square foot of area per linear frontage of the buildings or tenant lease, whichever is less.

c. Menu Board (for permitted drive-through businesses only)

2 per business or as approved as part of a Planned Sign Program

48 square feet aggregated for all menu boards

6 feet

Permitted

a. Menu board signs shall be approved as part of a Planned Sign Program.

 

b. Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way.

 

c. Audible or noise-producing signs shall not exceed the standards in Chapter 17.20 (Noise).

d. Business Directory for Multiple Tenants

1 per site

24 square feet

Freestanding—6 feet

 

Wall—Below the eave line

Permitted

Signs shall be oriented and located in a manner that limits visibility from a public right-of-way

 

Table 3-11: CF and OA Zones

 

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Illumination Allowed?

Additional Regulations

a. Freestanding

1 per parcel or street frontage

1 per linear foot of street frontage, not to exceed 50 square feet per street frontage

10 feet

Permitted

a. Signs shall be placed within a landscaped planter.

 

b. Additional signage may be permitted subject to a Planned Sign Program (i.e., booster signs for sports fields).

 

c. Freestanding signs shall be of a monument type.

 

d. If more than 2 of any kind of signs are proposed, a Planned Sign Program shall be required.

b. Wall

1 per use or building frontage

1 square foot per linear foot of building frontage, not to exceed 24 square feet total

Below eave line

Permitted

If more than 2 of any kind of signs are proposed, a Planned Sign Program shall be required.

 

Table 3-12: Service Station Permanent Signs

 

Allowed Sign Types

Maximum Number

Maximum Sign Area

Maximum Sign Height

Illumination Allowed?

Additional Regulations

a. Freestanding—Monument only

1 per parcel

24 square feet if the sign only contains identification and no changeable copy panels for pricing. If price information required by law is incorporated into the identification signs, the total square footage may be 32 square feet.

8 feet

Permitted

a. A Planned Sign Program shall be required for all new service stations.

 

b. Service stations with an associated convenience store shall be limited to 24 square feet for an identification sign.

 

c. Signs shall be of a monument type and shall be located within a planter.

 

d. The total square footage of all permanent signs shall not exceed 100 square feet in area cumulatively.

b. Wall or Canopy

1 per street frontage

1 square foot per 3 linear feet of building frontage

Wall—below the eave line

 

Canopy—confined to canopy fascia

Permitted

a. No other signs shall be permitted on the canopy or columns.

 

b. Signs encompassed within a fuel pump or required by State or Federal governments shall not be regulated by this chapter.

c. Safety Sign Provided for Purpose of Providing Operation Instructions

1 per canopy column

2 square feet per sign

Below the canopy roof line

Permitted

a. Shall be attached to island column or as approved by a Planned Sign Program.

 

b. No other signs shall be permitted on the canopy or columns.

 

c. Signs encompassed within a fuel pump or required by State or Federal governments shall not be regulated by this chapter.

 

d. No signs shall be permitted to be displayed on top of, attached to, or suspended from any pump.

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.100 Transit Advertising Shelters within a Public Right-of-Way
Notwithstanding the prohibition on offsite advertising signs (billboards) established in Section 17.26.050 (Prohibited Signs), off-site advertising signs shall be permitted on transit shelters and benches for transit operated by a public transit agency, subject to the following regulations.

A.    All such signs shall be permanently attached to the transit shelter or bench.

B.     A maximum of two signs per shelter/bench are permitted.

C.     The aggregate area of all such signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.

D.    The signage shall be wholly contained on the shelter structure or bench.

E.     Transit advertising shelters and benches may be allowed within the public right-of-way or other location subject to the approval of the Director of Public Services/City Engineer.

F.     All plans and specifications shall be approved by the Orange County Transit Authority and shall be maintained in accordance with the Authority’s requirements.

G.    Before the erection of any shelter or display, the applicant shall enter into a license and maintenance agreement with the City, which shall be subject to review and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.26.110 Planned Sign Program
A.    Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Sign Program is to provide flexibility from strict application of this chapter while encouraging good sign design, sign variety, and better visibility for multi-tenant developments that may not be visible from a right-of-way.

B.     Applicability.

1.     Mandatory Sign Program Required. A Planned Sign Program shall be required whenever a parcel will have permanent signs that exceed either five signs or an aggregate area of 200 square feet.

2.     Optional Sign Program Allowed. Application under the provisions of a Planned Sign Program shall be at the option of the applicant whenever the application is not mandatory under this section and the site meets any of the following conditions:

a.     The site to be considered consists of five or more separate business activities;

b.     The area to be included for consideration consists of a parcel, a series of parcels, or parcels combined, which total a minimum of two acres;

c.     The site to be considered consists of a parcel, or a series of parcels, or parcels combined, as provided below, which front on two or more publicly dedicated street rights-of-way;

d.     Signs for the site to be considered consist of three or more signs for a single tenant.

C.     Permit Application. Permit application requirements shall comply with Chapter 17.26 (Applications, Processing, and Fees), and shall include a letter of justification identifying how the proposed sign program is consistent with the findings for approval and the intent of this chapter.

D.    Review Procedures. The Director shall review the Planned Sign Program and shall make a recommendation to the Planning Commission to approve, approve with modifications, or disapprove the application.

E.     Findings Required. Before approval of a Planned Sign Program, the Commission shall make the following findings:

1.     The proposed signs complement and are in harmony with the design of the building; incorporate several common design elements (e.g., materials, letter style, colors, illumination, sign-type or sign shape); and incorporate materials, colors, or design motifs included in the structure or structures being identified;

2.     The approval of a Planned Sign Program will not adversely affect surrounding land uses or obscure adjacent conforming signs.

F.     Amendment of a Previously Approved Planned Sign Program. Application for the addition, modification, or replacement of signs requiring permits, within the boundaries of an area having a previously approved Planned Sign Program, shall be made in the following manner and shall be approved by the Director.

1.     Whenever the total number of signs to be added, modified, or replaced total less than 25 percent of the number of allowed signs presently on the site, application shall be made under the provisions of a standard sign application.

2.     When the total number of signs to be added, modified, or replaced total 25 percent or more of the number of allowed signs presently on the site, application shall be made under the provisions of a Planned Sign Program. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.120 Temporary Signs
A.    Applicability. All temporary signs shall comply with the standards provided in this section. A Temporary Sign Permit shall be obtained from the Development Services Director prior to the display of temporary signs, unless specified in Section 17.26.040 (Exempt Signs).

B.     Purpose. In addition to the purpose of this chapter set forth in Section 17.28.010, the purpose of this section is to ensure that temporary signs do not create a distraction to the traveling public by limiting the proliferation of temporary signs. Further, the purposes of this section include eliminating aesthetic blight and litter in Los Alamitos that is detrimental to public health, safety, and general welfare.

C.     General Standards for All Temporary Signs.

1.     Number. The maximum number of temporary signs that may be displayed at the same time is subject to compliance with the applicable requirements of this section. The number and area of temporary signs shall not be included in the calculation of aggregate permanent sign area.

2.     Materials and Maintenance.

a.     Temporary exterior signs shall be made of durable, weather-resistant material. Only interior window signs may be made of nonrigid (e.g., paper) material.

b.     Temporary signs shall be well maintained consistent with Section 17.26.060(E) (General Requirements for All Signs).

3.     Illumination Prohibited. Temporary signs shall not be illuminated.

4.     Sign Placement.

a.     Temporary signs are allowed on private property only subject to permission of the property owner.

b.     Temporary signs shall not be placed in any public right-of-way except as may otherwise be permitted by the Municipal Code.

5.     Removal of Signs. Temporary signs and their components shall be promptly removed at the expiration of the applicable Temporary Sign Permit.

D.    Temporary Sign Standards for the C-O, C-G, TCMU, P-L-I, CF, and OA Zones. Temporary signs are allowed in the C-O, C-G, TCMU, P-L-I, CF, and OA as provided in Table 3-10 subject to the following standards.

1.     A business may be granted a permit to display on-site temporary signs for a maximum of 90 days within a 12-month period. This can be accrued in multiple or consecutive days up to 90 days.

2.     Sign Area.

a.     Total temporary signs for a single business on a single lot shall not exceed a total aggregate area of more than one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage on a public street and shall not exceed a total aggregate area of 32 square feet.

b.     Building sites with 100 lineal feet of frontage or more on a public street may be allowed an aggregate area of temporary signs not to exceed 50 square feet.

c.     Individual tenants or building sites with less than 24 lineal feet of building frontage may be allowed 24 square feet.

d.     Individual tenants within a center may be allowed a total aggregate area of one square foot per lineal foot of store frontage at the main entrance and shall not exceed 24 square feet of total sign area.

3.     One temporary sign only, per street frontage, shall be allowed for each business.

4.     In no case shall a temporary sign obstruct an adjacent sign.

5.     Temporary signs shall be erected or placed only upon the site in which they are intended to advertise. Off-site temporary signs shall not be allowed.

E.     Calendar Year Permit.

1.     Businesses may apply to the Director for a calendar year permit. If the Director approves the permit, the use of one temporary sign per business shall only be allowed for up to 90 days. Afterwards, a new temporary sign shall be used for each new event. In no event shall the same temporary sign be used consecutively. The applicant shall request a temporary sign for each event.

2.     The Director may revoke or disapprove a year-long Temporary Sign Permit in the event that the sign is not removed in a timely manner or is not appropriately maintained.

F.     Grand Opening/Business Closing Sign. In addition to the temporary signs permitted in subsection D of this subsection, on-site grand opening or business closing temporary signs in connection with a new business, new ownership, or closure of a business may be allowed and approved by the Director, subject to the provisions listed below. If approved, a temporary sign permit shall be issued to include the expiration date.

1.     Banners, pennants and flags shall be allowed for a period not to exceed 45 days.

2.     Banners, pennants, and flags shall not exceed a total aggregate area of more than one square foot per lineal foot of building frontage on a public street. The banners, pennants, and flags shall not exceed an aggregate area of 32 square feet.

G.    Nonprofit Organizations. Temporary signs advertising a special event occurring on site, including civic, public, religious, educational, or philanthropic events, may be granted a Temporary Sign Permit for no longer than 30 days per occurrence unless a longer time period is established by the Director in the Temporary Sign Permit. Temporary banners, pennants, and flags shall be allowed. Sign area, specific locations, colors, and materials shall be submitted for review by the Director. If approved, a temporary sign permit shall be issued including the expiration date.

H.    Temporary Signs during Elections and on Residential Property. See Section 17.26.040 (Exempt Signs) for regulations pertaining to temporary signs during elections and on residential properties during times when a residential activity is occurring, such as a yard sale or a property is advertised for sale, rent, or lease.

I.      Abatement of Illegal Temporary Signs. An unlawful portable or temporary sign may be impounded by the City and held pending notification of the owner by the City. Unlawful signs located within the public right-of-way or on public property may be removed without notice. Abated signs shall be retained at City Hall for a period of minimum three working days; after three days, the signs may be discarded. The owner may obtain the signs from the City upon payment of an impound and storage charge in an amount established by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.130 Signs of Special Significance
A.    An existing sign, because of its character, age, influence, or cultural or historical significance, may be exempted from the regulations detailed in this chapter. The Director shall have the authority to determine whether a particular sign meets these criteria. These signs shall be subject to approval of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.32 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits).

B.     In approving a sign of special significance, the Commission shall make the following findings.

1.     The sign contributes to the positive architectural, cultural, or historical character of the City, State of California, or the United States;

2.     The sign would not create confusion to the public or to public safety officials in response to emergencies;

3.     The sign would not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of the community;

4.     The documentation of the history of the sign and site has been provided to the City for archive purposes. Documentation shall include:

a.     Date in which the sign was erected,

b.     Documentation of originality of historic or cultural value, and

c.     Documentation showing that the sign has been maintained in original form and significant text as when it was originally constructed.

5.     The sign(s) fulfill the purpose and intent of this chapter in compliance with Section 17.26.010 (Purpose). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.140 Nonconforming Signs
A.    Nonconforming Signs—General. A sign or other advertising device or structure of whatever type or nature, other than an illegal sign, which was legally established but has become nonconforming due to the establishment of new standards may continue, provided such nonconforming sign complies with the provisions of this section.

B.     Abandoned Signs. An advertising device that was lawfully erected that does not now conform to the provisions of this chapter, but whose use has ceased, or the structure upon which the display exists has been abandoned by its owner, for a period of minimum 180 consecutive days, shall be removed, altered, or replaced so as to conform to the provisions of this chapter within six months from the date of receipt of a written order of abatement from the Director requiring the abatement. Costs incurred by the City in removing an abandoned display shall be borne by or charged to the legal owner of the real property upon which the sign is located.

C.     Remodeled Nonconforming Signs. A sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter, whose owner, outside of a change of copy, requests permission to remodel and remodels that advertising display, or expands or enlarges the structure or intensifies the land use upon which the advertising display is located, and the display exceeds 50 percent of the cost of reconstruction of the structure, shall remove, alter, or replace the sign so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter in conjunction with the project.

D.    Agreement to Remove Nonconforming Signs. A sign that does not conform to the provisions of this chapter for which there has been an agreement between the sign owner and the City for its removal as of any given date shall remove the sign in compliance with the provisions of the agreement.

E.     Traffic Hazard. A sign that is determined by the City Engineer to constitute a traffic hazard not created by the relocation of streets or highways or by acts of the City shall be removed, altered, or replaced so as to conform to the requirements of this chapter as provided in the written order of abatement from the City official requiring removal or alteration.

F.     Minor Repairs and Repainting. Nonconforming signs may be removed for the purpose of repairing or repainting and may be replaced upon first obtaining a sign permit.

G.    Change of Ownership. Upon change of ownership of the business advertised by the nonconforming sign, the sign as originally approved, including text, may remain on site. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.26.150 Abatement of Unsafe and Unauthorized Signs
A sign or other advertising device regulated by this chapter that is deemed by the Director or other authorized individual to be unsafe or hazardous to the public health, safety, or welfare or that has been constructed, erected, or maintained in violation of the provisions outlined in this chapter or other applicable code shall be considered a public nuisance. The property owner or responsible person(s) shall be given written notice to correct and/or remove the sign violation within 30 days from the date of receipt of a written order of abatement from the Director requiring the removal or alteration. If the responsible person(s) or property owner fails to alter or remove the structure to comply with the regulations detailed in this chapter within 10 days, the unsafe or unauthorized sign may be removed or altered by the City at the expense of the responsible person(s) or owner. A sign or advertising device that presents an immediate threat to the public safety may be removed without notice. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

Division 4: REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
Chapter 17.28 REGULATIONS FOR SPECIFIC LAND USES AND ACTIVITIES
17.28.010 Purpose and Applicability
This chapter establishes standards for the location, site planning, development, and operations of certain land uses that are allowed within individual or multiple zones, as outlined in Division 2 (Zoning District, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations), and for activities that require special standards to mitigate their potential adverse impacts. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.020 Accessory Dwelling Units and Junior Accessory Dwelling Units
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for and regulate the creation of accessory dwelling units (ADUs) and junior accessory dwelling units (JADUs) in a manner consistent with California Government Code Sections 65852.2 and 65852.22.

B.     Definitions. The following terms used in this section shall have the meanings indicated below:

“Accessory dwelling unit” or “ADU” means an attached or a detached residential dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with a proposed or existing primary residence. It shall include permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same parcel as the single-family or multifamily dwelling is or will be situated.

“Director” means the Development Services Director or designee.

“Junior accessory dwelling unit” or “JADU” means a unit that is no more than 500 square feet in size and contained entirely within a single-family residence. A JADU may include separate sanitation facilities, or may share sanitation facilities with the single-family residence.

“Nonconforming zoning condition” means a physical improvement on a property that does not conform with current zoning standards.

“Passageway” means a pathway that is unobstructed clear to the sky and extends from a street to one entrance of the accessory dwelling unit.

“Proposed dwelling” means a dwelling that is the subject of a permit application and that meets the requirements for permitting.

“Public transit” means a location, including, but not limited to, a bus stop or train station, where the public may access buses, trains, subways, and other forms of transportation that charge set fares, run on fixed routes, and are available to the public.

“Tandem parking” means that two or more automobiles are parked on a driveway or in any other location on a lot, lined up behind one another.

C.     Conforming ADUs. An ADU that conforms to this section shall:

1.     Be deemed an accessory use or an accessory building and shall not be considered to exceed the allowable density for the lot upon which it is located;

2.     Be deemed a residential use that is consistent with the existing General Plan and zoning designation for the lot upon which it is located;

3.     Not be considered in the application of any local ordinance, policy, or program to limit residential growth; and

4.     Not be considered to be a new residential use for purposes of calculating connection fees or capacity charges for utilities, including water and sewer service, unless the ADU was constructed with a new single-family dwelling.

D.    Locations Permitted.

1.     ADUs are permitted on any lot zoned to allow single-family or multifamily residential units that includes a proposed or existing single-family or multifamily dwelling.

2.     JADUs are permitted on any lot zoned to allow single-family or multifamily residential units that includes a proposed or existing single-family dwelling.

3.     Notwithstanding the foregoing, no ADU may be constructed in an area in which the development of new residential units or residential additions, the addition of bathrooms, or new or additional connections to the water or sewer system would otherwise be prohibited due to inadequate water or sewer capacity, as determined by reference to objective and generally applicable rules, regulations, or maps adopted and/or maintained by the water service or sewer provider, as applicable.

E.     ADU Requirements. Except as provided in subsection (F)(2), all ADUs must comply with the following criteria:

1.     Legal Lot/Residence. An ADU shall only be allowed on a lot that contains a proposed or legally developed existing single-family or multifamily residence.

2.     An ADU shall be either:

a.     Attached to, or located within, the proposed or existing primary dwelling, including attached garages, storage areas or similar uses, or an accessory structure; or

b.     Detached from the proposed or existing primary dwelling and located on the same lot as the proposed or existing primary dwelling.

3.     Occupancy and Ownership. Except as otherwise provided by law (e.g., Government Code Section 65852.26), an ADU may be rented separate from the primary residence, but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary residence. No ADU, or primary residence on the same lot, shall be rented out for a term of less than 30 consecutive days. The property owner of the lot upon which an ADU is located need not occupy either the ADU, or the primary residence as his or her domicile.

4.     Number of Units Per Lot.

a.     For lots with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling, no more than one attached or detached ADU shall be permitted on the lot.

i.      Notwithstanding the foregoing, a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling may have one JADU and one detached ADU.

b.     For lots with an existing multifamily dwelling:

i.      At least one attached ADU, and up to 25 percent of the number of the existing units may be constructed within portions of the existing multifamily dwelling structure that are not used as livable space (e.g., storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages) provided all applicable building code standards are met.

ii.     Not more than two detached ADUs shall be permitted on the lot.

5.     Unit Size, Height and Design.

a.     The maximum size of a detached or attached ADU is 850 square feet for a studio or one-bedroom unit and 1,000 square feet for a unit with two bedrooms.

b.     If there is an existing primary dwelling, the total floor area of an attached ADU shall not exceed 50 percent of the floor area of the existing primary dwelling.

c.     The minimum size of a detached or attached ADU is 200 square feet.

d.     No more than two bedrooms are allowed in any ADU.

e.     No FAR, lot coverage, or open-space requirements may be applied which would not permit at least an 800-square-foot ADU that is at least 16 feet in height with four-foot side and rear yard setbacks.

f.      The height of an ADU shall not exceed 16 feet unless the ADU is within the existing space of a single-family dwelling, an accessory structure, or multifamily dwelling structure.

g.     The exterior materials, colors, roof pitch and architecture of an ADU shall be similar to and compatible with the primary unit(s).

6.     Applicability of Development Standards. Except as otherwise provided in this section, all ADUs must conform to the development standards set forth in this Title 17 for the zoning district in which they are located.

7.     Setbacks and Spacing.

a.     No setbacks are required for an existing living area or accessory structure or a structure constructed in the same location and to the same dimensions as an existing structure that is converted to an ADU or to a portion of an ADU. For all other ADUs, minimum setbacks of no less than four feet from the side and rear lot lines are required.

b.     A minimum distance of 10 feet is required between a detached ADU and the primary dwelling unit, and all other structures, including garages, on the property.

8.     Building and Fire Code Compliance. All ADUs must satisfy the requirements of the Los Alamitos Building Code and Fire Code and any other applicable provisions of the California Building Standards Code. However, fire sprinklers shall not be required if they are not required for the primary residence.

9.     Off-Street Parking.

a.     One off-street parking space must be provided for an attached or detached ADU. The required parking space may be permitted in setback areas, or through tandem parking on a driveway, unless specific findings are made by the Director that parking in setback areas or tandem parking is not feasible based upon specific site or regional topographical or fire and life safety concerns.

b.     When a garage, carport, or covered parking structure is demolished in conjunction with the construction of an ADU or converted to an ADU, those off-street parking spaces are not required to be replaced.

c.     Off-street parking is not required in the following instances:

i.      The ADU is located within one-half mile walking distance of public transit, including transit stations and bus stations;

ii.     The ADU is located within an architecturally and historically significant historic district;

iii.    The ADU is part of the proposed or existing primary residence or accessory structure;

iv.    When on-street parking permits are required but not offered to the occupant of the ADU; and/or

v.     When there is a car share vehicle station located within one block of the ADU.

10.   Exterior Access. An attached ADU must have independent exterior access from the proposed or existing primary dwelling.

11.   Passageway. No passageway shall be required in conjunction with the construction of an ADU.

12.   Accessibility Standards. New construction of any ground level accessory dwelling unit shall be designed and constructed to allow for disability/accessibility standards. Plans shall demonstrate future entrance capability and actual construction shall include adequate door and hallway widths, maneuvering space in kitchens and bathrooms, and structural reinforcements for grab bars.

13.   Conversion of Existing Primary Unit. An existing primary dwelling may be converted to an ADU if it complies with all applicable requirements of this section.

F.     Permit Procedures.

1.     Director Approval. Except as provided under subsection (F)(2), prior to the issuance of a building permit for an ADU or JADU, the applicant shall obtain approval from the Director.

a.     An application must be submitted on a form approved by the Director. The application must demonstrate compliance with the requirements of this section and shall be submitted with the appropriate fee as may be approved by resolution of the City Council.

 

b.     The Director will review and approve complete applications that comply with the requirements of this section. The application shall be considered ministerially with no discretionary review or public hearing.

c.     The Director shall approve or deny an application within 60 days of receiving a complete application that meets the requirements of this section, unless either:

i.      The applicant requests a delay, in which case the 60-day period may be tolled for the period of the requested delay, or

ii.     If the application to create an ADU or a JADU unit is submitted with an application to create a new single-family dwelling on the lot, the Director may delay acting on the application for the ADU or the JADU until the City acts on the application to create the new single-family dwelling, but the application to create the ADU or JADU will still be considered ministerially without discretionary review or a hearing.

2.     Building Permit Only. The following types of ADUs and JADUs, shall be approved upon the issuance of a building permit and without Development Services Director review, regardless of whether the proposed ADU meets the development standards for parking, unit height, size, floor area, landscaping, and setbacks and spacing contained in this section:

a.     One ADU or JADU per lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling if all of the following apply:

i.      The ADU or JADU is within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure and may include an expansion of not more than 150 square feet beyond the same physical dimensions as the existing accessory structure. An expansion beyond the physical dimensions of the existing accessory structure shall be limited to accommodating ingress and egress;

ii.     The space has exterior access from the proposed or existing single-family dwelling;

iii.    The side and rear setbacks are sufficient for fire and safety; and

iv.    The JADU complies with the requirements of subsection I.

b.     One detached, new construction, ADU that does not exceed four-foot side and rear yard setbacks for a lot with a proposed or existing single-family dwelling. The ADU may be combined with a JADU described in subsection (F)(2)(a), if the detached ADU satisfies the following conditions:

i.      The total floor area is 800 square feet or less; and

ii.     The peak height above grade is 16 feet or less.

c.     At least one ADU, and up to 25 percent of the existing number of multifamily dwelling units, within the portions of an existing multifamily dwelling structure that are not used as livable space, including, but not limited to, storage rooms, boiler rooms, passageways, attics, basements, or garages, provided each unit complies with applicable building standards for dwellings.

d.     Not more than two ADUs that are located on a lot that has an existing multifamily dwelling, but are detached from that multifamily dwelling and are subject to a height limit of 16 feet and four-foot rear yard and side setbacks.

3.     Zoning Conformity. The City shall not require, as a condition of approval of a permit application for the creation of an ADU or JADU, the correction of nonconforming zoning conditions.

G.    Utilities.

1.     All ADUs must be connected to public utilities, including water, electric, and sewer services. For example, ADUs proposed to be installed on a property with only septic tanks are prohibited.

2.     An ADU that is contained within the proposed space of a single-family dwelling or existing space of a single-family dwelling or accessory structure, as described under subsection (F)(2)(a)(i), is not required to have a new or separate utility connection between the ADU and the utility. Nor is a connection fee or capacity charge required unless the ADU is constructed within a new single-family home.

3.     All other ADUs other than those mentioned in subsection (G)(2) may require a new or separate utility connection between the ADU and the utility. Any connection fee or capacity charge shall be proportionate to the burden placed on the water and sewer systems due to either its square feet, or drainage fixture unit (DFU) vales, as defined in the Uniform Plumbing Code adopted and published by the International Association of Plumbing and Mechanical Officials, upon the water or sewer system. The Director shall make the determination as to whether a new or separate utility connection is required.

H.    Fees.

1.     No impact fee is required for an ADU measuring less than 750 square feet. Any impact fees charged for an ADU of 750 square feet of more shall be charged proportionately in relation to the square footage of the primary dwelling.

2.     Construction of an ADU is subject to any applicable fee adopted under the California Government Code, Title 7, Division 1, Chapter 5 (commencing with § 66000) and Chapter 7 (commencing with § 66012).

I.      JADU Requirements.

1.     Occupancy and Ownership. A JADU may be rented separate from the primary residence, but may not be sold or otherwise conveyed separate from the primary residence. The JADU may not be rented on a short-term basis of less than 30 consecutive days. The property owner of the lot upon which a JADU is located must occupy either the JADU or the primary residence as his or her domicile.

2.     Footprint. A JADU located within a proposed or existing single-family residence may only be constructed within the walls of the residence.

3.     Size. A JADU shall not be less than 220 square feet and shall not exceed 500 square feet in size.

4.     Separate Entrance. A JADU located within a proposed or existing single-family residence must include a separate entrance from the main entrance of the residence.

5.     Kitchen Requirements. A JADU must include an efficiency kitchen, including a cooking facility with appliances, and a food preparation counter and storage cabinets that are of reasonable size in relation to the size of the JADU.

6.     Parking. No additional off-street parking is required for a JADU beyond that required at the time the existing primary dwelling was constructed.

7.     Fire Protection. For purposes of any fire or life protection ordinance or regulation, a JADU shall not be considered a separate new dwelling unit.

8.     Utility Service. For purposes of providing service for water, sewer, or power, including a connection fee, a JADU shall not be considered a separate or new dwelling unit.

9.     Deed Restriction. Prior to the issuance of a building permit for a JADU, the owner shall record a deed restriction against the title of the property in the County Recorder’s office with a copy filed with the Director. The deed restriction shall run with the land and shall bind all future owners, heirs, successors, or assigns. The form of the deed restriction shall be provided by the City and shall provide that:

a.     The property shall include no more than one JADU.

b.     The JADU may not be sold, mortgaged, transferred separately from the primary residence; this deed restriction may be enforced against future purchasers.

c.     The owner of the property shall occupy either the primary residence or the JADU as his or her domicile.

d.     The JADU may be rented, but may not be rented on a short-term basis of less than 30 consecutive days.

e.     A restriction on the size and attributes of the junior accessory dwelling unit that conforms with this section.

The deed restriction may not be modified or terminated without the prior written consent of the Director. (Ord. 20-04 § 4, 2020; Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-07 § 3, 2018; Ord. 17-08 § 4, 2017)

 

17.28.030 Accessory Structures/Uses—Residential
A.    Purpose. This section provides standards for accessory uses and structures that are customarily related to a residence (e.g., garages, greenhouses, storage sheds, studios, above-ground swimming pools/spas, and workshops). Standards for in-ground swimming pools are provided in Section 17.16.140 (Swimming Pools and Spas).

B.     General Requirements.

1.     Accessory structures may be erected or constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to, the construction of the main residential structure.

2.     Consistent with the definitions of “accessory structure” and “accessory use” in Division 7 (Definitions), accessory uses and structures in the residential zone shall be incidental to and not alter the residential character of the site.

C.     Standards.

1.     Use. Accessory structures, other than permitted accessory dwelling units and legally approved guest houses, shall not be used for residential purposes, even on a temporary basis.

2.     Coverage. The sum of the floor area(s) of the total number of detached accessory structures shall not exceed the maximum rear setback coverage of the lot in compliance with Table 2-03 (Development Standards in Residential Zones). Accessory structures shall be included in the calculation for the coverage of the entire site in compliance with Table 2-03.

3.     Size Limit. An accessory structure shall not exceed 640 square feet unless a site plan is approved in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor).

4.     Height Limit. Detached accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet, except detached tool sheds located within a required side setback shall not exceed a height of seven feet from grade.

5.     Improvements.

a.     Accessory structures may include no more than one half-bath (i.e., sink and toilet) and shall not include any shower, bathtub, or cooking facilities.

 

b.     Each accessory structure shall be no more than one room, not including a half-bath or an attached garage.

6.     Separation Requirements. Detached accessory structures on a single lot shall be separated from the main structure and other structures by at least five feet, or more, as required, except as allowed by the Uniform Building Code (UBC).

7.     Location Requirements.

a.     Setback Areas. Accessory structures in residential zones may be located in the required side or rear setback areas, provided that the structure(s) are a minimum of five feet from any common property line to the eave line and further provided that all run-off water from the roof is disposed of on the subject lot.

b.     Garage Access from Alley. Where access to a garage is provided from an alley, the garage shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from the rear property line. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 14-03 § 7, 2014; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.035 Accessory Structures/Uses—Nonresidential Zones
A.    Purpose. This section provides standards for accessory structures that are customarily related to commercial, industrial, and institutional uses of property.

B.     General Requirement.

1.     Accessory structures may be erected or constructed concurrent with, or subsequent to, the construction of the main structure or structures.

2.     No more than three accessory structures shall be located on a lot.

C.     Standards.

1.     Use. Accessory structures, other than approved caretaker units, shall not be used for residential purposes, even on a temporary basis.

2.     Size Limit. An accessory structure shall not exceed 640 square feet unless a site plan is approved in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor).

3.     Height Limit. Detached accessory structures shall not exceed a height of 15 feet.

4.     Separation Requirements. Detached accessory structures shall be separated from the main structure and other structures by at least five feet, or more, as required, except as allowed by the Uniform Building Code (UBC).

5.     Location Requirements. Accessory structures may be located in the required side or rear setback areas, provided that the structure(s) are a minimum of five feet from any common property line to the eave line and further provided that all run-off water from the roof is disposed of on the subject lot. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.28.040 Adult Businesses
A.    Purpose and Findings.

1.     It is the purpose and intent of this section to provide for the reasonable and uniform regulation of adult-oriented businesses in the City. It is recognized that adult-oriented businesses have a serious deleterious effect upon adjacent areas, as well as the areas in which they are located. It is the purpose of this section to establish criteria and standards for the establishment and conduct of adult-oriented businesses that will protect the public health, safety, and welfare; preserve locally recognized values of community appearance; minimize the potential for nuisances related to the operation of adult-oriented businesses; and maintain local property values.

2.     It is the purpose and intent of this section to establish proper regulations and to provide for a reasonable number of approximately located sites for adult-oriented businesses within the City, based upon the following findings:

a.     The following studies that substantiate the adverse, secondary effects of adult-oriented businesses were reviewed by the City:

•       Austin, Texas: 1986;

•       Indianapolis, Indiana: 1984;

•       Los Angeles, California: 1977;

•       Phoenix, Arizona: 1979;

•       St. Paul, Minnesota: 1989;

•       Garden Grove, California: 1991; and

•       Upland, California: 1992.

b.     Based on the foregoing studies and the other evidence presented, the Council finds that:

i.      Adult-oriented businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates of those areas in which they are located and that surround them.

ii.     Both the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to sensitive land uses and the concentration of adult-oriented businesses tend to result in the blighting and downgrading of the areas in which they are located.

3.     The studies conducted in various communities in other jurisdictions have demonstrated that the proximity and concentration of adult-oriented businesses adjacent to residential, recreational, religious, educational, or other adult-oriented businesses can cause other businesses and residents to move elsewhere.

4.     The studies conducted in various communities in other jurisdictions have demonstrated that adult-oriented businesses are linked to increases in the crime rates and blighting of those areas in which they are located and that surround them.

5.     The special regulation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary to ensure that their adverse secondary effects will not contribute to an increase in the crime rates or the blighting or downgrading of the areas in which they are located or surrounding areas. The need for the special regulation is based on the recognition that adult-oriented businesses have serious objectionable operational characteristics, particularly when several of them are concentrated under certain circumstances or located in direct proximity with sensitive uses (e.g., residential zones and uses, parks, schools, religious institutions or day care centers), having a deleterious effect upon the adjacent areas.

6.     It is the purpose and intent of these special regulations to prevent the concentration or location of adult-oriented businesses in a manner that would create adverse secondary effects. Thus, in order to protect and preserve the public health, safety, and welfare of the citizenry, especially including minors, the special regulation of the time, place, and manner of the location and operation of adult-oriented businesses is necessary.

7.     The protection and preservation of the public health, safety and welfare require that certain distances be maintained between adult-oriented businesses and residential uses and zones, religious institutions, schools, day care centers, parks, and other adult-oriented businesses.

8.     The need to regulate the proximity of adult-oriented businesses to sensitive land uses (e.g., residential, religious, educational, recreational, and other adult-oriented businesses) is documented in studies conducted by other jurisdictions as listed elsewhere in this section.

9.     The report of the State of Minnesota Attorney General’s Working Group on the regulation of sexually oriented businesses dated June 6, 1986, indicates that:

a.     Community impacts of sexually oriented businesses are primarily a function of two variables, proximity to residential areas and concentration. Property values are directly affected within a small radius, typically one block, of the location of a sexually oriented business. Concentration may compound depression of property values and may lead to an increase of crime sufficient to change the quality of life and perceived desirability of property in a neighborhood.

b.     The impacts of sexually oriented businesses are exacerbated when they are located near each other. When sexually oriented businesses have multiple uses (i.e., theater, bookstore, nude dancing, peep booths), one structure can have the impact of several separate businesses.

10.   In consideration of the findings of the report of the State of Minnesota Attorney General’s Working Group on the regulation of sexually oriented businesses dated June 6, 1986, it is appropriate to prohibit the concentration of multiple adult-oriented businesses within one structure in order to mitigate the compounded adverse secondary effects associated with the concentrations as described above.

11.   The provisions of this section have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials, that are protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution and the relevant provisions of the California State Constitution.

12.   The proposed parking standards are necessary in the interests of the public health, safety, and welfare to provide for an appropriate amount of off-street parking.

B.     Definitions. Terms unique to this section are listed in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions).

C.     Appeal. Wherever there is a reference to an appeal being filed or available to be filed, the right of appeal shall also include the right to appeal administrative determinations made by the Director in compliance with this section to the Planning Commission and Council.

D.    Adult Use Planning Permit.

1.     License and Permit Requirements. In order to operate an adult-oriented business within this City, the applicant or proprietor of the business shall obtain the license required by Chapter 5.40 (Adult-Oriented Business Licenses) and other licenses required by Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the Municipal Code and an adult use planning permit as required by this section. It is unlawful and a misdemeanor, subject to punishment in compliance with the Municipal Code, for an owner, operator, manager, or employee to operate an adult-oriented business without processing an adult use planning permit—including an interim adult use planning permit—required by this section and a license required by Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations) of the Municipal Code.

2.     Contents of Application. Applicants for a permit, in addition to an application or documents required to be filed in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code, shall file a written, signed, and verified application on a form provided by the Director evidencing the following:

a.     The name and permanent address of the applicant;

b.     The name and business address of the applicant. If the applicant is a corporation, the applicant shall provide the name of the State of incorporation, the name shall be exactly identified in its articles of incorporation and the applicant shall show the name and address each of the officers, directors, and controlling stockholders owning no less than 10 percent of the stock of the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the application shall show the name and address of each of the partners, including limited partners;

c.     Location and address of the proposed adult-oriented business;

d.     Legal description of the subject property;

e.     A detailed description of the manner of providing proposed entertainment, including type of entertainment and the number of persons engaged in the entertainment;

f.      Proposed hours of operation;

g.     A floor plan showing where the specific entertainment uses are proposed to be conducted within the structure;

h.     A site plan as specified in Chapter 17.44 Site Development Permit—Major and Minor;

i.      The name or names of the person or persons having responsibility for the management or supervision of the applicant’s business and of the entertainment;

j.      Statement of the nature and character of the applicant’s business if any, to be carried on in conjunction with this entertainment.

3.     Nondisclosure of Portions of Application. Notwithstanding the fact that an application filed for an adult use planning permit may be a public record under Government Code Section 6250 et seq., certain portions of the application contain information vital to the effective administration and enforcement of the licensing and/or permit scheme established which is personal, private, confidential, or the disclosure of which could expose the applicant to a risk of harm. Information includes, but is not limited to, the applicant’s residence address and telephone number, the applicant’s date of birth and/or age, the applicant’s driver’s license and/or Social Security number, and/or personal financial data. The Council, in adopting the application and licensing and/or permit system detailed, has determined in compliance with Government Code Section 6255 that the public interest in disclosure of the information detailed above is outweighed by the public interest in achieving compliance with this section by ensuring that the applicant’s privacy, confidentiality, or security interests are protected. The City Clerk shall cause to be obliterated from a copy of a completed license application made available to any member of the public, the information detailed in this subsection.

E.     Referral of Application for Investigation.

1.     Referral of Application. The Director shall refer the permit application to the Chief of Police for an investigation to be made of the information contained on the application.

2.     Police Investigation. After an investigation, including obtaining the information in compliance with Section 2.64.130 et seq. (Criminal History Information) of the Municipal Code, the Chief of Police shall issue a report to the Director. The Planning Commission, or Council as appropriate, shall approve the adult use planning permit unless one or more of the following findings is true:

a.     The applicant, employee, agent, partner, director, officer, controlling stockholder, or manager has knowingly made false, misleading or fraudulent statement of material fact in the application for a permit or in a report or record required to be filed with a City or County agency or department.

b.     On the date that the business for which a permit is required commences, or after that time, there will be no responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the adult-oriented business is open.

c.     An applicant is under 18 years of age.

d.     An applicant has been convicted of a specific criminal act for which:

i.      Less than two years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering;

ii.     Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the conviction is of a felony offense; for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering;

iii.    Less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date of release from confinement, whichever is the later date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors for the specified criminal acts which are sexual crimes against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crimes connected with another adult-oriented business, including, but not limited to, distribution of obscenity; distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering; conviction of an offense occurring within 24 months before application;

iv.    The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on disqualification of the applicant;

v.     An applicant who has been convicted of any of the above described specified criminal acts may qualify to own, operate or manage an adult-oriented business only when the required time period has elapsed.

3.     Issuance, Suspension, and Revocation of Permit. In the event the information requested in compliance with Section 2.64.130 of the Municipal Code is not immediately available, the Chief of Police shall, if the application otherwise meets the requirements of this Zoning Code and the investigation conducted reveals none of the factors detailed in subsection B of this section, report on it and the permit shall be issued by the director. Should the information obtained in compliance with Section 2.64.130 et seq. (Criminal History Information) of the Municipal Code materially vary from that on the application, the variance shall be cause to revoke the permit. A permit issued before the City receives the information required by Section 2.64.130 et seq., of the Municipal Code shall state clearly on its face that the permit is subject to suspension or revocation in compliance with Sections 5.40.024 (Suspension and Revocation Hearings) and 5.40.026 (Revocation) of the Municipal Code.

4.     Compliance with State Law. The City’s decision to approve or deny the permit shall not include information authorized or required to be kept confidential in compliance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900.

F.     Reservation of Right to Review. The Council and Planning Commission shall retain and reserve the right and jurisdiction to review and modify an adult use planning permit, including the conditions of approval, based on changed circumstances in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). Changed circumstances include, but are not limited to, the modification of the business, the change in scope, emphasis, size or nature of the business, and the expansion, alteration, of change of use. The reservation of the right to review a permit granted or approval by the Council and Planning Commission shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, the right of the Council and Planning Commission to review and revoke or modify a permit granted or approved for any violations of the conditions imposed on the permit.

G.    Time Limit for Land Use Review and Decisions.

1.     Interim Adult Use Planning Permit. The Director shall accept as complete, or deny as incomplete, the application for an adult use planning permit for a business protected by the First Amendment of the United States Constitution within 10 days from the date on which an application is submitted to the director. In order to avoid undue delay or suppression of protected expression, the Director shall make an initial determination that the required information is contained in the application to process an interim adult use planning permit within five days of the date of filing the application. If the application is sufficient to issue an interim adult use planning permit it shall be issued by the Director within 10 days of the date the application was filed.

        A sufficient application shall include, but not be limited to, the applicant’s meeting the requirements to be issued an adult-oriented business license required by Chapter 5.40 (Adult-Oriented Business Licenses) of the Municipal Code and the proposed business shall be located and developed in compliance with the requirements of the P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) Zoning District and the requirements of this section. The granting of the interim adult use planning permit by the Director is without prejudice to and does not preclude the denial of the final adult use planning permit application filed by the applicant.

        The interim adult use planning permit shall terminate upon the Planning Commission taking action on the final adult use planning permit. Rights to operate beyond the termination of the interim adult use planning permit for a First Amendment protected business shall not vest in the applicant if the applicant is unable or unwilling to obtain the adult-oriented business license required by Chapter 5.40 (Adult-Oriented Business Licenses) of the Municipal Code and the final adult use planning permit required by this section.

2.     Final Adult Use Planning Permit. The Planning Commission shall approve or deny the completed adult use planning permit application within 90 days of its acceptance as complete by the Director. The time limit established by this section may be extended once for a period not to exceed 90 days upon consent of the Director and the applicant. The application shall be processed and noticed in the same manner as Conditional Use Permits are processed and noticed under State law and Chapter 17.66 (Public Hearing Notice Procedures) of this Zoning Code.

a.     To approve the final adult use planning permit, the Planning Commission, or Council on appeal, shall first make the following findings:

i.      Applicable filing fees have been paid.

ii.     The applicant is not overdue in payment to the City of any taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed in relation to an existing or former adult-oriented business.

iii.    The structure, equipment, and location used by the business for which an adult-oriented business license is required complies with the requirements and standards of the health, building, zoning, fire and safety laws of the State, the Orange County Fire Department, and the City.

iv.    The conduct of the adult-oriented business as proposed by the applicant, if allowed, will comply with all applicable laws; including, but not limited to, the City’s, zoning, fire, and health and safety regulations.

v.     The City currently has no evidence demonstrating that the applicant has knowingly made false, misleading, or fraudulent statement of material facts in the adult use planning permit application or another document required by the City in conjunction with it.

vi.    The use is allowed in the zone, district or area in which it is proposed to be located and is in conformity with the applicable development standards of that zone, district or area—including the provision of required parking.

vii.   The use is in conformity with the locational standards detailed in Chapter 17.10 (Commercial and Industrial Zones) and in Chapter 17.24 (Performance Standards).

viii.  The design of the site and the proposed improvements are in compliance with applicable design standards in Chapter 17.10 (Commercial and Industrial Zones) and in Chapter 17.24 (Performance Standards).

ix.    The proposed conduct of the adult-oriented business is in compliance with applicable performance standards of Chapter 17.24 (Performance Standards).

b.     In the event the Planning Commission, or the Council on appeal, denies the final adult use planning permit application, the business shall cease its operations as an adult-oriented business and no further activities regulated by this section or Chapter 5.40 (Adult-Oriented Business Licenses), Chapter 5.42 (Adult-Oriented Live Entertainer Licenses), or Chapter 5.44 (Figure Model Licenses) of the Municipal Code shall be conducted on the premises unless and until an adult use planning permit and all licenses required by Chapter 5.40 (Adult-Oriented Business Licenses), Chapter 5.42 (Adult-Oriented Live Entertainer Licenses), or Chapter 5.44 (Figure Model Licenses), of the Municipal Code are obtained. The interim adult use planning permit shall also terminate on the date the adult use planning permit application is denied.

c.     If the permit requested is for a development project for construction or reconstruction subject to the Permit Streamlining Act (Government Code Section 65920 et seq.), the time limits provided in the Permit Streamlining Act shall apply to the adult use planning permit’s approval or denial.

d.     Upon the filing of an appeal in compliance with Chapter 17.68 (Appeals), the Planning Commission or the Council shall render its decision on the appeal within 60 days.

H.    Applicability and Nonconforming Period. Design and performance standards detailed in this section are deemed to be necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, and welfare and shall be applicable and govern existing and proposed adult-oriented businesses immediately upon adoption and passage of the ordinance codified in this section. In the event that there is any adult-oriented business lawfully in existence before the adoption of said ordinance and is not in compliance with the design and performance standards of this section, the adult-oriented business shall conform to design and performance standards within six months of October 27, 2003.

I.      Extension of Nonconforming Amortization Period.

1.     Application for Extension of Amortization Period. An application for extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use shall be made in a manner as required for a Conditional Use Permit.

2.     Application Process. The owner of the property on which an adult-oriented business is located or the owner of the adult-oriented business who desires to extend the amortization period shall apply for approval of an extension not later than six months before expiration of the amortization period, unless the Director determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application. The application shall be made in writing on a form as prescribed by the Director and shall be accompanied by the required fee as established by resolution of the Council. The party requesting the extension of the amortization period shall bear the burden of proof in establishing that the amortization period established by Section 17.66.020 (Applicability) is unreasonable and that the requested extension is a reasonable amortization period for the owner to receive a fair rate of return on the investment in the business. The party applying for the extension shall also be required in order to meet its burden of proof to submit the documentation detailed in this section.

3.     Application Contents. A complete application shall include:

a.     The applicant’s signature.

b.     A written request for an extension of the amortization period that shall include information relevant to the factors listed in subsection E (Considerations for an Extension) of this section and shall identify the term of the requested extension.

c.     The required fees.

d.     A mailing list and a set of gummed labels with the names, addresses and tax assessor parcel numbers of owners of real property within a radius of 300 feet from the external boundaries of the property on which the adult-oriented business is located.

e.     A tax assessor’s parcel map identifying the properties to be notified within the 300-foot radius.

4.     Incomplete Application. If the application is not complete, the Director shall specify in writing those parts that are incomplete and shall identify the manner by which the application can be made complete. If a written determination is not provided to the applicant within 30 calendar days after it is submitted, the application shall be deemed complete.

5.     Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a noticed public hearing on the request for an extension.

6.     Considerations for an Extension. In determining whether to grant an extension of the amortization period for an adult-oriented business which is a nonconforming use, and in determining the appropriate length of the an extension, the Planning Commission shall consider the amount of investment in the business, and the opportunities for relocation to a legally permissible site, the costs of relocation, the effects of the business on the surrounding area, and the following additional factors:

a.     The present actual and depreciated value of business improvements;

b.     The applicable Internal Revenue Service depreciation schedule or functional nonconfidential equivalents;

c.     The remaining useful life of the business improvements;

d.     The remaining lease term;

e.     The ability of the business and/or landowner to change the use to a conforming use;

f.      The date upon which the property owner and/or business operator received notice of the nonconforming status of the adult-oriented business and the amortization requirements.

7.     Findings. The Planning Commission, or Council on appeal, shall receive and consider evidence presented by the applicant and any other persons, and shall make findings that the amortization period it establishes is reasonable in view of the evidence and the criteria detailed above.

J.      Continuation of Nonconforming Structures and Uses.

1.     Nonconforming Structure. A nonconforming structure may be continued and maintained, except as provided in this section, provided there are no structural alterations, except as provided in this section.

2.     Nonconforming Use. A nonconforming use may be continued, except as provided in this section, provided that the use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered, except as provided in this section.

K.    Removal or Alterations of Nonconforming Uses. The following provisions shall apply to adult-oriented businesses:

1.     Amortization Time Periods. An adult-oriented business that is a nonconforming use on January 1, 1995, shall be subject to an amortization period expiring January 1, 1996, and an adult-oriented business which becomes a nonconforming use after January 1, 1995, shall be subject to an amortization period of three years commencing on the date the use becomes nonconforming.

2.     Extension of Amortization Period. The owner of an adult-oriented business that is a nonconforming use may apply for extension of the amortization period in the same manner as required for a Conditional Use Permit. An application shall be made before the expiration of the amortization period unless the reviewing authority determines that good cause is shown for late filing of the application.

3.     Cessation of Business Operations. Upon the conclusion of the amortization period, an adult-oriented business that is a nonconforming use shall cease business operations and signs, advertising, and displays relating to the business shall be removed within 30 days.

L.     General Provisions. Adult-oriented businesses shall only be allowed to be established in the P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) zone and shall be subject to the location and design standards specified by this section and the requirement of an adult use planning permit as otherwise provided in this Zoning Code.

M.    Location, Design, and Performance Standards.

1.     Separation Requirements. An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within 500 feet of:

a.     A zone or land use district that contains the words “residence” or “residential” within this Zoning Code;

b.     A religious institution, chapel, or similar place of worship or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for this use by City action;

c.     A funeral parlor, mortuary, cemetery, or similar facility, or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for this use by City action;

d.     A school, nursery, day care center, park or playground or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for this use by City action;

e.     Any other recreational facility where minors congregate or property zoned, planned, or otherwise designated for this use by City action.

2.     Separation Requirements from Other Adult-Oriented Businesses. An adult-oriented business shall not be established or located within 500 feet of an existing adult-oriented business. If two or more existing adult-oriented businesses are located in closer proximity to each other than 500 feet, then in determining which of the businesses is or are nonconforming, preference shall be given in the order of the respective lengths of continuous uninterrupted operation of the businesses.

3.     Measurement of Separation Distances. For the purposes of this section, all distances shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures, from the nearest point of the structure in which the adult-oriented business is or will be located to the nearest property line of any land use, land use district or zone, or to the nearest point of the structure in which an existing adult-oriented business is located.

4.     Signs or Displays. Advertising signs or structures, advertisements, displays or other promotional materials depicting specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities or displaying instruments, devices or paraphernalia designed for use in connection with specific sexual activities, shall not be shown or exhibited so as to be visible from any exterior area.

5.     Entries and Windows. Structure openings, entries, and windows shall be located, covered, or screened to prevent viewing the interior from any exterior area.

6.     Noise. Loudspeakers or sound equipment audible to persons in any public exterior area shall not be used in connection with an adult-oriented business, and the business shall not be so conducted that sounds associated with the business are not emitted into any public exterior area.

7.     Compliance with Site Development Standards. The establishment of an adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable site development standards, including parking, of the zone in which the adult-oriented business is located, as well as the Building Code, Fire Code, and the Health and Safety Code. An adult-oriented business shall comply with the applicable City permit and inspection procedures. In addition, adult-oriented businesses shall comply with the following performance standards:

a.     Each adult-oriented business shall have a business entrance separate from any other non-adult business located in the same structure.

b.     Adult-oriented business shall not be operated in a manner that permits the observation by the public of any material depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas from any public way or from a location beyond the walls of the structure or portion of it in which the adult-oriented business is conducted.

c.     The structure entrance to the adult-oriented business shall be clearly and legibly posted with a notice indicating that minors are precluded from entering the premises.

d.     Each adult-oriented business shall be provided with a manager’s station for the purpose of supervising activities within the business. A manager shall be on duty on the premises during all times that the adult-oriented business is open to the public.

e.     A viewing room shall be visible from the manager’s station of the adult-oriented business, and visibility of the entire viewing room from the manager’s station shall be neither obscured nor obstructed by any curtain, door, wall, or other structure.

f.      Exterior areas of adult-oriented businesses, including structures, landscaping and parking areas, shall be maintained in a clean and orderly manner free of trash, weeds, and debris.

g.     The maximum occupancy load, fire exits, fire lanes, and fire suppression equipment shall be regulated, designed and provided in compliance with the regulations and standards of the Orange County Fire Department and the City’s Building Department.

h.     Adult-oriented business shall not operate between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. The Planning Commission, or Council on appeal, shall establish the actual allowed hours of operation for each permit approved or granted. Owners, operators, managers or employees of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under the provisions of this zoning code or the municipal code, shall not allow the business to remain open for business or to permit any employee to engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. or in violation of the actual allowed hours of operation established in the conditions of approval for the permit.

i.      Off-street parking shall be provided for the adult-oriented business as specified for the zone in which the business is located in compliance with Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading). Each adult theater, adult cabaret, or adult motion picture arcade shall provide one parking space for every two seats in the viewing room, or shall provide one parking space for every two occupants in compliance with the allowable occupant load as established by the Building Official and/or the Fire Marshal, whichever standard is greater. One parking space shall be provided for each employee on the maximum shift.

j.      A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult-oriented business, other than an adult motel and regardless of whether or not an adult-oriented business license has been issued to the business under this Zoning Code or the Municipal Code, which exhibits on the premises in a viewing room or viewing booth of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film, video cassette or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements:

i.      Upon application for an adult-oriented business license, the application shall be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan of it specifying the location of one or more manager’s stations, the location of overhead lighting fixtures, and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons shall not be allowed. A manager’s station(s) shall not exceed 32 square feet of floor area.

ii.     Alterations in the configuration or location of a manager’s station shall not be made without the prior written approval of the Director.

iii.    It is the duty of the permit holder to ensure that at least one employee is on duty and situated at each manager’s station at all times that any patron is present inside the premises.

iv.    The interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which a patron is allowed access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not contain video reproduction equipment. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designed, then the interior of the premises shall be configured so that there is an unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron is allowed access for any purpose from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this subsection shall be by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.

v.     It shall be the duty of the permit holder and employees present on the premises to ensure that the view area remains unobstructed by doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is allowed access to areas of the premises which have been designed as an area in which patrons shall not be allowed in the application filed in compliance with this section.

k.     An on-site security program shall be prepared and implemented including the following items:

i.      Off-street parking areas and structure entries serving the adult-oriented business shall be illuminated during hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide an average maintained horizontal illumination of one foot-candle of light on the parking surface and/or walkway. This required lighting level is established to provide sufficient illumination of the parking areas and walkways serving the adult-oriented business for the personal safety of patrons and employees and to mitigate the incidence of vandalism and theft. The lighting shall be shown on the required site or lot plan and shall be subject to review for compliance through the design review process by the director and the Chief of Police.

ii.     Interior portions of the adult-oriented business, except those areas devoted to mini-motion or motion pictures, shall be illuminated during all hours of operation with a lighting system designed to provide a minimum maintained horizontal illumination of not less than two foot-candles of light.

iii.    For adult-oriented businesses that exceed an occupant load of 125 persons, the provision of on-site security personnel shall be required during business hours in compliance with a plan to be reviewed and approved for adequacy by the Chief of Police. Security personnel shall be licensed in compliance with the California Business and Professions Code, to the satisfaction of the Chief of Police.

l.      Adult Motion Picture Theater.

i.      A manager’s station shall be located near the main entrance and the station shall be provided with an unobstructed view of all motion picture private viewing areas.

ii.     Adult motion picture arcades shall not be maintained or operated unless the complete interior of the adult motion picture theater is visible upon entrance to the adult motion picture theater. Partially or fully enclosed booths or partially or fully concealed booths shall not be maintained.

iii.    Persons shall not operate an adult motion picture theater in which the number of image-producing devices exceeds the maximum occupancy load allowed in a room or partitioned portion of a room in which an image producing device is located.

m.    Adult Hotel/Motel.

i.      Evidence that a sleeping room in a hotel, motel, or a similar commercial establishment has been rented or subrented and vacated two or more times in a period of less than 10 hours on a recurring basis creates a rebuttable presumption that the establishment is an adult hotel/motel as that term is defined in this section.

ii.     A person shall be in violation of the provisions of this section if a person rents or sub-rents a sleeping room at a location without an adult-oriented business license and an adult use planning permit to a person or persons and within 10 hours afterwards rents or sub-rents the same room to another person(s) or sub-rents the same room to the prior renter.

N.  Prohibited Activities.

1.     Duties of Persons Who Operate Business. Persons shall not operate or cause to be operated an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued under this Zoning Code, knowingly or with reason to know, permitting, suffering, or allowing any employee:

a.     To engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

b.     To contract or otherwise agree with a patron to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a person at the business;

c.     To intentionally touch a patron at an adult-oriented business while engaged in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity;

d.     To voluntarily be within six feet of a patron while engaged in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engaged in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

2.     Prohibited Employee Activities. Employees of an adult-oriented business shall not:

a.     Engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

b.     Contract or otherwise agree to engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with a patron at the business;

c.     Engage in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity while intentionally touching a patron at the adult-oriented business;

d.     Engage in the display or exposure of a specified anatomical area or engage in or simulate a specified sexual activity closer than six feet from any patron.

3.     Intentional Touching Prohibited. Persons at an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not the business is allowed under this Zoning Code, shall not intentionally touch an employee who is displaying or exposing a specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity at the adult-oriented business.

4.     Prohibited Activities of Persons. Persons at an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not the business is allowed under this zoning code, shall not engage in a couch dance or straddle dance with an employee at the business who is displaying or exposing a specified anatomical area or engaging in or simulating a specified sexual activity.

5.     Prohibited Activities During Certain Hours. Employees of an adult-oriented business, regardless of whether or not a permit has been issued for the business under this section, shall not engage in a performance, solicit a performance, make a sale, solicit a sale, provide a service or solicit a service between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. of any particular day. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 2, 2012; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.050 Affordable Housing
Residential density bonuses, incentives, or concessions for the production of affordable housing shall be granted in compliance with Government Code Section 65915, as amended from time to time. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.060 Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales
A.    Purpose. This section provides development standards for the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption where allowed in compliance with Table 2-02 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones), Table 2-04 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Zones), and Table 2-06 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Town Center Mixed-Use Zone) for “Alcoholic Beverage Sales,” “Convenience Stores,” and “Automobile Service Stations.”

B.     Applicability. This section shall apply to:

1.     Establishments that do not currently sell, but propose to sell, alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption;

2.     Establishments that currently sell alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption but which propose to change the type of alcoholic beverages to be sold (change the type of retail liquor license within a license classification);

3.     Off-site establishments that currently sell alcoholic beverages if the establishment substantially changes its mode or character of operation, which includes but is not limited to either a 10 percent increase in floor area or a 25 percent increase in facing used for the display of alcoholic beverages;

4.     Off-site establishments that have been abandoned or have discontinued operation for three months. The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to determine when the establishment was in operation;

5.     Gasoline service stations selling beer, wine, and/or spirits for consumption off the premises.

C.     Findings. In addition to any required findings for an applicable discretionary permit, an application may be approved where the information submitted by the applicant or presented at the public hearing, substantiates the following:

1.     The requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the use of a school, park, playground, religious institution, temple, or other place used primarily for religious worship, or similar uses within a 500-foot radius of the property, in or outside the City.

2.     The requested use at the proposed location is sufficiently buffered in relation to residentially zoned areas within the immediate vicinity so as not to adversely affect the area.

3.     The requested use at the proposed location will not result in an undue concentration of similar premises. A separation of not less than 500 feet, from property line to property line, in or outside the City, shall not be construed as undue concentration. The applicant shall bear the burden of proof that a separation of less than 500 feet does not create an undue concentration of facilities for the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-site consumption within the community.

4.     The requested use at the proposed location will not adversely affect the economic welfare of the community.

5.     The exterior appearance of the structure will be consistent with the external appearance of commercial structures already constructed or under construction within the immediate neighborhood so as to not cause blight, deterioration, or substantially diminish or impair property values within the neighborhood.

D.    Gasoline Service Stations and Convenience Stores. Gasoline service stations and convenience stores that sell beer, wine, and/or spirits for consumption off the premises shall be subject to the following:

1.     Beer, wine, and/or spirits shall not be displayed within five feet of the cash register or the front entrance unless it is in a permanently affixed display case.

2.     Advertisements of alcoholic beverages shall not be displayed at motor fuel islands.

3.     Sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be made from a drive-in or drive-through window.

4.     Display or sale of alcoholic beverages shall not be made from a portable container.

5.     Alcoholic beverage advertising shall not be located on motor fuel islands, and self-illuminated advertising for alcoholic beverages shall not be located on structures or windows.

6.     Employees on duty between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 2:00 a.m. shall be at least 21 years of age to sell alcoholic beverages.

7.     Arcade machines may not be kept, maintained, or operated on the premises.

8.     Not more than 25 percent of the total floor area of the convenience market shall be devoted to the sale of alcoholic beverages. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.070 Arcades
A.    Locational and Development Restrictions.

1.     Arcades, as defined by the number of machines in Division 7 (Definitions), shall be located more than 300 feet from a public or private school (grades kindergarten through 12) and from another legally allowed arcade.

2.     Permit applications shall include a floor plan drawing including, but not limited to, emergency exits, fire doors, evacuation paths, desk, chairs, arcade machines, waiting areas, and restrooms.

3.     A facility that has more than 45 arcade machines shall also meet all occupancy A fire requirements.

B.     Operation Regulations.

1.     The maximum number of arcade machines in an arcade shall not exceed one arcade machine for every 35 square feet of gross floor area allotted to the arcade operations.

2.     Arcade machines and waiting areas within the premises shall be visible from the supervisor’s station and adequately supervised by an adult attendant 18 years or older. The attendant shall be present whenever an arcade machine is being operated.

3.     Persons under 18 years of age shall not be allowed on the premises where the arcade machines are located after 10:00 p.m. unless accompanied by a parent or guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of the minor.

4.     Arcades with a gross floor area of 3,000 square feet or greater, excluding restaurant dining and kitchen areas, shall provide a visible security guard between 5:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. on Friday, Saturday, and Sunday evenings. Security guards shall be responsible for crowd control both on the arcade premises and adjoining parking areas.

5.     Windows shall be kept clear of any item or tint that obscures full view from the exterior to inside the business.

6.     Establishments with arcade machines consisting of 25 percent or more of the floor area shall provide a waiting area with seating within the business. The minimum number of seats shall be determined at one seat for every eight arcade machines but not less than four, unless modified by the Planning Commission based on a showing of good cause that a lesser number of seats in the waiting area will adequately accommodate patrons waiting to use an arcade machine.

7.     Failure to comply with the regulations provided by this section shall be cause for immediate suspension or revocation of applicable permits in compliance with Section 17.42.050 (Violation, Discontinuance, and Removal). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.080 Automobile Service Stations and Automobile Repair Uses
A.    Applicability. Automobile service stations, automobile and motorcycle repair facilities, automobile body shops, and automobile paint shops shall be subject to the provisions of this section.

B.     Operations Requirements. Repairing, painting, or servicing of motor vehicles, installation of parts, and body repair work shall be conducted entirely within a structure.

C.     Vehicle Storage and Parking.

1.     For service stations located in the C-G (General Commercial) zone, outdoor storage of vehicles overnight shall not be permitted. Overnight parking of vehicles awaiting service or pick up shall be within a structure.

2.     For automobile repair, body and paint shops, and service stations located in the P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) Zoning District, overnight parking of vehicles awaiting repair, service or pick up shall be within a structure or screened by a masonry wall not to exceed eight feet in height. The outdoor storage of tires, automobile parts, and fluids is strictly prohibited.

3.     Vehicles awaiting repair, service, or pick up shall be parked on the subject property and not in the public right-of-way.

D.    Repair Bays. Interiors of service repair bays shall be screened or oriented so as not to be visible from properties used or zoned for residential purposes.

E.     Retail Sale of Alcohol. Automobile service stations with retail sales of beer and wine shall comply with the provisions of Section 17.28.060 (Alcoholic Beverage Retail Sales).

F.     Hours of Operation.

1.     Automobile servicing shall be conducted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.

2.     Automobile repair work, body repair work, and/or automobile painting shall be conducted between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 691 § 2, 2006; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.090 Cannabis Uses
A.    Purpose.

1.     The purpose of this section is to expressly prohibit the establishment of commercial cannabis uses in the City relating to medical cannabis and adult use cannabis and to impose reasonable regulations on personal cultivation in private residences and accessory structures.

2.     The Council finds that the prohibition on commercial cannabis activity is necessary for the preservation of and protection of the public health, safety, and welfare of the City. The prohibition of such uses is within the authority conferred upon the Council by State law and is an exercise of its police powers to enact and enforce regulations for the public health, safety and welfare.

B.     Definitions. Terms unique to this section are listed in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions).

C.     Prohibition.

1.     Commercial cannabis activities, whether or not for profit, are expressly prohibited in all zones in the City, including all specific plan areas and overlay zones. No person shall establish, operate, conduct, allow, or engage in a commercial cannabis activity anywhere within the City. This prohibition includes any type of business enterprise where cannabis is complimentarily provided as part of any other non-cannabis related business activity.

2.     A property owner shall not rent, lease, or otherwise permit any person or business that engages in commercial cannabis activity to occupy real property in the City. A property owner shall not allow any person or business to establish, operate, maintain, conduct, or engage in commercial cannabis activity on any real property owned or controlled by that property owner that is located in the City.

3.     This section is meant to prohibit all activities for which a State license is required subject to the Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act (MAUCRSA). Accordingly, the City shall not issue any permit, license, or other entitlement for any activity for which a State license is required under the Adult Use of Marijuana Act (AUMA), including any local license to a non-profit entity subject to California Business and Professions Code Section 26070.5.

4.     Except as provided in this section, all cultivation of cannabis is expressly prohibited in all zones in the City.

D.    Personal Cultivation—Regulations.

1.     An authorized grower shall be allowed to cultivate cannabis for personal use only within a private residence or a fully enclosed and secure structure which is accessory to a private residence, subject to the following regulations in addition to any regulations of State law:

a.     The cannabis cultivation area shall be contained within one single room that shall not exceed 150 square feet.

b.     The room shall be securely locked and accessible only to individuals residing in the residence who are 21 years of age or older.

c.     The cannabis plants shall not come within 12 inches of the ceiling or any cultivation lighting.

d.     Cannabis cultivation lighting shall not exceed 1,200 watts in total for the total cultivation area within the residence.

e.     The use of gas products such as but not limited to CO2, butane, methane, or any other flammable or non-flammable gas for cannabis cultivation or processing is prohibited.

f.      There shall be no exterior visibility or evidence of cannabis cultivation occurring within the private residence or accessory structure from the public right-of-way or any adjoining property, including, but not limited to:

i.      Visual observation of any cannabis plants;

ii.     Any form of sign indicating that cannabis plants are being grown inside the residence or accessory structure;

iii.    Visual observation of any equipment used in the growing and cultivation operation;

iv.    Unusual odors, smells, fragrances, or other olfactory stimulus;

v.     Any light emanating from cultivation lighting.

g.     The authorized grower shall reside full-time in the residence where the cannabis cultivation occurs.

h.     The authorized grower shall not participate in cannabis cultivation in any other location within the City.

i.      The residence shall include fully functional and usable kitchen, bathroom, and bedroom areas for their intended use by the resident authorized grower, and the premises shall not be used primarily or exclusively for cannabis cultivation.

j.      The cannabis cultivation area shall be in compliance with the provisions of the applicable building and construction codes as outlined in Title 15 of the Municipal Code. The Building Official may impose additional conditions to meet such codes if necessary, including, but not limited to, installation of fire suppression sprinklers and ventilation and filtration systems that prevent plant odors from exiting the interior of the structure.

k.     The cannabis cultivation area shall not result in a nuisance or adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of the resident or nearby residents by creating dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odors, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or be hazardous due to use or storage of materials, processes, products, or wastes.

l.      Cultivation shall be limited to six cannabis plants, mature or immature, per private residence or a fully enclosed and secure structure. The limit of six plants per private residence shall apply regardless of how many individuals reside at the private residence.

m.    The cannabis plants and any cannabis in excess of 28-½ grams produced by plants shall be kept in a locked space on the grounds of the private residence or accessory structure which space is not visible from the public right-of-way by normal unaided vision.

n.     If the person cultivating the plants is not the owner of the residence, such person shall obtain permission from the property owner to cultivate plants on the premises in compliance with the provisions of State law and this section. Such permission shall be in writing and made available to City staff upon request.

2.     No outdoor cultivation of cannabis plants shall be allowed in the City, even for personal use. (This section shall be of no further force or effect and shall be deemed repealed upon a determination by the California Attorney General that nonmedical use of cannabis is lawful in the State under Federal law.)

E.     Violation. It is hereby declared to be unlawful, a public nuisance and a violation of this section for any person owning, leasing, occupying, or having charge or possession of any property within the City to cause or allow such property to be used in a manner which violates this section.

F.     Violation—Misdemeanor. Any violation of this section shall be punishable as a misdemeanor, punishable as outlined in Chapter 1.20 (General Penalty).

G.    Public Nuisance. Any use or condition caused, or allowed to exist, in violation of any provision of this section shall be, and hereby is declared to be, a public nuisance and may be summarily abated by the City subject to Code of Civil Procedure Section 731 or any other remedy available to the City.

H.    Civil Penalties. In addition to any other enforcement allowed by this section, the City Attorney may bring a civil action for injunctive relief or the City may pursue administrative fines and penalties subject to Chapter 1.24 (Administrative Fines and Penalties) against any person or entity that violates this section. In any civil action brought subject to this section, a court of competent jurisdiction may award reasonable attorneys’ fees, where the City has elected at the initiation of the action to seek the recovery of such fees, in which case the prevailing party in such action shall be entitled to an award of attorneys’ fees in an amount which shall not exceed the reasonable attorneys’ fees incurred by the City, regardless of the actual costs of any party’s attorneys’ fees. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 17-09 § 2, 2017)

 

17.28.100 Condominiums—Commercial and Industrial
A.    Purpose and Intent.

1.     The Council finds that office and industrial condominium projects are different in so many respects from other types and forms of land ownership and development as to require additional regulations.

2.     The intent of this section is to further the goals of the General Plan and regulate the placement of these projects and land use consistent with the form of ownership and occupancy of these projects in compliance with applicable laws for the general health, safety, and welfare of the public.

3.     The intent of this section is also to develop standards, procedures, and guidelines that provide a more flexible method whereby properly located land areas can be developed, employing more innovative and imaginative land planning concepts than would be possible through the strict application of conventional zoning and subdivision regulations.

4.     The purpose of this section is to provide for the general control of design and development of common ownership office, and industrial condominiums in relation to adjoining areas in compliance with the basic purpose of the State Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Conditional Use Permit Required.

1.     Where Types of Condominium Projects Allowed. Commercial condominiums shall be allowed in the C-O (Commercial-Professional Office), C-G (General Commercial), and P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) zones. Industrial condominiums shall be allowed in the P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) zone subject to the approval of tentative and final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law.

2.     Compliance Required. Persons shall not construct, sell, lease, convey, maintain, or use a condominium project within the City without complying with the provisions of this section.

C.     Applicability of Subdivision Ordinance. The provisions of Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the Municipal Code shall apply.

D.    Relationship to Other Laws. Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this section are either more or less restrictive than regulations or restrictions imposed by other laws, the regulations, rules, or restrictions which are more restrictive or which impose specific design standards shall govern.

E.     Requirements for Commercial and Industrial Condominiums.

1.     Application Requirements—New Development. The applicant shall file an application for Site Development Permit—Major for a commercial or industrial condominium development in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor). Also, a tentative subdivision map, as required by this section and Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the Municipal Code, shall be submitted to the Development Services Department concurrently. The Development Services Department shall make recommendations on the project to the Planning Commission for approval, conditional approval, or denial. Tentative subdivision maps and Site Development Permit—Major applications filed in compliance with this section shall be processed concurrently.

2.     Application Requirements—Conversions. The conversion of lease or rental commercial or industrial developments to commercial or industrial condominium developments within appropriate zoning districts shall be allowed, subject to the issuance of a Conditional Use Permit in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 17.32 (Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits) and the approval of tentative and final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law. In addition to satisfying other requirements of this section, the applicant for conversion of an existing office or industrial structures to condominiums at the time application is made, shall provide the following information:

a.     Structure and Zoning History. A structure and zoning history, to the extent available, detailing the date of construction, major uses since construction, and the dates, nature, and scope of major repairs and alterations since construction.

b.     Property Report. A property report detailing the condition and useful life of the roof, foundation, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and structural elements of existing structures. A registered civil or structural engineer shall prepare the report.

c.     Pest Report. A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator.

3.     Development Standards.

a.     Approval of the Conditional Use Permit for conversion shall require that the development in question meet the requirements currently in effect for new commercial or industrial condominium developments.

b.     Structures shall comply with building, energy, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and fire codes in force in the City at the time application for condominium is made.

c.     Commercial and industrial condominiums to be constructed or converted shall be subject to the development standards, parking requirements, and sign regulations for the zone in which they are located, and subject to the conditions of approval.

d.     In addition to the requirements of the applicable zone, the following development standards shall apply. Wherever there is a conflict or the appearance of a conflict between the normal zoning requirements and the following condominium requirements, the more stringent standards shall apply unless the conflict is mutually exclusive, in which case this section shall apply.

4.     Utilities. Each commercial or industrial condominium unit shall have separate water, sewage, and utility connections, or provisions for shared usage shall be included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions. Each utility that is controlled by and consumed within the unit shall be separately billed for its use. Each unit shall have access to its own meter(s), heater(s), and air conditioner(s), and shall not require entry through another unit. Each unit shall have its own electrical panel and access to it. A plan for equitable sharing of non-separately metered, jointly used utilities shall be developed before final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

5.     Outdoor Storage Areas. Outdoor storage may be allowed in industrial condominiums as a part of the required Conditional Use Permit when the Planning Commission determines that the storage is adequately screened from public view and will not be aesthetically or materially detrimental to surrounding properties. If the Planning Commission determines that a proposed industrial condominium development can adequately accommodate outdoor storage area(s), then the development standards of the P-L-I (Planned Light Industrial) zone shall apply. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 18-06 §§ 3, 10, 2018; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.110 Condominiums—Residential and Residential Conversions
A.    Purpose and Intent.

1.     The Council finds that residential condominium projects are different in so many respects from other types and forms of land ownership and development as to require additional regulations. This applies to new condominium development projects as well as the conversion of existing multi-family housing to condominiums.

2.     The intent of this section is to further the goals of the General Plan, provide a balanced mix of housing, and ensure the form of ownership and occupancy complies with applicable laws for the general health, safety, and welfare of the public.

3.     The intent of this section is also to establish standards, procedures, and guidelines that provide a more flexible method whereby properly located land areas can be developed, employing more innovative and imaginative land planning concepts than would be possible through the strict application of conventional zoning and subdivision regulations.

4.     The purpose of this section is to provide for the general control of design and development of common ownership residential condominiums in relation to adjoining areas in compliance with the basic purpose of the State Subdivision Map Act.

B.     Permits and Map Required.

1.     New Condominium Projects. Residential condominium projects shall be allowed in all residential zones and in the Town Center Mixed Use zone at densities applicable to the zone in which the project is located, subject to the approval of tentative and final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law and any development permits required for multi-family housing in the zone in which the new project is located. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law.

2.     Condominium Conversions. Residential condominium conversion projects shall be allowed in all residential zones and in the Town Center Mixed Use zone at densities applicable to the zone in which the project is located, subject to the approval of a Site Development Permit—Major and the approval of tentative and final tract or parcel maps as may be required by law. This requirement is in addition to other permits or certificates required by law.

3.     Compliance Required. Persons shall not construct, sell, lease, convey, maintain, or use a condominium project within the City without complying with the provisions of this section.

C.     Applicability of Subdivision Ordinance.

1.     Condominiums, whether new construction or conversion of existing structures and as may otherwise be superseded by the Subdivision Map Act:

a.     If five or more dwelling units, the standard subdivision procedure shall be applied.

b.     If four or fewer dwelling units, the minor subdivision (parcel map) shall be applied.

2.     The provisions of Title 16 (Subdivisions) of the Municipal Code shall apply.

D.    Relationship to Other Laws. Whenever regulations or restrictions imposed by this section are either more or less restrictive than regulations or restrictions imposed by other laws, the regulations, rules, or restrictions which are more restrictive or which impose specific design standards shall govern.

E.     Requirements for Residential Condominiums.

1.     Compliance with Codes. Structures shall comply with building, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing codes in force in the City at the time the application is made.

2.     Sound and Energy Insulation. Structures shall be sound attenuated to comply with the Uniform Building Code standards in effect at the time of filing. Additionally, the structure shall be made to comply with the energy insulation requirement in effect at the time of filing.

3.     Fire Protection.

a.     Smoke Detectors. Each condominium unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat, conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

b.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. Fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition.

4.     Utilities.

a.     Utility Metering. Each condominium unit shall be separately metered for all utilities. In addition, a plan for equitable sharing of non-separately metered, jointly used utilities shall be developed before final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

b.     Undergrounding of Utilities. On-site overhead utility service lines shall be placed underground.

5.     Dedication and Improvements. Dedications for streets, alleys, drainage, or public utilities shall be made so as to bring the development into conformity with existing City street, alley, drainage, and public utility standards.

6.     Parking, Off-Street. Parking requirements for condominiums shall be provided for in compliance with Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading).

7.     Storage Space. Each condominium unit shall be provided with a minimum of 200 cubic feet of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space. The space shall be for the sole use of the unit owner. This storage area may be located within a covered parking area, provided it does not interfere with vehicle parking.

8.     Laundry Facilities.

a.     Separate Facilities. A separate laundry facility area of sufficient size to allow for the installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each condominium unit (if provided for in the garage, the area shall not encroach into the required parking space).

b.     Common Facility. As an alternative to subparagraph a, a common laundry facility may be provided; such facility shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each three condominium units or fractions of thereof.

9.     Lot Size, Setback, Coverage, Height, and Density Requirements. Lot sizes, setback lines, coverage, structure heights, and density requirements shall meet the minimum requirements for the zone in which the condominium is located.

10.   Private Open Space. An adjoining private open space for each condominium unit in compliance with the requirements for the zone in which the project is located.

F.     Requirements for Residential Condominium Conversion.

1.     Application for Conversion. In addition to satisfying other requirements of this section, the applicant for conversion of any existing residential structures to condominiums, at the time application is made, shall provide the following information:

a.     Structure and Zoning History. A structure and zoning history, to the extent available, detailing the date of construction, major uses since construction, and the dates, nature, and scope of major repairs and alterations since construction.

b.     Property Report. A property report detailing the condition and useful life of the roof, foundation, mechanical, electrical, plumbing, and structural elements of all existing structures. A registered civil or structural engineer, or a licensed general building or engineering contractor, shall prepare the report.

c.     Pest Report. A structural pest report prepared by a licensed structural pest control operator.

2.     Development Standards.

a.     Compliance with Codes. Structures shall comply with building, mechanical, electrical, and plumbing codes in force in the City at the time the application for conversion is made.

b.     Sound and Energy Insulation. Structures shall be sound attenuated to comply with the Uniform Building Code standards in effect at the time of filing. Additionally, the structure shall be made to comply with the energy insulation requirement in effect at the time of filing.

c.     Fire Protection.

i.      Smoke Detectors. Each condominium unit shall be provided with approved detectors of products of combustion other than heat, conforming to the latest Uniform Building Code standards, mounted on the ceiling or wall at a point centrally located in the corridor or area giving access to rooms used for sleeping purposes.

ii.     Maintenance of Fire Protection Systems. Fire hydrants, fire alarm systems, portable fire extinguishers, and other fire protective appliances shall be retained in an operable condition.

3.     Utilities.

a.     Construction before January 23, 1980. Structure construction approved by the City before January 23, 1980, may be converted to condominiums when the following standards are met:

i.      Utility Metering. Each condominium unit shall be separately metered for gas and electricity. In addition, a plan for equitable sharing of non-separately metered, jointly used utilities shall be developed before final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions. In a case where the subdivider can demonstrate to the Planning Commission that this standard cannot or should not be met, the Planning Commission may modify the standard.

b.     Construction after January 23, 1980. Structure construction approved by the City after January 23, 1980 may be converted to condominiums when the following standards are met:

i.      Utility Metering. Each condominium unit shall be separately metered for all utilities. In addition, a plan for equitable sharing of non-separately metered, jointly used utilities shall be developed before final map approval and included in the covenants, conditions, and restrictions.

4.     Undergrounding of Utilities. On-site overhead utility service lines shall be placed underground.

5.     Dedications and Improvements. Dedications for streets, alleys, drainage, or public utilities shall be made so as to bring the development into conformity with existing City street, alley drainage, and public utility standards.

6.     Off-Street Parking.

a.     Buildings converted to condominiums may utilize the parking spaces that exist prior to the conversion only, and need not provide additional parking, even if the spaces are not in compliance with the parking requirements and standards established for newly constructed multi-family residential structures in the R-2 and R-3 zones, unless additional or alternative parking spaces exist as determined by City staff.

b.     Other Parking Provisions. In all other respects, off-street parking requirements and standards shall be governed by the provisions of Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading).

7.     Storage Space. Each condominium unit shall be provided with a minimum of 200 cubic feet of enclosed weatherproofed and lockable private storage space within a covered parking area, provided it does not interfere with motor vehicle parking.

8.     Laundry Facilities.

a.     Separate Facilities. A separate laundry facility area of sufficient size to allow for the installation of a clothes washer and dryer shall be provided for each condominium unit (if provided for in the garage, the area shall not encroach into the required parking space).

b.     Common Facility. As an alternative to subparagraph a, a common laundry facility may be provided; such facility shall consist of not less than one automatic washer and dryer for each three condominium units or fractions of thereof.

9.     Setback, Height, and Density Requirements. Setback lines, structure heights, and density requirements shall meet the minimum requirements for the zone in which the condominium is located.

10.   Tenant Provisions/Notification to Tenants. The subdivider shall comply with the following provisions regarding tenants’ rights:

a.     Tenants of a structure proposed for conversion shall be given 10 days’ written notice, by the developer, of the Planning Commission meeting at which the conversion proposal will be heard and considered. Certification that the residents of the project have been notified shall be provided to the Director.

b.     Each tenant shall be given a minimum of 150 days’ written notice of intention to convert before termination of tenancy due to the conversion or proposed conversion. Evidence of receipt shall be submitted with the tentative map. The form of the notice shall be as approved by the Development Services Department and shall contain not less than the following:

i.      Name and address of current owner;

ii.     Name and address of proposed subdivider;

iii.    Approximate date on which the tentative map is proposed to be filed;

iv.    Approximate date on which the final map or parcel map is to be filed;

v.     Approximate date on which the unit is to be vacated by nonpurchasing tenants;

vi.    Tenant’s right to purchase;

vii.   Tenant’s right of notification to vacate;

viii.  Tenant’s right to extend lease;

ix.    Tenant’s right of termination of lease;

x.     Statement of no rent increase;

xi.    Provisions of relocation assistance;

xii.   Other information may be required as deemed necessary.

c.     If a tenancy is to expire before 120 days before the commencement of sales is scheduled, the developer shall offer to extend the tenancy upon the same terms for an additional 90 days. If a tenancy is to expire before 30 days before the commencement of sales is scheduled, the developer shall offer to extend the tenancy for a period to and including the 30th day before the date scheduled for commencement of sales.

d.     The developer shall permit a tenant to terminate a lease or rental agreement without a penalty, cost, or forfeiture, after notice has been given of the intention to convert to condominium housing, if a tenant notifies the developer, in writing, 30 days in advance of the termination.

11.   Tenants’ Right to Purchase. Each of the tenants in the proposed condominium project shall be given notice of an exclusive right to contract for the purchase of their respective units upon the same terms and conditions that the units will be initially offered to the general public, or terms more favorable to the tenant. This right shall comply with the provisions of Business and Professions Code Section 11018.2, unless the tenant gives prior written notice of their intention not to exercise this right. This right of purchase shall extend at least 90 days from the date of issuance of the subdivision public report, or commencement of sales, whichever is later.

12.   Increase in Rents. The tenant’s rent shall not be increased between the time of filing of the tentative map and the time relocation takes place, or the subdivision is denied or withdrawn.

13.   Relocation Assistance.

a.     The subdivider shall provide each tenant with a list of available units of similar price and in the same general area.

b.     The subdivider shall provide relocation funds equivalent to the last month’s rent (at the current rental rate then being charged) to all tenants, to cover expenses related to moving.

14.   Notice to New Tenants. After submittal of the tentative map, prospective tenants shall be notified in writing of the intent to convert, before the leasing or renting of a unit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.120 Construction Structures—Temporary
A.    Temporary Use Permit Required. Contractor’s temporary construction structures or trailers in conjunction with a subdivision or other development, to be used only for offices or storage, may be allowed for a period not to exceed six months, with up to three six-month extensions, each upon approval of a Temporary Use Permit in compliance with Chapter 17.46 (Temporary Use Permits).

B.     Design and Operational Requirements.

1.     The temporary construction site building shall be located within the boundaries of the subdivision or tract of land in which the real property is to be sold and/or is being developed.

2.     The property to be used for a temporary construction site building shall not be permanently improved for that purpose.

3.     The temporary construction site building shall conform to the setbacks of the underlying development district; shall provide skirting; and shall obtain all necessary permits, including building, electrical, and plumbing, as applicable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.130 Day Care, General
A.    Purpose and Applicability. This section establishes standards for the location, development, and operations for general day care facilities, as defined in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions) as “Day Care, General” where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations). This section provides standards for the location, development, and operation of general day care facilities in compliance with State law. These standards shall apply in addition to requirements imposed by the California Department of Social Services and other regulatory agencies (e.g., Fire Department).

B.     Standards. All general day care facilities shall comply with all of the following:

1.     Licensing. The operator of a general day care facility shall obtain and maintain a valid license from the California Department of Social Services in compliance with California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 6.

2.     General Day Care Facilities Review Standards. An application for a general day care facility shall be reviewed by the responsible review authority for compliance with the provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 1597.46(a)(3) and this section. The application may be approved only if the general day care facility complies with applicable sections of the Health and Safety Code, this section, all applicable City ordinances, and any regulations adopted by the State Fire Marshall.

3.     Fences or Walls Required. Fences or walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry.

4.     Drop-Off/Pick-Up Areas. Any general day care facility located on a through street classified as a collector or arterial street in the Los Alamitos General Plan shall provide a drop-off and pick-up area that does not require backing into the street. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.140 Day Care Home—Large Family (9-14 Children)
A.    Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to large family child day care homes, as defined by current State law, in compliance with Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations) and the following standards. These standards shall apply in addition to requirements imposed by the California Department of Social Services and other regulatory agencies.

B.     Standards. All large family child day care homes shall comply with all of the following:

1.     Licensing. The operator of a large family child day care home shall obtain and maintain a valid license from the California Department of Social Services in compliance with California Code of Regulations, Title 22, Division 12 (Child Care Facility Licensing Requirements).

2.     Care Provider’s Residence. The large family child day care home shall be the primary residence of the care provider, and the use shall be clearly residential in character and shall be incidental and accessory to the use of the property as a residence, in compliance with Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78 and other applicable law.

3.     Fences or Walls Required. Fences or walls shall provide for safety with controlled points of entry.

4.     Play Area and Equipment. Outdoor play area(s), including all stationary play equipment, shall be located in the rear area of the lot and shall comply with any setback requirements for the zone in which the large family day care home is located.

5.     Drop-Off/Pick-Up Areas and Use of Garages.

a.     A minimum of two off-street uncovered parking spaces shall be provided as a drop-off and pick-up area. The spaces shall be in addition to those required for the dwelling unit in compliance with Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading). A driveway may be used to provide the spaces, provided the City Traffic Engineer approves the arrangement based on traffic and pedestrian safety considerations.

b.     Garages shall not be used as a family child day care play area unless alternative on-site covered parking is available to meet minimum residential parking requirements and further, the garage is improved to meet Building and Fire Code regulations as a habitable space.

c.     Hours of Operation. A large family child day care home located may only operate a maximum of 14 hours each day between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.

d.     Inspection Required. Before commencing operation of a large family child day care home, the City Building Official shall conduct an inspection of the premises on which the large family child day care home is to be operated to ensure that there are no unallowed uses, structure, electrical, and/or mechanical improvements to the property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.150 Day Care Home—Small Family (8 or Fewer Children)
All small family child day care homes, as defined as in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions), shall comply with the applicable provisions of Health and Safety Code Section 1597.30 et seq. (Family Day Care Homes). Such facilities do not require any discretionary City permits and are exempt from Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.28.160 Emergency Shelters
A.    Purpose. This section identifies locations for emergency shelters and sets forth the development standards that shall be met regardless of whether the emergency shelter is allowed as of right or by a Conditional Use Permit.

B.     Required On-Site Waiting and Intake Areas.

1.     10 square feet per bed.

2.     Minimum 100 square feet.

C.     Facility Management. A resident manager shall be required. A written management plan addressing, at a minimum, staff training, identification process, neighborhood outreach, pet policy, safety, security, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor activities, storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be approved by the Development Services Director. The management plan may be reviewed as needed by the City with revisions made by the operator.

D.    Proximity to Other Emergency Shelters. An emergency shelter may not be located closer than 300 feet from another emergency shelter.

E.     Maximum Length of Stay. Six months.

F.     Multi-Jurisdictional Agreement. Emergency shelters for homeless persons that are subject to a multi-jurisdictional agreement, subject to California Government Code Section 65583(d), shall be considered an allowed use even if inconsistent with the criteria in this section, provided the agreement includes standards and operational criteria acceptable to the participating jurisdictions. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-04 § 6, 2013)

 

17.28.170 Hazardous Waste Facilities
A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to establish uniform standards, land use regulations, and a permit process for controlling the location, design, maintenance, and safety of off-site hazardous waste facilities.

B.     Definitions. Terms unique to this section are listed in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions).

C.     Applicability.

1.     The provisions in this section shall apply to hazardous waste facilities as defined in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations).

2.     The provisions of this section do not apply to:

a.     Transportable treatment units (TTU) which are designed to be moved either intact or in modules and which are intended to be operated at a given location for a limited period of time;

b.     Permanent on-site hazardous waste facilities at locations where hazardous waste is produced, and which are owned by, leased to, or under the control of the producer of the waste.

D.    Required Licensing. Facilities (i.e., off-site, on-site and TTUs) shall be licensed as required by State law.

E.     Consistency with County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. Any application for a hazardous waste facility or project shall be subject to all applicable regulations outlined in the Los Alamitos Municipal Code and the County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. All requirements of the City with regard to hazardous waste facilities shall be consistent with those portions of the approved County Plan which identify general areas or siting criteria for hazardous waste facilities. The County Hazardous Waste Management Plan as it now exists or may be amended is adopted and incorporated by reference as part of the Municipal Code.

F.     City Requirements and Conditions. Nothing contained in this section nor any requirement incorporated by reference shall limit the authority of the City to attach appropriate conditions to the issuance of any Conditional Use Permit for a hazardous waste facility to protect the public health, safety or welfare, and does not limit the authority of the City to establish more stringent requirements or siting criteria than those specified in the County Hazardous Waste Management Plan. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.180 Live/Work Units
A.    Purpose and Applicability. The provisions in this section shall apply to live/work units, as defined in Division 7 (Definitions) and where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations).

B.     Limitations on Use. The nonresidential component of a live/work project shall be a use allowed within the applicable zone in compliance with Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations). Specifically, however, a live/work unit shall not be allowed to include any of the following land uses or activities:

1.     Vehicle repair and service.

2.     Vehicle and equipment maintenance and repair services.

3.     Storage of flammable liquids or hazardous materials beyond that normally associated with a residential use.

4.     Manufacturing or industrial activities, including, but not limited to, welding and machining.

5.     Any other activity or use, as determined by the Director, to be incompatible with residential activities and/or to have the possibility of affecting the health or safety of live/work unit residents due to the potential for the use to create dust, glare, heat, noise, noxious gasses, odor, smoke, traffic, vibration, or other impacts, or would be hazardous because of materials, processes, products, or wastes.

C.     Ground Floor Use. Where ground floor commercial uses are required, live/work units shall not exceed 25 percent of the ground floor building area.

D.    Design Standards.

1.     Floor Area Requirement. A live/work unit shall have a minimum floor area of at least 500 square feet. At least 150 square feet of a live/work unit shall be designated as suitable for workspace and shall measure not less than 15 feet in at least one dimension and no less than 10 feet in any dimension. The area suitable for workspace for each unit shall be clearly demarcated on approved building plans.

2.     Separation and Access of Individual Units. Each live/work unit shall be separated from other units and other uses in the building. Access to each unit shall be provided from shop fronts, directly from the sidewalk parallel to the primary or secondary street, or from common access areas, corridors, or halls. The access to each unit shall be clearly separate from other live/work units or other uses within the building. Living space shall be located in the rear ground level or second floor and above to maintain activity and commercial access along the frontage.

3.     Location of Living Space—Ground Floor Units. Ground floor live/work units shall designate a minimum of the front 20 feet of the building depth of the unit, as measured from the unit frontage, as area suitable for work space in order to maintain activity and commercial access along the frontage. Dedicated living space may be located be in the rear portion of the ground level, provided the front 20 feet of the unit is designated as suitable for work.

4.     Facilities to Accommodate Commercial Activities. A live/work unit shall be designed to accommodate nonresidential uses as evidenced by the provision of ventilation, interior storage, flooring, and other physical improvements of the type commonly found in exclusively nonresidential facilities used for the same work activity.

5.     Ceiling Height. Ground floor live/work units shall have a minimum floor to ceiling height of 12 feet, measured from top of floor to bottom of ceiling. A mezzanine space shall not be included in the calculation of minimum height for any floor or level.

E.     Operating Requirements.

1.     Sale or Rental of Portions of Unit. The work portion of a live/work unit may be rented separately from the live portion.

2.     Business License Required. At least one business tenant of a live/work unit shall be required to have a business license with the City, issued subject to Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations).

3.     Non-Resident Employees. The employment of any persons who do not reside in the live/work unit shall comply with all applicable Building Code, Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), and other State and Federal regulations.

4.     Client and Customer Visits. Client and customer visits to live/work units are allowed subject to any applicable conditions of the permit to ensure compatibility with adjacent commercial or industrial uses, or adjacent residentially zoned areas or uses. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.28.190 Mobile Food Vending
A.    Purpose and Applicability. The purpose of this section is to ensure that off-street mobile food vending is conducted in a manner compatible with surrounding and adjacent uses and does not create an adverse impact on adjacent properties by reason of noise, parking, or litter. Mobile food vending is also subject to Chapter 5.24 (Food Handling Business).

B.     Special Events that Include Mobile Food Vending. The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons operating a mobile vendor vehicle as part of a certified farmers’ market, or an authorized street fair or other event occurring under a Temporary Use Permit issued by the City, provided that the vehicle is part of the event and is complying with all terms of the permit or permits issued for the event.

C.     Operational Requirements. Mobile vendor vehicles operating on private property shall comply with the following requirements:

1.     Written Approval of Owner. The written approval of the owner of the location shall be obtained. A copy of this approval shall be provided to the Director prior to operating at the location. The vendor shall maintain proof of the owner’s approval in the vehicle. The person operating the mobile vendor vehicle shall present this proof upon the demand of a peace officer or City employee authorized to enforce this section.

2.     Impervious Surface Parking. The vehicle shall only be stopped, standing, or parked on surfaces paved with concrete, asphalt, or another impervious surface.

3.     Litter Removal. The mobile vendor vehicle and surrounding property shall be maintained in a safe and clean manner at all times. The mobile food vendor shall remove litter caused by its products from any public and private property within a 25-foot radius of the vending vehicle’s location.

4.     No Discharge of Liquid. The mobile food vendor shall not discharge any liquid (e.g., water, grease, oil, etc.) onto or into City streets, storm drains, catch basins, or sewer facilities. All discharges shall be contained and properly disposed of by the mobile food vendor.

5.     Temporary Shade Structures. Temporary shade structures shall be removed whenever the mobile vendor vehicle is not operating.

6.     Noise. The mobile food vendor shall be subject to the noise provisions identified in Title 9 (Public Peace and Welfare). The operation shall at all times be conducted in a manner not detrimental to surrounding properties or residents by reason of lights, noise, activities, parking or other actions. The applicant shall prohibit loitering at the site and shall control noisy patrons on-site and those leaving the premises. No amplified music or loudspeakers shall be allowed.

7.     Hours of Operation. No mobile food vending shall operate before 8:00 a.m. or after 10:00 p.m., including set-up and clean-up.

8.     Business License Required. The mobile food vendor shall have a valid business license issued by the City subject to Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations). As part of its application for a business license, the mobile food vendor shall furnish to the City evidence of insurance, as deemed acceptable in the reasonable discretion of the City, against liability for death or injury to any person as a result of ownership, operation, or use of its vending vehicles.

9.     Health Permit Required. The mobile food vendor shall have a valid permit issued by the Orange County Department of Health. All required County Health permits shall be in the possession of the mobile food vendor at all times during which it operates within the City.

10.   Fire Department Inspection. All mobile food vendors’ vending vehicles shall be inspected and approved by Fire Department prior to issuance of its initial business license and from time to time thereafter in the discretion of the Fire Department. At a minimum, all cooking equipment producing grease laden vapors shall be protected by a UL 300 listed automatic fire extinguishing system. A Class K fire extinguisher shall be provided within each vending vehicle at an accessible location. All fire protection equipment shall be properly maintained and serviced at intervals required by the California Fire Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.28.200 Outdoor Dining
A.    Purpose and Applicability.

1.     The City encourages the use of outdoor dining and seating areas, provided that business operators are mindful of two important considerations: (a) the safety and flow of pedestrian traffic; and (b) the visual appearance of the outdoor dining and/or seating areas. The standards set forth in this section are intended to ensure that outdoor seating is done in a way that is both safe for pedestrians and appropriate for the surroundings.

2.     The provisions in this section shall apply to outdoor dining that occurs on private property incidental to an otherwise allowed use, and where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations).

3.     Outdoor dining may be allowed on private property as an accessory use associated with a legally approved eating and/or drinking establishment upon approval of the required permit.

B.     Change in Allowed Use. The size of an allowed outdoor dining area shall not be increased or the arrangement substantially altered unless the Director has reviewed and approved a new application as required under this section.

C.     Submittal Requirements. In addition to the submittal requirements of the required application, the applicant shall provide the following:

1.     Floor Plan. A diagram showing the layout of the indoor business space, the proposed outdoor dining area with appropriate setbacks indicated.

2.     Furniture and Fixtures. The submittal must identify the style, color and materials of all fixtures that will be placed in the outdoor dining area, including, but not limited to, tables, chairs, umbrellas, planters, and barriers.

3.     Hold Harmless Agreement. For outdoor dining areas immediately adjacent to the public right-of-way, a hold harmless agreement in a form approved by the City Attorney, releasing the City from any liability related to the outdoor dining area.

D.    Development Standards. Permits issued subject to the terms of this section and as required by this title shall conform to all of the following requirements. No permit shall be issued that does not comply with these standards.

1.     The outdoor dining area shall not encroach into any required parking lot area, including areas where vehicles may overhang curbs.

2.     The outdoor dining area shall not be located or utilized in a manner which causes an obstruction of a public walkway or interferes with the flow of pedestrian or other traffic.

3.     The proposed outdoor dining activity shall not interfere with the use of any public walkway by neighboring property owners and tenants.

4.     A minimum setback of 200 feet from residential uses shall be maintained, except as may be otherwise approved for mixed-use projects.

5.     The outdoor dining area shall maintain the minimum setbacks necessary to maintain the visibility of neighboring businesses to pedestrians and motorists, including visibility of signage.

6.     A minimum of four feet of totally unobstructed walkway space shall be maintained around the outdoor dining area, and outdoor dining areas shall not interfere with disabled access.

7.     The outdoor dining area shall be kept in a good state of repair and maintained in a clean, safe, and sanitary condition.

8.     All fencing, dividers, appurtenances, furnishings, and furniture that occur with an allowed use under this section shall be reviewed and approved by the Director to ensure that they are in keeping with the aesthetic and architectural character of the area and with all approved design guidelines.

9.     The outdoor dining area shall not be allowed within 15 feet of any driveway.

10.   The hours of operation for incidental outdoor dining areas shall be limited to the hours of operation for the associated indoor dining, unless otherwise authorized in writing by the Director.

11.   The incidental outdoor dining area shall comply with Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) and Title 24 accessibility requirements.

12.   The Director may place additional conditions upon the issuance of the permit to ensure the protection of the public walkway, the rights of all adjoining property owners, and the health, safety, and welfare of the public.

E.     Alcohol Service.

1.     Barriers are only required if alcohol will be served in the outdoor dining area.

2.     All areas where alcoholic beverages are served outside must comply with the standards established by the State Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control. Any perimeter fence and/or landscaped planter(s) shall be designed to clearly suggest that alcohol is not allowed outside the seating area.

F.     Barrier Design. Barriers, where required or provided, shall comply with the following:

1.     Any barrier must be freestanding, without any permanent or temporary attachments to buildings, sidewalks, or other infrastructure.

2.     The physical design of the fence, barrier, and/or landscaped planter(s) shall be compatible with the design of the building. Seating area barriers (fences, gates, ropes, etc.) shall be visually appealing and help to separate the seating area from the sidewalk.

3.     All barrier material must be maintained in good visual appearance, without visible fading, dents, tears, rust, corrosion, or chipped or peeling paint. A variety of styles and designs are permissible for outdoor dining/seating area barriers, including the following:

a.     Sectional Fencing. Sectional fencing is generally defined as rigid fence segments that can be placed together to create a unified fencing appearance. This type of fencing is portable but cannot be easily shifted by patrons or pedestrians, as can less-rigid forms of enclosures. Sectional fencing must be of metal (aluminum, steel, iron, or similar) or of wood construction and must be of a dark color (either painted or stained).

b.     Rope and Chain Rails. Rope or chain-type barriers are generally defined as enclosures composed of a rope or chain suspended by vertical elements such as stanchions. These types of barriers are permitted if they meet the following guidelines:

i.      The rope or chain must have a minimum diameter of one inch in order to remain detectable by the visually impaired.

ii.     Vertical support posts (stanchions, bollards, etc.) must be constructed of wood or metal (aluminum, steel, iron, or similar).

iii.    A stanchion or other vertical supporting member that has a base must not be a tripping hazard. The stanchion base shall not be domed and shall not be more than one-half inch above the sidewalk surface.

c.     Planters. Planters may be used in addition to or in place of other barrier designs. Planters may be used in situations where no barrier is required to provide added visual interest and create a more attractive and welcoming atmosphere. All planters must have living plants contained within them. Dead plants within the planter must be replaced or the planter removed from public view. Artificial plants, empty planters, or planters with only bare dirt, mulch, straw, woodchips or similar material are not permitted. Seasonal, thematic planter displays are encouraged.

d.     Prohibited Materials. Fabric inserts (natural or synthetic) of any size are not permitted to be used as part of a barrier. The use of chain-link, cyclone fencing, chicken wire, or similar material is prohibited. Materials not specifically manufactured for fencing or pedestrian control are prohibited unless they are expressly allowed elsewhere in these guidelines. Materials such as buckets, food containers, tires, tree stumps, vehicle parts, pallets, etc. are not permitted and shall not be used as components of a barrier.

e.     Barrier Measurements. To ensure their effectiveness as pedestrian control devices and their ability to be detected by persons with vision impairments, barriers must meet the following measurements:

i.      Height. The highest point of a barrier (such as a stanchion) must measure at least 36 inches in height, with the exception of planters.

ii.     Maximum Height of Planters and Plants. Planters may not exceed a height of 36 inches above the level of the sidewalk. Plants may not exceed a height of 96 inches (eight feet) above the level of the sidewalk.

iii.    Rope/Chain Distance from Ground. In the case of a rope or chain enclosure, the bottom most point on a rope or chain must not exceed 27 inches in height.

iv.    Maximum Distance from Ground. All barriers must be detectable to visually impaired pedestrians who employ a cane for guidance. Therefore, the bottom of barriers must be no greater than 27 inches above the sidewalk surface.

v.     Open Appearance. Fences or other perimeter enclosures with a height of between 36 inches and 48 inches must be at least 50 percent open (see-through) to maintain visibility of street level activity. Any enclosure over 48 inches high must be at least 80 percent open

vi.    Minimum Access Width. Any access opening within the barrier must measure no less than 44 inches in width.

vii.   Location. Access openings should be placed in a location that will not create confusion for visually impaired pedestrians. The seating area shall not be placed on landscaped areas.

G.    Furniture and Fixtures. To ensure compatibility with surrounding uses and a high standard of design quality, all physical elements associated with an outdoor dining area shall be compatible with the overall design of the main structure. A wide range of furniture styles, colors and materials are permitted. All furniture and fixtures shall be maintained in good visual appearance, without visible fading, dents, tears, rust, corrosion, or chipped or peeling paint. All furniture and fixtures shall be maintained in a clean condition at all times. All furniture and fixtures shall be durable and of sufficiently sturdy construction as not to blow over with normal winds. Furniture and fixtures shall not be secured to trees, lampposts, street signs, hydrants, or any other public street infrastructure by any means, whether during restaurant operating hours or when the restaurant is closed. To ensure a quality visual appearance, the following standards apply to outdoor dining furniture:

1.     Tables and Chairs. Tables and chairs need to be functional, not only for patrons, but also for pedestrians, given the limited space available in some areas. Outdoor dining furniture shall also contribute to the overall atmosphere and be complementary in both appearance and quality. Tables shall not be white plastic or any fluorescent or other strikingly bright or vivid color. Upholstered chairs are permitted. Upholstery is not permitted to be of any fluorescent or other strikingly bright or vivid color. All chairs used within a particular establishment’s outdoor seating area shall match each other by being of visually similar design, construction. and color.

2.     Umbrellas. Appropriately designed and sized umbrellas are permitted subject to the following conditions:

a.     Umbrellas must be free of advertisements or product names.

b.     All parts of any umbrella (including the fabric and supporting ribs) must be contained entirely within the outdoor seating area.

c.     When extended, the umbrella must measure at least seven feet above the surface of the outdoor dining area in order to provide adequate circulation space below. The seven-foot minimum height includes not only the umbrella frame and panels, but also any decorative borders such as fringes, tassels, or other such ornamentation.

d.     No part of an umbrella may exceed a height of 10 feet above the surface of the outdoor dining area to avoid an undue visual obstruction of other businesses.

e.     Umbrella fabric shall be one solid color and is not permitted to be a fluorescent or other strikingly bright or vivid color.

f.      Market-style umbrellas (those designed specifically for patio or outdoor restaurant use) are preferred for outdoor dining purposes. Umbrella fabric shall be of a material suitable for outdoor use and shall be canvas-type. No plastic fabrics, plastic/vinyl-laminated fabrics, or any type of rigid materials are permitted for use as umbrellas within an outdoor seating area.

g.     Umbrellas must not contain signage for the restaurant or for any other entity in the form of wording, logos, drawings, pictorial or photographic representations, or any other similar identifying characteristics.

3.     Prohibited Furniture. Unless allowed by the conditions of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, all furniture other than tables, chairs, umbrellas and heaters are prohibited. This includes, but is not limited to, serving stations, bar counters, shelves, racks, sofas, televisions, cooking appliances, and torches.

H.    Ground Coverings. The floor of outdoor seating areas shall be uncovered sidewalk material as to provide continuity with the adjacent public sidewalk or private walkway.

I.      Signage. Signage is not permitted within an outside dining area except with a valid city permit. No extra or additional signage is permitted solely as a result of having an outdoor dining area.

J.      Waste Receptacles. Waste receptacles shall be provided in outside seating areas for quick-serve establishments (typically using disposable utensils) and/or when table service is not provided. Waste receptacles shall not otherwise be placed in outside seating areas when table service is provided unless required by the Director.

K.    Entertainment. Outdoor seating areas that include dancing, entertainment, or amplified music require the preparation of a noise analysis with the appropriate mitigation measures. Outdoor entertainment requires a separate application from the City.

L.     Parking Requirements. Parking shall be provided as set forth in Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading).

M.    Compliance with Other Laws.

1.     If any of the standards listed above are found to be inconsistent with the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) or California Building Code (CBC) requirements, the ADA and/or CBC standards shall apply.

2.     To the extent any requirements of the ABC are more stringent than the standards listed above for restaurants serving alcohol, the ABC requirements shall apply.

N.    Temporary Suspension. The use which is allowed under this section may be temporarily suspended, subject to written notice, when, in the opinion of the Director, such use may interfere with the rights, health, welfare, or safety of the neighboring property owners and the others using the area. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 15-12 § 4, 2015)

 

17.28.210 Outdoor Display and Retail Activities
A.    Purpose and Applicability. This section provides development and operational standards for temporary and permanent outdoor display and sales that may be associated with the operation of retail establishments or of commercial centers in which retailers conduct their retail sales activities as defined by Chapter 17.74 (Definitions). Outdoor uses on public property within the public right-of-way shall require an Encroachment Permit.

B.     Standards for Temporary Outdoor Displays and Sales. Temporary outdoor displays and sales may be allowed subject to the requirements and approval of a Temporary Use Permit (Chapter 17.46).

C.     Standards for Permanent Outdoor Displays and Sales. Permanent outdoor displays and sales of merchandise may be allowed subject to the requirements and approval of a Conditional Use Permit and in compliance with the following standards:

1.     Height of Displayed Materials. The outdoor display of merchandise shall not exceed a height of 10 feet above finished grade.

2.     Location of Merchandise. Displayed merchandise shall occupy a fixed, specifically approved and defined location that does not disrupt the normal function of the site or its circulation, and does not encroach upon driveways, landscaped areas, parking spaces, or pedestrian walkways. Displays shall not obstruct traffic sight areas or otherwise create hazards for vehicle or pedestrian traffic. Displays, storage, or placement of items, goods, or merchandise for sale or use in connection with a business shall not be allowed within a court.

3.     Relationship to Primary Use. The outdoor display and sales area shall be directly related to a business occupying a primary structure on the subject lot.

4.     Signs. Additional signs, beyond those normally allowed for the subject use, shall not be allowed as a result of the outdoor display and sales area.

5.     Operating Hours. The hours of operation shall be restricted to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. if within 300 feet of a residential zoning district, or as identified in a permit.

6.     Waste Collection and Disposal. Solid, hazardous, and toxic waste collection, recycling, and/or disposal shall be provided.

7.     Other Conditions. Any other conditions that would ensure that the proposed use will be operated in an orderly and efficient manner shall be required. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.220 Outdoor Storage
A.    Purpose and Applicability. This section provides standards for the establishment of outdoor storage areas where allowed in compliance with Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations).

B.     Development Requirements.

1.     Screening. Outdoor storage areas shall be screened from adjoining properties and public rights-of-way through all of the following:

a.     Use of decorative walls, fences, solid gates, and/or landscaping.

b.     Screening shall be provided to a height of at least one foot above the height of the materials being stored.

2.     Storage Setback Area. Outdoor storage areas shall not encroach into required setback areas. In zones where no setback area is required, the outdoor storage area shall be set back a minimum of 10 feet from adjoining property line(s) unless otherwise allowed by a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.230 Recycling Facilities
A.    Applicability. Recycling facilities may be allowed in the commercial and industrial zones subject to the provisions in this section.

B.     Reverse Vending Machines Requirements.

1.     Reverse vending machines located outside a commercial structure shall be established in conjunction with a commercial use or community service facility that is in compliance with the zoning, building, and fire codes of the City. Reverse vending machines shall only be allowed for beverage container convenience zone collection centers, subject to an Administrative Use Permit.

2.     Reverse vending machines shall be located within 30 feet of the entrance to the commercial structures and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

3.     Reverse vending machines shall not be located within 500 feet of a residential use.

4.     Reverse vending machines shall be constructed and maintained with durable, waterproof, and rustproof material and maintained in a clean, litter-free condition on a daily basis.

5.     Reverse vending machines shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material to be deposited, operating instructions, and the identity and phone number of the operator or responsible person to call if the machine is inoperative.

6.     Reverse vending machines located within a commercial structure do not require discretionary permits.

C.     Small Collection Facilities Requirements.

1.     Small collection facilities shall be established only in conjunction with an existing commercial or community service facility that complies with the planning, building, and fire codes of the City.

2.     Small collection facilities shall be no larger than 500 square feet, not including space that will be periodically needed for removal of materials or exchange of containers.

3.     One parking space shall be required for the attendant.

4.     Occupation of parking spaces by the facility and the attendant may not reduce the available parking spaces below the minimum number required for the primary use.

5.     Additional parking spaces shall not be required for customers of a small collection facility located in an established parking lot.

6.     Small collection facilities shall be set back at least 10 feet from property lines and shall not obstruct pedestrian or vehicular circulation.

7.     Small collection facilities shall accept only glass metals, plastic containers, papers, and reusable items. Used motor oil containers may be accepted with the approval of the local Public Health Official.

8.     Small collection facilities shall use no power-driven processing equipment, except for reverse vending machines.

D.    Container Requirements.

1.     Containers shall be used that are constructed and maintained with durable waterproof and rustproof materials, covered when the site is not attended, secured from unauthorized entry or removal of material, and of a capacity sufficient to accommodate materials collected and collection schedule.

2.     Recyclable material shall be stored in containers or in the mobile unit vehicle, and materials shall not be left outside of containers when the attendant is not present.

3.     The site shall be maintained free of litter and other undesirable materials. Mobile facilities, at which truck or containers are removed at the end of each collection day, shall be swept at the end of each collection day.

4.     Attended facilities located within 100 feet of a property zoned or occupied for residential use shall operate only during the hours between 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.

5.     Containers for the 24-hour donation of materials shall be at least 100 feet from any property zoned or occupied for residential use unless there is acoustical shielding between the containers and the residential use that, in the opinion of the Director, provides adequate shielding for noise impacts.

6.     Containers shall be clearly marked to identify the type of material which may be deposited.

7.     The facility shall be marked clearly to identify the name and telephone number of the facility operator and the hours of operation, and display a notice stating that no material shall be left outside the recycling enclosure or containers. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-05 § 2, 2016; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.240 Schools—Private
In addition to other provisions of this Zoning Code, all of the following requirements shall apply to private academic schools:

A.    Side setbacks: minimum 10 feet.

B.     Fences shall be constructed and maintained as required by the entitlement permit.

C.     Minimum play area: 100 square feet per child. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.250 Senior Citizen Housing
A.    Applicability. Senior citizen housing projects and residential care facilities shall be subject to the standards in this section.

B.     Development Requirements.

1.     Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided for each project in compliance with the standards in Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading).

2.     Compliance with Zone Development Standards. At a minimum, proposed developments shall comply with the applicable zone regulations relative to structure setbacks, lot coverage, landscaping, and other development standards.

3.     Different Abutting Uses. New projects proposed on property abutting lots that are zoned or developed commercially or industrially shall include specific measures approved by the Planning Commission to mitigate potential impacts from adjacent uses.

4.     Sound Attenuation Measures. Sound attenuation measures shall be provided for new senior housing projects that comply with State requirements for residential occupancy.

5.     Dwelling Unit Density. For senior housing developments in a residential zone, the density standards of that zone shall apply. For senior housing developments and residential care facilities in all other zones, where such uses are permitted, no density limit shall apply.

6.     Dwelling Unit Size. Minimum and maximum dwelling unit size shall be governed by the Uniform Building Code and Department of Housing and Urban Development regulations. The Planning Commission may increase these standards upon review of the proposed occupancy and on-site amenities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.260 Single Room Occupancy Units
A.    Purpose. This section identifies development standards for single room occupancy (SRO) units.

B.     Development Standards.

1.     Each room shall have a minimum floor area of 150 square feet and a maximum floor area of 350 square feet.

2.     Dwelling units shall be offered for rent on a monthly basis or longer.

3.     An SRO unit shall accommodate a maximum of two persons.

4.     Each SRO development shall provide a minimum common area of 10 square feet for each unit or 250 square feet, whichever is greater. All common areas shall be within the structure. Dining rooms, meeting rooms, recreational rooms, or other similar areas approved by the Development Services Director may be considered common areas. Shared bathrooms, kitchens, janitorial storage, laundry facilities, common hallways, and other similar types of areas shall not be considered as common areas.

5.     If a full kitchen is not provided in each SRO unit, common kitchen facilities shall be provided in the development. A full kitchen includes a sink, refrigerator, and a stove, range top, and/or oven.

6.     Each SRO unit shall have a private toilet in an enclosed compartment with a door and a sink (not including a kitchen sink, if any). The compartment shall be a minimum of 15 square feet. If private bathing facilities are not provided for each unit, shared shower or bathtub facilities shall be provided in compliance with the most recent edition of the California Building Code for congregate residences. However, in no event shall there be less than one full shower or bathtub for every three units, and shower and bathtub facilities shall be located on each floor. Shared shower and bathtub facilities shall be accessible from a common area or hallway and shall be provided with an interior lockable door.

7.     Each SRO unit shall have a separate closet.

8.     Laundry facilities shall be provided in a separate room at the ratio of one washer and dryer for every 10 units.

9.     A cleaning supply room or utility closet with a wash tub with hot and cold running water shall be provided on each floor.

10.   A resident manager shall be required. A written management plan addressing, at a minimum, staff training, identification process, neighborhood outreach, pet policy, safety, security, client intake, loitering control, referral services, outdoor activities, storage, refuse control, and facility maintenance shall be approved by the Director of Community Development. The management plan may be reviewed as needed by the City with revisions made by the operator.

11.   An SRO development shall not be located within 300 feet of another SRO development. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-04 § 7, 2013)

 

17.28.265 Swimming Pools
A.    Location.

1.     Swimming pools in the R-1, R-2, and R-3 zones shall be constructed on the rear one-half of the parcel or 50 feet from the front property line, whichever is the less, or unless a different location is approved by the Director.

2.     Swimming pools shall not be located closer than five feet from any rear or side parcel line.

3.     On the street side of any corner parcel, where the rear parcel line abuts a side parcel line, the pool shall not be located closer than 10 feet from the side parcel line.

4.     Filter and heating systems for swimming pools, spas, Jacuzzis, and hot tubs shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any dwelling other than the dwelling on which the pool is located.

B.     Parcel Coverage. Swimming pools shall not occupy more than 40 percent of the required rear setback. Coverage by a swimming pool shall not be considered in measuring maximum parcel coverage.

C.     Enclosure Required. Swimming pools, spas, Jacuzzis, and hot tubs shall be completely enclosed by a fence at least five feet in height, and gates shall be self-closing and self-latching. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.28.270 Wireless Communications Facilities
A.    Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this section is to regulate the installation of antennas and other wireless communications facilities consistent with Federal law. The City acknowledges the community benefit associated with the provision of wireless communications service and potential public benefit from leasing of publicly owned properties. It is also recognized that unrestricted installations are contrary to the City’s efforts to promote safety and aesthetic considerations. It is not the intent of this section to unreasonably limit the reception or transmission of signals or to add excessive permit costs. Rather, it is the intent of this section to permit antennas and wireless communications facilities where they can be installed without creating adverse safety and aesthetic impacts on abutting and nearby properties and the overall community.

B.     Definitions. Terms unique to this section are contained in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions).

C.     Applicability. Wireless telecommunication facilities that are erected, located or modified within the City shall comply with the requirements of this chapter unless exempt pursuant to the provisions of subsection D of this section. This chapter shall also apply to facilities for which building permits and an extension have expired.

D.    Exemptions. The following wireless communications facilities are exempt from the requirements of this section and are subject to compliance with other provisions of the Municipal Code:

1.     A wireless communications facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this section if and to the extent that a permit issued by the California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC) or the rules and regulations of the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) specifically provide that the antenna is exempt from local regulation.

2.     Satellite earth station (SES) antennas which are two meters (6.5616 feet) or less in diameter or in diagonal measurement, located in any nonresidential zone. In order to avoid the creation of an attractive public nuisance, mitigate accidental tripping hazards, and maximize stability of the structure, such antennas shall be placed whenever possible on top of buildings and as far away as possible from the edges of rooftops.

3.     Parabolic antennas, direct broadcast satellite (DBS) antennas, and multipoint distribution service (MDS) antennas which are one meter (3.2808 feet) or less in diameter or diagonal measurement and Television Broadcast Service (TVBS) antennas, so long as said antennas are located entirely on private property and are not located within the required front setback area. This locational requirement is necessary to ensure that such antenna installations do not become attractive nuisances and/or result in accidental tripping hazards if located adjacent to a street or other public right-of-way.

4.     Antenna structures designed to receive broadcast satellite service, AM/FM radio signals, UHF/VHF radio signals, or multipoint distribution service (“MDS”) (“wireless cable”) as defined by the Federal Communications Commission.

5.     Amateur radio antenna structures provide a valuable and essential telecommunication service during periods of natural disasters and other emergency conditions and are therefore exempt from permit provisions of this section in compliance with the following standards:

a.     Height Limits. In residential zones, the height limit shall be 45 feet. In nonresidential zones, the height limit is 60 feet. However, amateur radio antennas in any district may extend to a maximum height of 75 feet, provided that the tower is equipped with a lowering device (motorized and/or mechanical) capable of lowering the antenna to the maximum allowed height when not in operation.

b.     Location Parameters. All antenna structures shall be located outside of required front and street side setback areas. Antenna structures shall also be set back a minimum distance of five feet from interior property lines. If any portion of the antenna overhangs any property line, an Administrative Use Permit is required to obtain the authorized signature of all affected property owners on the required application form.

c.     Tower Safety. All ground-mounted antennas shall be located within an enclosed fenced area or have a minimum five-foot-high tower shield at the tower base to prevent climbing. All active elements of antennas shall have a minimum vertical clearance of eight feet.

E.     Co-Location Facilities. Co-location facilities that have been granted a valid permit from the designated review authority are exempt from the requirements of this section if they meet on all of the following requirements:

1.     Such co-locations shall not increase the height of the tower as previously approved, nor shall they include any new equipment beyond the physical enclosure(s) of the prior approval(s);

2.     Improvements to existing wireless facilities that deviate from the prior approval or result in new visual or noise impacts as determined by the Director shall require new permits; and

3.     Development of the facility may be phased without being required to obtain additional Site Development Permit—Minor for each antenna or service located on the structure, provided that the maximum height of the structure(s), the location of the structure(s), and design of the structure(s) are consistent with the approved permit.

F.     Application Requirements. In addition to the application materials required for an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, the following information shall be provided for a wireless communications facility:

1.     A map showing the location of existing facilities within the City limits that are currently used by the operator of the proposed facility, whether or not the facilities are subject to the requirements of this chapter, along with a brief narrative describing each facility.

2.     A written description demonstrating how the facilities will comply with screening and site selection criteria set forth in this section.

G.    Conditions. The designated review authority may impose conditions on wireless communications facility applications to ensure compliance with all provisions and purposes of this section.

H.    Findings for Approval. The review authority may approve or conditionally approve a permit for a wireless communications facility only upon making the following written findings based on substantial evidence in the record.

1.     All of the following findings are required for the approval of an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit for any wireless communications facility:

a.     The establishment or expansion of the facility demonstrates a reasonable attempt by the applicant to minimize stand-alone facilities.

b.     All applicable development standards in this section have been met, or, if the application includes a request for an exception to those standards, then the review authority finds that lack of compliance with the development standards would not create adverse visual, noise, or aesthetic impacts to adjacent property.

2.     Findings for the establishment of a wireless communications facility that is not co-located with other existing or proposed facilities or a new freestanding pole or tower (at least one finding required):

a.     Co-location is not reasonably feasible;

b.     Co-location would have greater adverse effects on views, noise or aesthetics as compared with a stand-alone installation; or

c.     Co-location is not allowed by the property owner.

I.      Findings for Denial. Findings to deny any permit for a wireless communications facility as regulated by the Municipal Code shall be done in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in the written record. Denial shall not be based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions that comply with the Federal Communications Commission emission regulations.

J.      Development Standards, General. Unless otherwise exempt subject to subsection D (Exemptions), the following general development standards shall apply to all wireless communications facilities:

1.     All wireless communications facilities shall comply with all applicable requirements of the current uniform codes as adopted by the City and shall be consistent with the General Plan and Municipal Code, as well as other standards and guidelines adopted by the City.

2.     Facilities shall not bear signs or other advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other seals or signage required by law.

3.     Accessory equipment associated with operation of the facility shall be located within a structure, enclosure, or underground vault that complies with the development standards of the zoning district in which the accessory equipment is located. If the equipment is to be located above ground, it shall include sufficient landscaping that is planted and continuously maintained to screen the structure from view from public rights-of-way and adjacent properties.

K.    Major Facilities—Additional Development Standards. In addition to the general development standards in subsection J, above, major facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1.     Major facilities shall not be located within 200 feet of a property containing a residential structure. For the purposes of this provision, distance shall be measured in straight line without regard to intervening structures from the nearest point of the proposed major facility to the nearest relevant property line.

2.     No major facility shall be located within 500 feet of another existing, legally established major facility unless co-located on the same structure.

3.     Lattice towers shall not be allowed.

4.     The applicant shall use the smallest and least visible antennas possible to accomplish the owner/operator’s coverage objective.

5.     A visual impact analysis is required to demonstrate how the proposed facility will appear from public rights-of-way.

6.     Major facilities shall not exceed the maximum structure height for the zoning district in which it is located. For the purposes of this subsection, height shall be measured from the ground to the tallest part of the facility. The Commission may grant a higher structure height if the Commission can make the following findings:

a.     The Commission has reviewed the alternative options provided by the applicant and staff, including but not limited to additional and/or different locations and designs, and has determined that the proposed location has a lesser impact on the aesthetics and welfare of the surrounding community compare to other alternatives; and

b.     Based on the documented evidence presented, the additional height above the maximum structure height is reasonably necessary for co-location of facilities or for the efficient and technologically necessary operation of the proposed facility.

L.     Minor Facilities—Additional Development Standards. In addition to the general development standards in subsection J, above, and other provisions of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code, all minor facilities shall comply with the following standards:

1.     A minor facility shall not exceed the maximum height for the zoning district in which it is located.

2.     All screening and stealth features shall be well integrated into the design of the buildings and/or sites on which they are located in terms of architecture, materials, colors, building textures, and landscape palette.

M.    Facility Removal.

1.     Abandonment. A wireless communications facility that is inoperative or unused for a period of six continuous months shall be deemed abandoned. Upon reasonable suspicion of abandonment, the City shall provide a preliminary notice of abandonment to the operator of the facility and the owner(s) of the premises upon which the facility is located. The preliminary notice of abandonment may be delivered in person or mailed to the address(es) stated on the facility permit application and shall be deemed given at the time delivered or placed in the mail.

2.     Removal of Abandoned Facility.

a.     Within 30 days after preliminary notice of abandonment is given, the operator of the facility and the owner(s) of the property on which it is located shall either: (i) remove the facility and restore the premises; or (ii) provide the Department with written objection to the City’s preliminary notice of abandonment and submit a request for administrative hearing to reconsider the abandonment. If after this time the facility is not properly removed or the City does not receive an objection to its preliminary notice of abandonment and request for administrative hearing, the Director may make a determination of abandonment and provide notice in the same manner as the preliminary notice of abandonment.

b.     If the City receives a timely written objection to the preliminary notice of abandonment and a request for administrative hearing, the Director shall schedule an administrative hearing to commence within 15 days of receiving the objection. At the time and place scheduled for the administrative hearing, the operator of the facility or the owner(s) of the property on which it is located may present documents and other evidence that the facility was in use during the relevant six month period and that it is presently operational. The Director shall review the evidence, determine whether or not the facility was properly deemed abandoned, and make a determination of abandonment or a finding of continued use and provide notice in the same manner as provided for the preliminary notice of abandonment.

3.     Removal by City. If the facility is not properly removed following 30 days after the determination of abandonment, the facility shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in compliance with Chapter 8.32 of the Los Alamitos Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 19-02 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.28.280 Wireless Communications Facilities—Small
A.    Purpose. The purpose and intent of this chapter is to:

1.     Provide a uniform and comprehensive set of regulations and standards for the permitting, development, siting, installation, design, operation, and maintenance of small wireless facilities in the City, including within the public right-of-way.

2.     Establish clear local guidelines, standards, and time frames for the excise of local authority with respect to the regulation of small wireless facilities in the City, including within the public right-of-way.

3.     Impose clear and reasonable requirements so that applications for small wireless facilities will be processed in a consistent and prompt manner. Particularly, this chapter imposes requirements that are necessary to protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources, and provide for the orderly, managed, and efficient development of small wireless facilities in accordance with state and Federal laws, rules, and regulations.

4.     Provide for the orderly, managed, and efficient development of small wireless facilities in accordance with the state and Federal laws, rules, and regulations and permit and manage reasonable access to the public right-of-way for telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis.

5.     Enable the City to discharge its public trust consistent with rapidly evolving Federal and state regulatory policies, industry competition, and technological development through the encouragement of advanced and competitive telecommunications services on the widest possible equivalent basis to the businesses, institutions, and residents of the City while continuing to fairly and responsibly protect the public health, safety and welfare.

6.     Promote and protect public health and safety, community welfare, visual resources, and the aesthetic quality of the City consistent with the goals, objectives and policies of the General Plan.

7.     Conserve the limited physical capacity of the public rights-of-way held in public trust by the City.

8.     Assure that the City’s current and ongoing costs of granting and regulating private access to and use of the public right-of-way are fully paid by the persons seeking such access and causing such costs and secure fair and reasonable compensation to the City and the residents of the City for permitting private use of the public right-of-way.

9.     This chapter is not intended nor shall it be interpreted or applied to: (a) prohibit or effectively prohibit any personal wireless service provider’s ability to provide personal wireless services; (b) prohibit or effectively prohibit any entity’s ability to provide any interstate or intrastate telecommunications service, subject to any competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory rules or regulation for rights-of-way management; (c) unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services; (d) deny any request for authorization to place, construct or modify personal wireless service facilities on the basis of environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such wireless facilities comply with the FCC’s regulations concerning such emissions; (e) prohibit any collocation or modification that the City may not deny under Federal or State law; or (f) otherwise authorize the City to preempt any applicable Federal or State law.

B.     Applicability. Notwithstanding any provision of this Code to the contrary, this chapter shall govern all applications for small wireless facilities in the City.

C.     Required Approvals.

1.     Small Wireless Facility Permit Required. A small wireless facility permit shall be required to locate or modify any small wireless facility in the City, including, without limitation, within any public right-of-way. No small wireless facility shall be located or modified within the City on any property, including the public right-of-way, without the issuance of a small wireless facility permit as required by this chapter.

2.     Action by Development Services Director.

a.     The Director shall have the authority to approve, approve with conditions, or deny any application for a small wireless facility permit.

b.     Following the receipt of a complete application, and within the mandatory timeframes for processing small wireless facility applications established by the FCC, the Director shall issue a written determination as to the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application. The written determination shall state the findings in support of the Director’s decision.

c.     Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the provisions of Chapter 17.40 (Applications, Processing, and Fees) of this Code shall govern the process and procedures for the preparation, filing, initial processing, and review of applications for a small wireless facility permit.

3.     Permit for Improvements in the Public Right-of-Way. Each applicant for a small wireless facility permit pursuant to this chapter proposed for location in or on any public right-of-way within the City shall also submit an application for a permit for improvement in the public right-of-way pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.08.030 of this Code. The application for such permit shall be processed, reviewed, and approved concurrently with the application for a small wireless facility permit pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

4.     Non-Exclusive Grant. Any administrative approval granted under this chapter shall not confer any exclusive right, privilege, license, or franchise to occupy or use the public right-of-way of the City for delivery of telecommunications services or any other purposes.

5.     Application Content. All applications for a small wireless facility permit required by this chapter and all required submittals must be made in writing by the applicant or the applicant’s authorized agent on such form as the Director may prescribe, which shall include the information specified in this subsection in addition to all other information determined necessary by the Director.

a.     Full name and contact information for the small wireless facility owner, small wireless facility operator, agent (if any), and property owner, and related letter(s) of authorization from the small wireless facility owner and/or property owner.

b.     A full written description of the proposed small wireless facility, including its purpose and specifications.

c.     A detailed site and engineering plan of the proposed small wireless facility containing the exact proposed location of the small wireless facility, and any existing wireless facilities within a 500-foot radius of the proposed location, in accordance with requirements set by the Director.

d.     Photographs of all proposed small wireless facility equipment and an accurate visual impact analysis with photo simulations, including reasonable line-of-sight locations from public streets, nearby vicinity, or other adjacent viewpoints as may be required by the Director and a map that shows the photo location of each view angle.

e.     Building elevations and roof plan (for building- and/or rooftop-mounted facilities) indicating exact location and dimensions of equipment proposed. For freestanding facilities, indicate surrounding grades, structures, and landscaping from all sides.

f.      Proposed landscaping and/or nonvegetative screening (including required safety fencing) plan for all aspects of the small wireless facility.

g.     Written documentation demonstrating a good faith effort to locate the proposed small wireless facility in the least intrusive location and screened to the greatest extent feasible in accordance with the site selection and visual impact criteria of this chapter.

h.     If the application is for a small wireless facility that will be located within the public right-of-way, the applicant shall state the basis for its claimed right to enter the right-of-way, and provide a copy of its certificate of public convenience and necessity (CPCN), if a CPCN has been issued by the California Public Utilities Commission.

i.      A written description identifying the geographic service area for the subject facility.

j.      The applicant shall submit evidence from the equipment manufacturer that the ambient noise emitted from all proposed equipment will not, both individually and cumulatively, exceed the applicable noise limits as found in Chapter 17.24 of this Code.

k.     An application and processing fee in an amount equal to the maximum recommended fee amount as identified and periodically adjusted by the FCC or as established by the City Council by resolution for the estimated cost of the City, including staff time, and all other costs of whatever type or variety, incurred for the processing, review, commenting upon, evaluation, hearing, and consideration of the small wireless facility application.

l.      A siting analysis which identifies a minimum of five other feasible locations within or outside the City which could serve the area intended to be served by the small wireless facility, unless the applicant provides compelling technical reasons for fewer than the minimum. The alternative site analysis should include at least one collocation site, if feasible.

m.    A radio-frequency (RF) exposure compliance report prepared and certified by an RF engineer licensed by the State of California that certifies that the proposed facility, as well as any collocated facilities, will comply with applicable Federal RF exposure standards and exposure limits. The RF report must include the actual frequency and power levels (in watts effective radio power (ERP)) for all existing and proposed antennas at the site and exhibits and show the location and orientation of all transmitting antennas and the boundaries of areas with RF exposures in excess of the uncontrolled/general population limit (as that term is defined by the FCC) and also limit (as that term is defined by the FCC). Each such boundary shall be clearly marked and identified for every transmitting antenna at the project site.

n.     Every applicant applying for authorization to construct, modify, or remove a small wireless facility located on private property must include with its application a written authorization signed by the property owner.

o.     Any other studies or information as determined to be necessary by the Director in order to consider an application for a small wireless telecommunications facility may be required.

D.    Design and Development Standards for Small Wireless Facilities. The following design and development standards set forth in this section apply to all small wireless facilities in the City:

1.     Design and Development.

a.     Each component part of a small wireless facility shall be located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, inconvenience to the public’s use of the right-of-way, or safety hazards to pedestrians and motorists.

b.     A small wireless facility shall not be located within any portion of the public right-of-way interfering with access to fire hydrants, fire stations, fire escapes, water valves, underground vaults, valve housing structures, or any other vital public health and safety facility.

2.     Noise Restrictions and Requirements.

a.     Small wireless facilities shall be operated in a manner to minimize any adverse impacts caused by noise.

b.     Backup generators shall only be operated during periods of power outages, and shall not be tested on weekends or holidays, or between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m.

c.     At no time shall equipment noise from any small wireless facility exceed the applicable noise levels as established under Chapter 17.24 of this Code.

3.     Aesthetics.

a.     The applicant shall use screening and camouflage design techniques in the design and placement of small wireless facilities to ensure such facilities are as visually inconspicuous as possible.

b.     Small wireless facilities shall not bear any signs or advertising devices other than certification, warning, or other signage required by law or permitted by the City.

c.     Small wireless facilities shall not be illuminated unless specifically required by the Federal Aviation Administration, the FCC, or other government agency.

4.     Minimum Spacing.

a.     Facilities shall be sited at least 100 feet away from other facilities to avoid cluttering.

b.     Collocated facilities on the same structure or the replacement of preexisting facilities shall not be required to meet the minimum spacing standard in subsection (D)(1) with respect to one another.

5.     Undergrounding.

a.     To preserve community aesthetics, all small wireless facilities, excluding antennas, aboveground vents and the smallest possible electrical meter boxes, shall be placed within an underground vault, flush to the finished grade, whenever there are no physical or site constraints to make an underground vault infeasible, except as may be determined by the Director.

b.     When above-ground is the only feasible location for a particular type of accessory equipment and when such accessory equipment cannot be pole-mounted, such accessory equipment shall be enclosed within a structure, and shall not exceed a height of five feet and a total footprint of 15 square feet, and shall be screened and camouflaged to the fullest extent possible, including the use of landscaping or alternate screening. Required electrical meter cabinets shall be adequately screened and camouflaged.

c.     Infeasibility under this subsection shall not be demonstrated by mere cost to construct an underground vault or place the equipment within the vault.

d.     Where it can be demonstrated that undergrounding of equipment is infeasible due to conflict with other utilities or conflict with being able to provide personal wireless service, the Director may approve alternative above-grade equipment.

6.     Modification. At the time a small wireless facility is modified, existing equipment shall, to the extent feasible, be replaced with equipment that reduces visual, noise, and other impacts, including, but not limited to, undergrounding the equipment and replacing larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities.

7.     Poles.

a.     Only pole-mounted small wireless facilities shall be permitted in the right-of-way. All poles shall be designed to be the minimum functional height and width required to support the proposed small wireless facility installation and meet FCC requirements.

b.     Notwithstanding the above, no facility shall be located on a pole that is less than 23 feet in height and no facility shall exceed 50 feet in height, including, but not limited to, the pole and any antenna that protrudes above the pole.

c.     If an applicant proposes to replace a pole to accommodate the small wireless facility, the replacement pole shall match the appearance of the original pole to the extent feasible, unless the Director finds that another design accomplishes objectives of this subsection.

8.     Antennas.

a.     The applicant shall use the least visible antennas as possible.

b.     Each antenna associated with any deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, shall be no more than three cubic feet in volume. All other wireless equipment associated with the small wireless facility, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the small wireless facility, shall be no more than 28 cubic feet in volume.

c.     Pole mounted equipment, including antenna equipment, shall be designed to occupy the least amount of space in the right-of-way that is technically feasible.

d.     All antenna mounts shall be designed so as not to preclude possible future collocation by the same or other operators.

e.     The small wireless facility shall be mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height, including their antennas, or mounted on structures no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures, or does not extend existing structures on which it is located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10 percent, whichever is greater.

9.     Operation and Maintenance.

a.     Small wireless facilities shall be maintained in good working order and condition and shall be fully operable at all times.

b.     Small wireless facilities shall be free and clean of general dirt and grease; chipped, faded, peeling, and cracked paint; rust and corrosion; cracks, dents, and discoloration; missing, discolored, or damaged artificial foliage or other camouflage; graffiti, bills, stickers, advertisements, litter and debris; and damaged structural parts.

10.   Security Measures.

a.     Small wireless facilities may incorporate reasonable and appropriate security measures, such as fences, walls, and anti-climbing devices, to prevent unauthorized access, theft, and vandalism.

b.     Security measures must be designed to enhance concealment to the maximum extent feasible.

c.     Security measures shall not include barbed wire, razor ribbon, electrified fences, or any similar security measures.

11.   ADA Compliance. Small wireless facilities shall be built in compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

E.     Conditions of Approval for Small Wireless Facilities. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, approval of small wireless facilities shall be subject to each of the following conditions of approval, as well as any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by the Director:

1.     Before the permittee submits any application for a building permit or other permits required by this Code, the permittee must incorporate the small wireless facility permit granted under this chapter, all conditions associated with the small wireless facility permit and the approved plans and any photo simulations (the “Approved Plans”) into the project plans. The permittee must construct, install, and operate the small wireless facility in strict compliance with the Approved Plans. The permittee shall submit an as built drawing within 90 days after installation of the facility.

2.     Where feasible, as new technology becomes available, the permittee shall:

a.     Place above ground facilities below ground, including, but not limited to, any accessory equipment that has been mounted to a small wireless facility or pole or mounted on the ground; and

b.     Replace larger, more visually intrusive facilities with smaller, less visually intrusive facilities, after receiving all necessary permits and approvals required pursuant to this Code.

3.     The permittee shall submit and maintain current at all times basic contact and site information on a form to be supplied by the Director. The permittee shall notify the Director of any changes to the information submitted within seven days of any change, including change of the name or legal status of the owner or operator. This information shall include, but is not limited to, the following:

a.     Identity, including the name, address, and 24-hour local or toll-free contact phone number of the permittee, the owner, the operator, and the agent or person responsible for the maintenance of the small wireless facility.

b.     The legal status of the owner of the small wireless facility, including official identification numbers and FCC certification.

c.     Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner if different than the permittee.

4.     The permittee shall not place any small wireless facility that will deny access to, or otherwise interfere with, any public utility, easement, or right-of-way located on the site. The permittee shall allow the City reasonable access to, and maintenance of, all utilities and existing public improvements within or adjacent to the site, including, but not limited to, pavement, trees, public utilities, lighting and public signage.

5.     At all times, all required notices and signs shall be posted on the site as required by the FCC and California Public Utilities Commission, and as approved by the City. The location and dimensions of a sign bearing the emergency contact name and telephone number shall be posted pursuant to the approved plans.

6.     At all times, the permittee shall ensure that the small wireless facility complies with the most current regulatory and operational standards including, but not limited to, radio frequency emissions standards adopted by the FCC and antenna height standards adopted by the Federal Aviation Administration.

7.     All conditions of approval shall be binding as to the applicant and all successors in interest to permittee.

F.     Additional Conditions of Approval for Small Wireless Facilities in the Public Right-of-Way. In addition to compliance with the requirements of this chapter, including, without limitation, the terms and conditions set forth in an approved permit for improvement in the public right-of-way, the approval of small wireless facilities in the public right-of-way shall be subject to each of the conditions of approval set forth in this section and any modification of these conditions or additional conditions of approval deemed necessary by the Director:

1.     The small wireless facility shall be subject to such conditions, changes or limitations as are from time to time deemed necessary by the Director for the purpose of: (a) protecting the public health, safety, and welfare; (b) preventing interference with pedestrian and vehicular traffic; and (c) preventing damage to the public right-of-way or any property adjacent to it.

2.     The permittee shall not move, alter, temporarily relocate, change, or interfere with any existing structure, improvement or property without the prior consent of the owner of that structure, improvement or property. No structure, improvement or property owned by the City shall be moved to accommodate a small wireless facility unless the City determines that such movement will not adversely affect the City or any surrounding businesses or residents, and the permittee pays all costs and expenses related to the relocation of the City’s structure, improvement or property. Prior to commencement of any work pursuant to an encroachment permit issued for any facility within the public right-of-way, the permittee shall provide the City with documentation establishing to the City’s satisfaction that the permittee has the legal right to use or interfere with any other structure, improvement or property within the public right-of-way to be affected by applicant’s small wireless facility.

3.     The permittee shall assume full liability for damage or injury caused to any property or person by the small wireless facility. The permittee of any administrative or discretionary land use entitlement permit required under the provisions of this chapter shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City, its officers, agents, employees, and representatives (indemnitees), harmless from and against any and all loss, damage, liability, claim, demand, suit, cost, and expense whatsoever, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, regardless of the merit or outcome of any such claim or suit arising from or in any manner connected with the issuance of any such permits or approvals and/or the installation, construction, maintenance, use, or operation of the work contemplated on private property, City property, or the public right-of-way for said permits, regardless of whether the indemnitees reviewed and approved any plans or inspected any work or improvement, including any encroachment, and regardless of whether such maintenance, repair, replacement, or condition was affected or caused by the indemnitees, except as provided by law

4.     The permittee shall repair, at its sole cost and expense, any damage including, but not limited to subsidence, cracking, erosion, collapse, weakening, or loss of lateral support to City streets, sidewalks, walks, curbs, gutters, trees, parkways, slopes, street lights, traffic signals, improvements of any kind or nature, or utility lines and systems, underground utility line and systems, or sewer systems and sewer lines that result from any activities performed in connection with the installation or maintenance of a wireless telecommunications facility in the public right-of-way. The permittee shall restore such areas, structures and systems to the condition in which they existed prior to the installation or maintenance that necessitated the repairs. In the event the permittee fails to complete such repair within the number of days stated on a written notice by the Director, the Director shall cause such repair to be completed at permittee’s sole cost and expense.

5.     Should any utility company offer electrical service that does not require the use of a meter cabinet, the permittee shall at its sole cost and expense remove the meter cabinet and any related foundation within 30 days of such service being offered and reasonably restore the area to its prior condition.

6.     The permittee shall modify, remove, or relocate its small wireless facility, or portion thereof, without cost or expense to City, if and when made necessary by:

a.     Any public improvement project, including, but not limited to, the construction, maintenance, or operation of any underground or aboveground public infrastructure including but not limited to sewers, storm drains, conduits, gas, water, electric or other utility systems, or pipes owned by City or any other public agency;

b.     Any abandonment of any street, sidewalk, or other public facility;

c.     Any change of grade, alignment or width of any street, sidewalk or other public facility; or

d.     A determination by the Director that the small wireless facility has become incompatible with public health, safety or welfare or the public’s use of the public right-of-way.

7.     Any modification, removal, or relocation of the small wireless facility shall be completed within 90 days of written notification by the Director unless exigencies dictate a shorter period for removal or relocation. Modification or relocation of the small wireless facility shall require submittal, review, and approval of a permit amendment pursuant to this Code. The permittee shall be entitled, on permittee’s election, to either a pro-rata refund of fees paid for the original permit or to a new permit, without additional fee, at a location as close to the original location as the standards set forth in this Code allow. In the event the small wireless facility is not modified, removed, or relocated within said period of time, the City may cause the same to be done at the sole cost and expense of permittee. In the event of exigent circumstances, as determined by the Director, the City may modify, remove, or relocate small wireless facilities without prior notice to permittee provided permittee is notified within a reasonable period thereafter.

G.    Findings. Approval of a small wireless facility permit for a small wireless facility that will be located in the public right-of-way may be granted only if the following findings are made by the Director:

1.     The applicant has provided substantial written evidence supporting the applicant’s claim that it has the right to enter the public right-of-way pursuant to State or Federal law, or the applicant has entered into a franchise or other agreement with the City permitting them to use the public right-of-way.

2.     The applicant has demonstrated that the facility will not interfere with the use of the public right-of-way, existing subterranean infrastructure, or the City’s plans for modification or use of such location and infrastructure.

H.    Abandonment and removal of small wireless facilities.

1.     Abandonment.

a.     A small wireless facility that is inoperative for a period of six continuous months shall be deemed abandoned.

b.     Upon reasonable suspicion of abandonment, the Director shall provide a preliminary notice of abandonment to the operator of the small wireless facility and the owner(s) of the premises upon which the small wireless facility is located.

c.     The preliminary notice of abandonment may be delivered in person, or mailed to the address(es) stated on the small wireless facility permit application, and shall be deemed given at the time delivered or placed in the mail.

2.     Removal by Operator/Owner.

a.     Within 30 days after preliminary notice of abandonment is given, the operator of the small wireless facility and the owner(s) of the property on which it is located shall either: (i) remove the small wireless facility and restore the premises; or (ii) provide the Director with written objection to the preliminary notice of abandonment and submit a request for administrative hearing to reconsider the abandonment. If after this time, the small wireless facility is not properly removed, or the Director does not receive an objection to its preliminary notice of abandonment and request for administrative hearing, the Director may make a determination of abandonment and provide notice in the same manner as the preliminary notice of abandonment.

b.     If the Director receives a timely written objection to the preliminary notice of abandonment and a request for administrative hearing, the Director shall schedule an administrative hearing to commence within 15 days of receiving the objection. At the time and place scheduled for the administrative hearing, the operator of the small wireless facility or the owner(s) of the property on which it is located may present documents and other evidence that the small wireless facility was in use during the relevant six-month period and that it is presently operational. The Director shall review the evidence, determine whether or not the small wireless facility was properly deemed abandoned, and make a determination of abandonment or a finding of continued use and provide notice in the same manner as provided for the preliminary notice of abandonment.

3.     Removal by City. If the small wireless facility is not properly removed following 30 days after the determination of abandonment by the Director, the small wireless facility shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated in compliance with Chapter 8.32 of this Code.

I.      Appeals. Pursuant to Section 17.30.020 and Table 5-1 of this Code, a decision of the Director regarding a small wireless facility permit may be appealed to the Planning Commission, and a decision of the Planning Commission may be appealed to the City Council.

J.      Indemnification. The permittee of any administrative or discretionary land use entitlement permit required under the provisions of this chapter shall indemnify, defend, and hold the City, its officers, agents, employees, and representatives (indemnitees), harmless from and against any and all loss, damage, liability, claim, demand, suit, cost, and expense whatsoever, including reasonable attorneys’ fees, regardless of the merit or outcome of any such claim or suit arising from or in any manner connected with the issuance of any such permits or approvals and/or the installation, construction, maintenance, use, or operation of the work contemplated on private property, City property, or the public right-of-way for said permits, regardless of whether the indemnitees reviewed and approved any plans or inspected any work or improvement, including any encroachment, and regardless of whether such maintenance, repair, replacement, or condition was affected or caused by the indemnitees, except as provided by law. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 19-02 § 4, 2019)

Division 5: LAND USE AND PERMIT PROCEDURES
Chapter 17.30 REVIEW AUTHORITY AND PERMIT PROCESSING PROCEDURES
17.30.010 Purpose
A.    Procedures. This chapter provides procedures and requirements for the preparation, filing, initial processing, and review of applications for the land use entitlements required by this Zoning Code.

B.     Discretionary Land Use Entitlements. Receiving approval of a discretionary land use entitlement identified in this article is considered a privilege, not a right. The applicable review authority shall make the required findings in a positive manner before approving the application.

C.     Failure to Follow Requirements. Failure to follow the procedural requirements shall not invalidate City actions taken, in the absence of a clear showing of intent not to comply with this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.020 Discretionary Permits and Actions—Authority
Table 5-01 (Review Authority) identifies the City official or authority responsible for reviewing and making decisions on each type of application or land use entitlement required by this Zoning Code.

 

Table 5-01: Review Authority

 

Type of Entitlement or Decision

Chapter

Director (1)

Planning Commission

City Council

Legislative Actions

 

 

 

 

Development Agreements

17.62

 

Recommend

Decision

Development Agreement Amendments

17.62

Decision

 

Appeal/Call for Review

General Plan Amendments

17.64

 

Recommend

Decision

Specific Plans and Specific Plan Amendments

17.58

 

Recommend

Decision

Zoning Code Amendments

17.58

 

Recommend

Decision

Zoning Map Amendments

17.58

 

Recommend

Decision

Planning Permits and Approvals and Administrative Actions

 

 

Administrative Use Permits

17.32

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Conditional Use Permits

17.32

 

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Covenants for Easements

17.34

 

Recommend

Decision

Home Occupation Permits

17.36

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Local Landmarks Designation

17.38

 

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Local Landmarks Alteration—Director Review

17.38

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Local Landmarks Alteration—Planning Commission Review

17.38

 

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Minor Modifications

17.40

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Reasonable Accommodation

17.42

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Site Development Permit—Major

17.44

 

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Site Development Permit—Minor

17.44

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Temporary Use Permits

17.46

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Variances

17.48

 

Decision

Appeal/Call for Review

Zoning Consistency Review

17.50

Decision

Appeal

Appeal/Call for Review

Notes:

1      The Director may defer action on entitlement applications and refer the item(s) to the Planning Commission for final decision.

 

(Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.030 Application Filing
A.    Application Contents. Applications for amendments, entitlements, and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Code shall be filed with the Development Services Department in the following manner:

1.     The application shall be made on forms furnished by the Department.

2.     The necessary fees shall be paid in compliance with the City’s fee resolution.

3.     The application shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for the particular application. The requested information may include exhibits, maps, materials, plans, reports, and other information required by the Department that describe clearly and accurately the proposed work, its potential environmental impact, and its effect on the terrain, existing improvements, and the surrounding neighborhood.

4.     Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the City.

B.     Pre-Application Conference.

1.     A prospective applicant is strongly encouraged to request a pre-application conference with the Director or designee before completing and filing a permit application required by this Zoning Code.

2.     The purpose of a pre-application conference is to generally:

a.     Inform the applicant of City requirements as they apply to the proposed project;

b.     Discuss the City’s review process, possible project alternatives, or modifications; and

c.     Identify information and materials the City will require with the application, including any necessary technical studies and information anticipated for the environmental review of the project.

3.     Neither the pre-application review nor the provision of information and/or pertinent policies shall be construed as either a recommendation for approval or denial of the application or project by the City’s representative.

4.     Failure of the City’s representative to identify all required studies or all applicable requirements at the time of pre-application review shall not constitute a waiver of those studies or requirement.

C.     Eligible Applicants. Applications shall be made by the owners of a property or their agents with the written consent of the owner.

D.    Concurrent Application Filing and Processing.

1.     An applicant for a development project that requires the filing of more than one application shall file related applications concurrently, unless waived by the Director, and shall submit appropriate processing fees as set forth by Council resolution.

2.     Permit processing and environmental review shall be concurrent, and the final decision on the project shall be made by the appropriate review authority in compliance with Table 5-01 (Review Authority).

E.     Applicant’s Responsibility. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to establish the evidence in support of the findings required by the applicable sections entitled “Findings and Decision.”

F.     Application Not Eligible for Filing.

1.     If the Director determines that the application is not eligible for filing because it lacks the proper components for the granting of the application (e.g., a request for a zoning map amendment or tentative map that could not be granted in absence of a required General Plan Amendment application, a request for a Conditional Use Permit allowing a use that is not allowable in the subject zoning district, etc.), the applicant shall be so informed.

2.     If the application is subsequently filed and the required fee(s) paid, the fact that the applicant was so informed shall be noted on the application and the signature of the applicant shall constitute verification of being informed.

3.     Acceptance of the application does not constitute an indication of approval by the City.

G.    Filing Date. The filing date of an application for any non-legislative permit or action shall be the date on which:

1.     The Department receives the last submission, map, plan, or other material required as a part of that application by subsection A (Application Contents) of this section; and

2.     The application is deemed complete by the Director in compliance with Section 17.62.060 (Preapplication Review). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.040 Application Fees
A.    Filing Fees Required.

1.     The Council shall, by resolution, establish a schedule of fees for amendments, entitlements, and other matters pertaining to this Zoning Code, referred to as the City’s fee resolution or schedule of fees.

2.     The schedule of fees may be changed or modified only by resolution of the Council.

3.     The City’s processing fees are cumulative (e.g., if an application for a parcel line adjustment also requires a minor modification, both fees shall be charged).

4.     Processing shall not commence on an application until required fees have been paid.

5.     Without the application fee, the application shall not be deemed complete.

6.     As a matter of policy, the Council may waive certain fees for nonprofit organizations.

B.     Refunds and Withdrawals.

1.     Recognizing that filing fees are utilized to cover City costs of public hearings, mailing, posting, transcripts, and staff time involved in processing applications, refunds due to a disapproval are not allowed.

2.     In the case of a withdrawal, the Director may authorize a partial refund based upon the pro-rated costs to date and determination of the status of the application at the time of withdrawal. The Council may establish a refund schedule in the City’s fee resolution. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.050 Burden of Proof and Precedence
A.    Burden of Proof. The burden of proof to establish the evidence in support of the required finding(s) for any permit or approval in compliance with these Zoning Regulations is the responsibility of the applicant.

B.     Precedence.

1.     Each permit or approval shall be evaluated on a case-by-case basis.

2.     The granting of a prior permit or approval, or the denial of a permit, either on the subject property or any other property within the City does not create a precedent and is not justification for the granting or denial of a new permit under current review. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.060 Determination of Application Completeness
Applications filed with the Department shall be initially processed as follows:

A.    Completeness Review. The Director, or designee, shall review applications for completeness and accuracy before they are accepted as being complete and officially filed. This shall include information required for the environmental review of the project in compliance with Section 17.30.070 (Environmental Compliance).

1.     The applicant shall be informed in writing within 30 days of submittal either that the application is complete and has been accepted for processing, or that the application is incomplete and that additional information, specified in the letter, shall be provided.

2.     Where the Director has determined that an application is incomplete and the applicant believes that the application is complete and/or that the information requested by the Director is not required, the applicant may appeal the determination in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). Any such appeal shall stay the timeline for determining the application to be complete.

3.     When an application is incomplete, the time used by the applicant to submit the required additional information shall not be considered part of the time within which the determination of completeness shall occur. The time available to an applicant for submittal of additional information is limited by subsection (A)(4) of this section.

4.     Expiration of Application.

a.     If a pending application is not able to be deemed complete within 180 days after the first filing with the Department, the application shall expire and be deemed withdrawn.

b.     The Director may grant one 180-day extension, provided the applicant requests an extension in writing prior to expiration of the application submittal period.

c.     After the expiration of an application, future City consideration shall require the submittal of a new, complete application and associated filing fees.

B.     Referral of Application. At the discretion of the Director, or where otherwise required by this Zoning Code, State, or Federal law, an application may be referred to a public agency that may be affected by or have an interest in the proposed/requested land use activity. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.070 Environmental Compliance
A.    CEQA Review. After acceptance of a complete application, the project shall be reviewed in compliance with the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) to determine whether:

1.     The proposed project is exempt from the requirements of CEQA;

2.     The proposed project is not a project as defined by CEQA;

3.     A negative declaration or mitigated negative declaration may be issued; or

4.     An environmental impact report (EIR) shall be required.

B.     CEQA Guidelines. These determinations and, where required, the preparation of EIRs, shall be in compliance with the State CEQA Guidelines.

C.     Special Studies Required. One or more special studies, paid for in advance by the applicant, may be required to complete the City’s CEQA compliance review. These studies shall become public documents and neither the applicant nor any consultant who prepared the studies shall assert any rights to prevent or limit the documents’ availability to the public. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.080 Staff Reports and Recommendations
A.    Application Evaluation. The Director shall review applications to determine whether they comply and are consistent with the provisions of this Zoning Code, other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, the General Plan, applicable Specific Plan, and CEQA.

B.     Staff Report Preparation. For those application approvals requiring a public hearing, a staff report shall be prepared describing the conclusions about the proposed land use and development as to its compliance and consistency with the provisions of the Zoning Code, other applicable provisions of the Municipal Code, and the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan.

C.     Report Distribution. Staff reports shall be furnished to applicants at the same time that they are provided to the members of the Commission and/or Council before a hearing on the application. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.30.090 Alterations or Modifications
A.    Any person holding a permit or other approval granted under this title may request a modification or amendment to that permit or approval via an application provided by the Department. For the purpose of this section, the modification of a permit or approval may include modification of the terms of the permit itself, project design, or the waiver or alteration of conditions imposed in the granting of the permit or approval.

B.     If the Director, determines that a proposed project action substantially conforms with the original approval, the Director shall have the authority to approve the alteration or modification. Such approval shall be issued in writing.

C.     If the Director determines that a proposed project action is not in substantial conformance with the original approval, the Director or designee shall notify the property owner of the requirement to submit a permit modification application for consideration and action by the same review authority as the original permit or approval.

D.    A permit or approval modification may be granted only when the review authority makes all findings required for the original approval and the additional finding that there are changed circumstances sufficient to justify the modification of the approval.

E.     Any permit or approval modification is subject to the same hearing and notice requirements as the original permit or approval. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.32 ADMINISTRATIVE USE PERMITS AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS
17.32.010 Purpose and Intent
A.    The City recognizes that certain uses, due to the nature of use, intensity, or size, require special review to determine if the use proposed, or the location of that use, is compatible with surrounding uses, or through the imposition of development and use conditions, can be made compatible with surrounding uses. To ensure compatibility with zoning regulations and surrounding properties, conditional uses require special consideration. The Administrative Use Permit and Conditional Use Permit are provided for this purpose.

B.     The Director is empowered to grant and deny applications for Administrative Use Permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permit.

C.     The Planning Commission is empowered to grant and deny applications for Conditional Use Permits and to impose reasonable conditions upon the granting of such permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.32.020 Applicability
Approval of an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit is required to authorize proposed land uses specified by Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Standards) as being allowable in the applicable zone when subject to the approval of an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.32.030 Application Requirements
A.    Generally. An application for an Administrative Use Permit or a Conditional Use Permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Sections 17.30.030 (Application Filing) through 17.30.080 (Staff Reports and Recommendations). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the most up-to-date Department handout for Administrative Use Permit and Conditional Use Permit applications, together with the required fee. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.32.070 (Required Findings for Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits), below.

B.     For Massage Establishments. In addition to the requirements of subsection A above, an application for a massage establishment shall include a floor plan drawn to scale and showing entrances; exits; windows; interior doors; restrooms; all other separately enclosed rooms with dimensions including, but not limited to, closets, storerooms, break rooms, and changing rooms; and the location of all massage tables and chairs. All massage establishments shall comply with Chapter 5.32 (Massage) of the Municipal Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.32.040 Action by Development Services Director for Administrative Use Permits
A.    The Director shall review the process an application in accordance with the standards set forth in this Division 5 and may impose reasonable conditions of approval.

B.     No public notice and no public hearing shall be required for an Administrative Use Permit. Within 10 working days from the date an application is deemed complete, the Director shall issue a written determination as to the approval, conditional approval, or denial of the application. The written determination shall state the findings for decisions. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.32.050 Review Procedures for Conditional Use Permits
A.    Investigation by Director. Following receipt of a completed application, the Director shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter. A staff report shall be prepared pursuant to Section 17.30.080 (Staff Reports and Recommendations).

B.     Notice and Hearings.

1.     A public hearing before the Planning Commission shall be required for all Conditional Use Permits.

2.     A public hearing shall be scheduled once the Director has determined the application complete.

3.     Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notices). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.32.060 Conditions of Approval
In approving an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit, the review authority may impose any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will comply with this chapter, State law, and with the findings required by Section 17.32.070 (Required Findings for Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.32.070 Required Findings for Administrative Use Permits and Conditional Use Permits
Before an Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit may be granted, review authority shall make the following findings:

A.    The proposed use is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

B.     The proposed use is allowed within the applicable zone and complies with all other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code and the Municipal Code;

C.     The design, location, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed activity will be compatible with the existing and future land uses in the vicinity;

D.    The site is physically suitable in terms of:

1.     Its design, location, shape, size, and operating characteristics of the proposed use to accommodate the use, and all fences, landscaping, loading, parking, spaces, walls, yards, and other features required to adjust the use with the land and uses in the neighborhood;

2.     Streets and highways adequate in width and pavement type to accommodate public and emergency vehicle (e.g., fire and medical) access;

3.     Public protection services (e.g., fire protection, police protection, etc.); and

4.     The provision of utilities (e.g., potable water, schools, solid waste collection and disposal, storm drainage, wastewater collection, treatment, and disposal, etc.).

E.     The measure of site suitability shall be required to ensure that the type, density, and intensity of use being proposed will not adversely affect the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or general welfare, constitute a nuisance, or be materially injurious to the improvements, persons, property, or uses in the vicinity and zone in which the property is located. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.32.080 Permit to Run with the Land
A.    An Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit approved in compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall continue to be valid upon a change of ownership of the business, parcel, service, structure, or use that was the subject of the permit application in the same area, configuration, and manner as it was originally approved in compliance with this chapter.

B.     In addition to securing a business license, any new applicant seeking to operate a previously approved use in substantial compliance with an existing Administrative Use Permit or Conditional Use Permit shall submit a project description (e.g., narrative and/or a site and floor plan) to the Director ensuring that the new operation would be in compliance with the previous use and that the new applicant agrees to operate in full compliance with the previously issued conditions of approval. A fee may be imposed for the review of the project description and conditions of approval in compliance with the City’s fee resolution. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.34 COVENANTS FOR EASEMENTS
17.34.010 Purpose and Applicability
A.    This chapter is established in compliance with Government Code Sections 65870 through 65875 for the purpose of providing a mechanism for the City to create an easement independent of the subdivision process.

B.     This chapter shall apply to development projects approved by the Council, Commission, Director, and voters, and acts independently from other authority or method for the City to require an easement.

C.     The covenant for easement may be for:

1.     Parking;

2.     Ingress, egress, or emergency access;

3.     Light or air access;

4.     Landscaping;

5.     Right-of-way for public road or alley; or

6.     Open space purposes.

D.    At the time of recording the covenant of easement, the real property benefited or burdened by the covenant shall be in common ownership. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.34.020 Procedure
A.    Permits and Approvals Contingent Upon Recordation of Covenant. Whenever the Council, Commission, or Director determines that a covenant of easement is needed for one or more of the purposes identified in Section 17.34.010 (Purpose and Applicability), the approval, permit, or designation shall not become effective unless or until the covenant of easement is recorded.

B.     Preparation of Covenant. Whenever a covenant of easement is required in this chapter, the covenant shall either:

1.     Be in a form and manner approved by the City Attorney based upon the advice of the City Engineer and Director; or

2.     Be prepared by the City Attorney. Whenever the City Attorney prepares a covenant of easement, the City shall be entitled to reimbursement from the applicant for the costs associated with its preparation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.34.030 Content of Covenant
A covenant of easement prepared in compliance with to this chapter shall contain, at a minimum, the following elements:

A.    Identification of the owner or owners of the real property to be burdened, including a statement that both the burdened and benefited parcels are under common ownership;

B.     A consent to the covenant of easement and its recordation by the record owner or owners who are parties to the covenant;

C.     Identification of the real property to be benefited and to be burdened by the covenant including a legal description of the property;

D.    A statement that the covenant shall act as an easement pursuant to Chapter 3 (commencing with Section 801) of Title 2 of Part 2 of Division 2 of the California Civil Code, including an express statement that the easement and covenant of easement shall not merge into any other interest in real property in compliance with Government Code Section 65871, subdivision (b);

E.     A statement that the covenant of easement shall run with the land, be binding upon successors in interest to the burdened real property, inure to successors in interest to the real property benefited, and shall be subject to California Civil Code Section 1104;

F.     Identify the approval, permit, or designation granted which required the covenant;

G.    A statement identifying the Los Alamitos Municipal Code section that identifies the procedure for release of the covenant;

H.    An appropriate section for execution of the covenant of easement by the record owner or owners of the subject real property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.34.040 Release of Covenant
A.    Any person may request that the City make a determination as to whether or not the restriction imposed by the covenant of easement is still necessary to achieve the City’s land use goals. The determination of the need for the covenant of easement shall be made by the body or department that took final action on the original application. A person shall be entitled to only one determination in any 12-month period.

B.     To obtain a determination mentioned above, a request for determination application shall be made and filed with the City Clerk. The application shall include a fee as set by the City’s fee resolution.

C.     Upon receipt of a completed application, the City Clerk shall set the matter for public hearing before the Commission or Council or appropriate department head, as appropriate, and cause notice of it to be given in compliance with Government Code Section 65090, and a copy of the notice shall be mailed to the record property owner or owners as shown on the tax assessor’s latest equalized roll if other than the applicant and to record property owners within 300 feet of the property.

D.    At the conclusion of the public hearing, the Commission, or Council, or Department head, as appropriate, shall determine and make a finding, based upon substantial evidence in the record, whether or not the restriction imposed by the covenant for easement is still necessary to achieve the land use goals of the City. If a determination is made that the covenant for easement is still required, the commission or council, as appropriate, shall by resolution determine that the need still exists.

E.     If a determination is made that the covenant of easement is no longer necessary, the Commission, or Council, or department head, as appropriate, shall by resolution make the determination and finding and direct the City Attorney to prepare a release and transmit the same to the City Clerk for recording.

F.     The department head or Commission action on the continuing need for the covenant of easement is subject to appeal in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals).

G.    The Council’s determination in subsections D and E of this section shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.36 HOME OCCUPATION PERMITS
17.36.010 Purpose and Intent
A.    Purpose. It is the purpose of this chapter to:

1.     Allow for the conduct of home occupations that are deemed incidental to, and compatible with, surrounding residential uses;

2.     Recognize that a residential property owner or resident has a limited right to conduct a small business from a residence and that a neighbor, under normal circumstances, would not be aware of its existence;

3.     Maintain the residential character of residential neighborhoods; and

4.     Prevent the use of home occupations from transforming a residential neighborhood into a commercial area.

B.     Incidental and Secondary Use. The Home Occupation Permit is intended to allow for home occupations that are conducted within a dwelling located in a residential zone or the residential component of a mixed-use zone and are clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes and compatible with surrounding residential uses. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.36.020 Allowed and Prohibited Home Occupations
A.    Where Allowed. Home occupations are allowed in residential and the residential component of mixed-use zones in compliance with Division 2 (Zones, Allowable Uses, and Development Standards).

B.     Allowed Home Occupations. Allowed home occupations include any activity producing income, or intended to produce income, conducted entirely within a residential dwelling by the inhabitants of the dwelling, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the structure for residential purposes, which does not change the character of the dwelling, and only when conducted in compliance with the applicable locational and operational standards identified in Section 17.08.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones). This shall include cottage food operations as set forth in the California Health and Safety Code, Chapter 11.5 (Cottage Food Operations) et seq.

C.     Prohibited Home Occupations. The following uses are not incidental to or compatible with residential activities and are prohibited as home occupations:

1.     Adult businesses;

2.     Alcohol sales;

3.     Ammunition, explosives, or fireworks, sales, use, or manufacturing;

4.     Businesses that entail the commercial breeding, boarding, grooming, harboring, kenneling, raising, and/or training of dogs, cats, or other animals on the premises;

5.     Carpentry (on-site) and cabinet making (does not prohibit a normal wood-working hobby operation);

6.     Fortune telling (psychic);

7.     Lawn mower and/or small engine repair;

8.     Massage establishments (on-site);

9.     Medical and dental offices, clinics, and laboratories;

10.   Mini storage;

11.   Plant nursery;

12.   Storage and/or sales of equipment, materials, and other accessories to the construction and service trades;

13.   Tattoo parlors;

14.   Television, radio, or appliance repair;

15.   Tobacco/hookah lounges/parlors;

16.   Vehicle repair (body or mechanical), upholstery, automobile detailing (e.g., washing, waxing, etc.) and painting. (This does not prohibit “mobile” or resident-conducted minor repair or detailing at the customer’s location);

17.   Vehicle sales whereby any vehicle is stored on the premises for any period of time;

18.   Welding and machining; and

19.   Other similar uses determined by the Director not to be incidental to or compatible with residential activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.36.030 Permit Required
A.    Home Occupation Prohibited Without a Permit. No person shall engage in business or transact and carry on any business, calling, profession, occupation, or trade, on any property zoned for residential purposes without an approved and unrevoked or unsuspended Home Occupation Permit.

B.     No Permit on Site with Violations. No permit shall be issued for a property on which there exists a violation of the law.

C.     Permit Required. The establishment of a home occupation within a residence (single-family, multi-family, mixed use, or accessory dwelling) shall be regulated by a one-time application and fee, in compliance with the fee schedule adopted by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.36.040 Permit Process
A.    Filing. An application for a Home Occupation Permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Section 17.44.030 (Application Processing, Filing, and Review—Generally). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the most up-to-date Department handout for Home Occupation Permit applications, together with the required fee in compliance with the fee schedule. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.40.040 (Required Findings and Decision). Initial review of the application, including time requirements and requests for information, shall be in compliance with Section 17.62.060 (Preapplication Review).

B.     Project Review Procedures. Following receipt of a completed application, the Director shall investigate the facts necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this section.

C.     Public Notice Not Required. A public notice and hearing shall not be required for the Director’s decision on a Home Occupation Permit application.

D.    Director’s Actions. The Director may approve a Home Occupation Permit that would be operated in compliance with Section 17.08.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones), or the Director may defer action and refer the application to the Commission for review and final decision. The Director shall review all Home Occupation Permit applications and shall record the decision in writing with the findings on which the decision is based. The Director (or the Commission on a referral) may approve a Home Occupation Permit application, with or without conditions, only upon first making all of the following findings. Failure to make all of the following findings shall result in denial of the Home Occupation Permit application:

1.     The proposed home occupation will be consistent with the General Plan, any applicable specific plan, and the development and design standards of the subject zone;

2.     The proposed home occupation shall meet all of the requirements of this section and will be located and conducted in full compliance with all of the standards specified in Section 17.08.020 (Allowed Uses and Permit Requirements for Residential Zones) and all conditions imposed on the Home Occupation Permit;

3.     The proposed home occupation will not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare, or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the immediate vicinity; and

4.     The proposed home occupation will not interfere with the use or enjoyment of neighboring existing or future residential developments and will not create traffic or pedestrian hazards.

E.     Conditions of Approval. In approving a Home Occupation Permit application, the Director (or the Commission on a referral) may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, parking, performance guarantees, property maintenance, surfacing, time limits, traffic circulation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval would be in compliance with this section and the findings required above.

F.     Acknowledgement. A Home Occupation Permit shall not be valid until signed by the applicant, with the signature acknowledging the applicant’s full understanding and agreement with all of the conditions, and agreement to waive any right to later challenge any conditions imposed as unfair, unnecessary, or unreasonable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.36.050 Business License Required
Immediately following the effective date of an approved Home Occupation Permit, when no appeal has been filed, the applicant shall obtain a Business License in compliance with Municipal Code Title 5 (Business Licenses and Regulations). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.36.060 Permit Expiration—Nontransferable
Home Occupation Permits shall immediately expire upon discontinuance of the home occupation. Home Occupation Permits are not transferable to a new owner or resident of a premises, nor to another property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.36.070 Inspections
The Director shall have the right at any time during normal City Hall business hours, upon request, to enter and inspect the premises subject to a Home Occupation Permit to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.36.080 Changes in Home Occupation
A change in the type of home occupation activity (e.g., a change from one allowed activity to another allowed activity) conducted by the original resident/permittee shall also require a new Home Occupation Permit and Business License before conducting an allowed home occupation. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.38 LOCAL LANDMARKS
17.38.010 Purpose and Intent
This chapter is established to assist in the identification and preservation of historic and cultural resources within the City. These regulations are necessary to preserve those elements of Los Alamitos’ heritage which may now or in the future be endangered as to their very existence or in maintaining their historic or cultural integrity. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.38.020 Duties of the Planning Commission
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to review and make determinations and/or recommendations on various matters relating to a local landmark, as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.38.030 Register of Local Landmarks
There shall be created a Los Alamitos Register of Local Landmarks that shall contain the name, location, pertinent historic data, and date of entry on the register of structures or natural or manmade features receiving a local landmark designation. The Los Alamitos Register of Local Landmarks shall be maintained in the City Clerk’s office. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.38.040 Procedure for Review of Requests for Local Landmark Designations
A.    Authority. Upon the written consent of the property owner, the Planning Commission may upon its own initiative or upon request of a person or government agency, approve a local landmark designation for a historic or cultural resource in the City.

B.     Public Hearing. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing for any request for a local landmark designation in compliance with Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notices).

C.     Findings and Decision. The Planning Commission, after due consideration and public hearing, shall by resolution approve or disapprove the request for local landmark designation, stating the reasons for the action.

D.    Appeal of Decision. The decision of the Planning Commission shall be final unless appealed to the Council pursuant to Chapter 17.60 (Appeals).

E.     Notice with City Clerk. Upon approval of a local landmark, notice shall be placed with the City Clerk for inclusion in the Register of Local Landmarks and in the building permit address file for consideration before issuance of future requested building permits. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.38.050 Criteria for Designation
In considering a request for a local landmark designation, the Planning Commission, or Council on appeal, shall use the following criteria in determining eligibility:

A.    Character, interest, or value as part of the heritage of the City;

B.     Location as a site of historical event;

C.     Identification with a person or persons or groups who significantly contributed to the culture and development of the City;

D.    Exemplification of a particular architectural style or way of life important to the City;

E.     Identification as the work of a person or persons whose work has influenced the heritage of the City, the State of California, or the United States;

F.     Embodiment of elements of outstanding attention to architectural design, detail, materials, craftsmanship, or the best remaining architectural type in an area;

G.    Relationship to other landmarks, where the preservation of one has a bearing on the preservation of another;

H.    A unique location or singular physical characteristic representing an established and familiar visual feature of a neighborhood; and/or

I.      Integrity as a natural environment that strongly contributes to the well-being of the people of the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.38.060 Alteration of a Local Landmark
A.    Rehabilitation Criteria. Any alteration of a local landmark shall comply with the Secretary of the Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties,” the State Historic Building Code, and other design criteria and standards established by resolution of the Council. The primary concern is with the exterior of the local landmark unless there are interior features that greatly contribute to the significance of the property.

B.     Maintain Historic Nature. Every attempt shall be made to restore or modify the local landmark in a way to maintain the historic nature of the property, but not so as to burden the owner of the local landmark with the requirements that are not practically or economically available in current markets, as determined by the Director.

C.     Alterations. Alterations of a local landmark shall be subject to review and approval in compliance with the following procedures.

1.     Director Review. The following projects shall be reviewed by the Director:

a.     Minor alterations, including the addition, change, or removal of exterior architectural features and existing hardscape;

b.     Minor exterior improvements (e.g., air conditioning units, skylights, solar panels, greenhouse windows, roof mounted equipment, arbors, and fences);

c.     Expansion of a local landmark by less than 10 percent of the existing floor area, provided the expansion is not readily visible from the public street;

d.     The construction or demolition of an accessory structure that has a floor area less than 500 square feet.

2.     Planning Commission Review. The following projects shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission:

a.     A proposed alteration that the Director determines to be inconsistent with the design criteria of the Secretary of Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties” and/or the State Historic Building Code;

b.     A proposed alteration that involves the construction of a new, detached structure that has a floor area of 500 square feet or more;

c.     Expansion of a local landmark by more than 10 percent but less than 50 percent of the existing floor area, provided such expansion does not exceed 500 square feet;

d.     An alteration of a local landmark whereby the alteration is readily visible from the public street.

3.     Site Development Permit—Major Review Required. The following projects shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and shall require Site Plan Review—Major in compliance with Chapter 17.44 (Site Development Permit—Major and Minor). The Planning Commission may approve such projects with conditions that the local landmark be memorialized by providing a written history of the site, photo documentation, placement of a historic marker signifying the importance of the site, or other means as deemed appropriate by the Commission.

a.     On appeal, a proposed alteration that the Director determines to be inconsistent with the design criteria of the Secretary of Interior’s “Standards for Rehabilitation of Historic Properties” and/or the State Historic Building Code;

b.     An alteration that results in a local landmark being enlarged by more than 50 percent of the existing floor area or more than 500 square feet.

c.     The demolition of a local landmark wherein all or part of it will be removed from a site either by relocation or destruction. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.40 MINOR MODIFICATIONS
17.40.010 Purpose and Intent
The Minor Modification process is established authorize the Director to act on certain applications on an administrative basis, without a public hearing, due to the minor nature of a proposed and allowed deviation from specified development standards, as further described in this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.40.020 Applicability
When in the public interest and when it has been determined that there will be no significant adverse impact on surrounding property, the Director may consider and render a decision on slight variations from the provisions of this Zoning Code, limited to the following:

A.    Reduction in Parcel Area or Dimension. Where an existing or proposed parcel is substandard in land area or dimensions, with respect to the regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located, a reduction in parcel area or dimension by not more than five percent may be allowed.

B.     Reduction of Setback Requirements or Separation Distances. Where an existing or proposed parcel is so irregularly shaped as to render strict compliance with setbacks and distances between structure regulations of the zoning district in which the parcel is located difficult to maintain or where a situation imposes an onerous burden on the development of the parcel, a reduction of setback requirements or distance between structures of not more than 10 percent may be allowed.

C.     Fence, Wall, and Hedge Heights. Up to 10 percent of a fence, wall, or hedge height above the stated maximum height may be allowed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.40.030 Application Filing, Processing, and Review
A.    Application. An application for a Minor Modification shall be filed and processed in compliance with Sections 17.40.030 (Application Filing, Processing, and Review). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the most up-to-date Department handout for Minor Modification applications, together with any required fee. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.40.040 (Required Findings and Decision), below.

B.     Review. A completed application shall be reviewed and analyzed by the Director to ensure the application is consistent with the purpose and intent of this chapter and otherwise conforms to the requirements of the General Plan and this title.

C.     Public Notice and Hearing Not Required. A public notice and hearing shall not be required for the Director’s action on a Minor Modification. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.40.040 Required Findings and Decision
A.    Decision. Within 10 days of deeming a Minor Modification application complete, the Director shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.

B.     Required Findings. Before a Minor Modification may be approved, the Director, or the Commission or Council on appeal, shall make the following findings:

1.     There are special circumstances applicable to the property (i.e., substandard size or irregular shape), so that the strict application of this Zoning Code denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning districts.

2.     Granting the Minor Modification would not constitute a grant of special privilege inconsistent with the limitations on other properties classified in the same zoning district.

3.     Granting the minor modification is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; and

4.     The proposed Minor Modification would not be detrimental to the public interest, health, safety, convenience, or welfare of the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.40.050 Post-Decision Procedures
A.    Notice to Commission. Within one day of issuing the decision, the Director shall transmit a copy of the proceedings and findings of the Director to all owners of properties immediately abutting the subject property/properties.

B.     Substantial Compliance. Once approved, the Minor Modification shall not be substantially altered. Substantial changes shall require review and approval by the Director before commencement of construction. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.42 REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION
17.42.010 Purpose
In accordance with Federal and State Fair Housing laws, this chapter establishes regulations to provide reasonable accommodations in the City’s zoning and land use regulations, policies, and practices when needed to provide an individual with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

17.42.020 Review Authority
A.    Director. The Development Services Director shall review all applications for a reasonable accommodation pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.

B.     No Public Hearing Required. No public hearing is required for any reasonable accommodation request unless a decision of the Director is appealed or called for review pursuant to the provisions of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

17.42.030 Application Requirements
A.    Applicant. A request for reasonable accommodation from any zoning provision, rule, practice, or policy may be made by any person with a disability, his or her representative, a developer of housing for individuals with disabilities, or a provider of residential care to individuals with disabilities. A reasonable accommodation may be approved only for the benefit of one or more individuals with a disability.

B.     Application. An application for a reasonable accommodation from a zoning regulation, policy, or practice shall be made on a form provided by the Development Services Department and shall be accompanied by a fee in an amount set by resolution of the Council.

C.     Other Discretionary Permits. If the project for which the request for reasonable accommodation is made requires another discretionary permit, then the applicant shall file the request for reasonable accommodation together with the application for the other discretionary permit. The processing procedures of the discretionary permit shall govern the joint processing of both the reasonable accommodation request and the discretionary permit. Nothing herein prevents an applicant from requesting a reasonable accommodation at a later time.

D.    Required Submittals. In addition to materials required under other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code, an application for a reasonable accommodation shall include the following:

1.     Documentation that the applicant is: (a) an individual with a disability; (b) applying on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability; or (c) a developer or provider of housing for one or more individuals with a disability.

2.     The specific exception or modification to the Zoning Code provision, policy, or practices requested by the applicant.

3.     Documentation that the specific exception or modification requested by the applicant is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy the residence.

4.     Any other information that the Director reasonably concludes is necessary to determine whether the findings required by Section 17.42.040(B) can be made, so long as any request for information regarding the disability of the individuals benefited complies with Fair Housing Law protections and the privacy rights of the individuals affected. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

17.42.040 Decision
A.    Director Action. The Director shall issue a written determination to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation, and the modification or revocation thereof in compliance with subsection B.

B.     Findings. The written decision to approve, conditionally approve, or deny a request for reasonable accommodation shall be based on the following findings, all of which are required for approval. In making these findings, the Director may approve alternative reasonable accommodations which provide an equivalent level of benefit to the applicant.

1.     The requested accommodation is requested by or on behalf of one or more individuals with a disability protected under State or Federal law.

2.     The requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.

3.     The requested accommodation will not impose an undue financial or administrative burden on the City, as “undue financial or administrative burden” is defined in Fair Housing Laws and interpretive case law.

4.     The requested accommodation will not result in a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s Zoning Code, as “fundamental alteration” is defined in Fair Housing Laws and interpretive case law.

5.     The requested accommodation will not fundamentally alter the character of the community, as “fundamental alteration” is defined in Fair Housing Laws and interpretive case law, including creating a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking.

6.     The requested accommodation will not, under the specific facts of the case, result in a direct threat to the health, safety, or general welfare of other individuals or substantial physical damage to the property of others.

C.     The Director may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation is necessary to provide one or more individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling:

1.     Whether the requested accommodation will affirmatively enhance the quality of life of one or more individuals with a disability.

2.     Whether the individual or individuals with a disability will be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing type of their choice absent the accommodation.

3.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation is necessary to make facilities of a similar nature or operation economically viable in light of the particularities of the relevant market and market participants.

4.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the existing supply of facilities of similar nature and operation in the community is sufficient to provide individuals with a disability an equal opportunity to live in a residential setting.

D.    The Director may consider, but is not limited to, the following factors in determining whether the requested accommodation would require a fundamental alteration in the nature of the City’s Zoning Code:

1.     Whether the requested accommodation would fundamentally alter the character of the neighborhood.

2.     Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially alter the character of the community.

3.     Whether the accommodation would result in a substantial increase in traffic or insufficient parking.

4.     Whether granting the requested accommodation would substantially undermine any express purpose of either the general plan or an applicable specific plan.

5.     In the case of a residential care facility, whether the requested accommodation would create an institutionalized environment due to the number of and distance between facilities that are similar in nature or operation.

E.     Rules While Decision Is Pending. While a request for reasonable accommodation is pending, all laws and regulations otherwise applicable to the property that is the subject of the request shall remain in full force and effect.

F.     Effective Date. No reasonable accommodation shall become effective until the decision to grant such accommodation shall have become final by reason of the expiration of the time to make an appeal. In the event an appeal is filed, the reasonable accommodation shall not become effective unless and until a decision is made on such appeal. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

17.42.050 Violation, Discontinuance, and Removal
A.    Violation of Terms/Revocation. Any reasonable accommodation approved in accordance with the terms of this title may be revoked if any of the conditions or terms of such reasonable accommodation are violated, or if any law or ordinance is violated in connection therewith, pursuant to the provisions set forth in Chapter 17.68 (Revocations and City-Initiated Modifications) of this title.

B.     Discontinuance. A reasonable accommodation shall lapse if the exercise of rights granted by it is discontinued for 180 consecutive days.

C.     Removal. All improvements constructed under a reasonable accommodation authorized by this chapter which deviate from the applicable development standards at the time that the improvement is constructed shall be removed upon the vacation of the unit by the person to whom the reasonable accommodation was granted, unless the Director makes one of the findings below. If neither of the findings can be made, nothing herein prevents a person from filing for a Variance in order to keep the improvement.

1.     The accommodation is necessary to give another disabled individual an equal opportunity to enjoy the dwelling. The Director may request the applicant or his or her successor-in-interest to the property to provide documentation that subsequent occupants are persons with disabilities. Failure to provide such documentation within 10 days of the date of a request by the City shall constitute grounds for discontinuance by the City of a previously approved reasonable accommodation.

2.     The removal of the improvement is not readily achievable without making significant structural changes that would impact the safety and soundness of the structure, as determined by the City’s building official, or such costs of removal equal or exceed 25 percent of the market value of the structure, as determined by the City’s Building Official. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

17.42.060 Amendments
A request for changes in conditions of approval of a reasonable accommodation, or a change to plans that would affect a condition of approval, shall be treated as a new application. The Director may waive the requirement for a new application if, as determined by the Director, the changes are minor, do not involve substantial alterations or addition to the plan or the conditions of approval, and are consistent with the intent of the original approval. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 13-05 § 1, 2013)

 

Chapter 17.44 SITE DEVELOPMENT PERMIT—MAJOR AND MINOR
17.44.010 Purpose and Intent
A.    Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide a process for the appropriate review of development projects.

B.     Intent. The intent of this section is to ensure that all approved site and structural development:

1.     Respects the physical and environmental characteristics of the site;

2.     Ensures safe and convenient access and circulation for pedestrians and vehicles;

3.     Exemplifies the best professional high-quality design practices;

4.     Allows for and encourages individual identity for specific uses and structures;

5.     Encourages the maintenance of a distinct neighborhood and/or community identity;

6.     Minimizes or eliminates negative or undesirable visual impacts; and

7.     Provides for the adequate dedication of land for public purposes and the provision of public infrastructure associated with the subject development. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.020 Two Types of Site Development Permits—Major and Minor
A.    Two Levels. Two levels of Site Development Permits are established, and the thresholds set forth below shall apply.

B.     Major. A Major Site Development Permit requires a discretionary Planning Commission review process that includes public notice with a public hearing conducted as is required for all Planning Commission actions. The following projects shall require a Major Site Development Permit:

1.     Any new construction or addition to an existing commercial, mixed-use, industrial, or private institutional structure or group of structures involving greater than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area.

2.     Any structural project involving a tentative parcel map or tentative subdivision map, with the Commission’s review of any multi-family residential subdivision limited to adherence of the project to the objective design criteria established in this title and any applicable design guidelines.

3.     Any project requiring a Conditional Use Permit.

4.     Any multi-family residential development project, including duplex developments, with the Commission’s review limited to adherence of the project to the objective design criteria established in this title and any applicable design guidelines.

C.     Minor. A Minor Site Development Permit consists of a staff-level review with public notice provided but with no public hearing required. A Minor Site Development Permit shall be required for any proposed addition to an existing multi-family residential, commercial, mixed-use, industrial, or private institutional structure or group of related structures whereby the addition is 2,500 square feet or less of gross floor area. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.030 Application Processing, Filing, and Review—Generally
A.    Application. An application for Site Development Permit shall be filed and processed in compliance with Section 17.30.030 (Application Filing). The application shall include the information and materials specified in the most up-to-date Department handout for Site Development Permit applications, together with any required fee. It is the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.44.060 (Required Findings and Decision), below.

B.     Review. The following criteria shall be considered during the review of a Site Development Permit application, including, but not limited to:

1.     Compliance with this title and all other applicable City regulations and policies;

2.     Efficient site layout and design;

3.     Applicable environmental review;

4.     Compatibility with neighboring properties and developments with regard to setbacks, building heights, massing, location of parking facilities, and similar site design and building design features that shape how a property appears within a broader, definable neighborhood or zone context;

5.     Efficiency and safety of public access and parking and loading facilities;

6.     The compatibility in scale and aesthetic treatment of proposed structures with public areas;

7.     The adequacy of proposed driveways, landscaping, parking spaces, onsite and off-site parking, pedestrian improvements;

8.     The placement and use of private open spaces;

9.     The use of design techniques such as façade articulation, use of varied building finishes and materials, varied rooflines, and stepped-back stories to break up building massing;

10.   Privacy considerations with regard to the placement and orientation balconies and windows;

11.   Appropriate open space and use of water-efficient landscaping both to enhance overall site design and to provide privacy screening;

12.   Consistency with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan; and

13.   Consistency with any adopted design guidelines, policies, and standards applicable to the property and in particular, the provisions of Section 17.08.045 (Design Standards). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.040 Application Processing, Filing, and Review—Housing Development Projects
The provisions of Government Code Section 65589.5(j)(2)(A), as it may be amended from time to time, shall apply to the review of applicable housing development projects with regard to consistency and conformance with applicable plans, policies, programs, ordinances, standards, requirements, or similar local land use regulations. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.050 Conditions of Approval
In approving a Site Development Permit application, the responsible review authority may impose any conditions deemed reasonable and necessary to ensure that the approval will comply with this chapter, State law, and with the findings required by Section 17.44.060 (Required Findings and Decision). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.060 Required Findings and Decision
A.    Decision—Minor Site Development Permit. Within 21 days of deeming a Minor Site Development Permit application complete, the Director shall act to approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.

B.     Decision—Major Site Development Permit. Decisions on Major Site Development Permit applications shall be made by the Commission through the public hearing process specified in Section 17.44.020(B) (Two Types of Site Development Permits—Major and Minor).

C.     Required Findings. Before a Site Development Permit application may be approved, the responsible review authority shall make the following findings:

1.     The proposed project is allowed within the subject zone;

2.     The proposed project complies with all of the applicable criteria identified in 17.44.030(B) (Application Processing, Filing, and Review—Generally), above;

3.     The proposed project is in keeping with the character of the neighborhood, in terms of the structure(s) general appearance;

4.     The design of the proposed development will provide a desirable environment for its occupants and visiting public as well as its neighbors through good aesthetic use of materials, texture, and color, and will remain aesthetically appealing and retain an appropriate level of maintenance; and

5.     The proposed development would not be detrimental to the public health, safety, or welfare or materially injurious to the properties or improvements in the vicinity. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.44.070 Issuance of Building Permits and Certificate of Occupancy
No building permits shall be issued unless the site plans have been approved in compliance with this chapter. Certificates of occupancy shall not be issued unless development complies with approved site plans and conditions. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.46 TEMPORARY USE PERMITS
17.46.010 Purpose and Intent
This chapter provides a process for reviewing proposed temporary uses conducted on privately owned property outside of a private structure (e.g., carnivals, car washes, outside displays/sales, etc.) to ensure that:

A.    Basic public convenience, health, interest, safety, or community welfare standards are maintained and protected from adverse impacts;

B.     The integrity of the applicable zone is preserved;

C.     The compatibility between the temporary land use and the surrounding neighborhood is maintained; and

D.    Suitable temporary uses are approved with the minimum necessary conditions or limitations consistent with the temporary nature of the use. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.020 Applicability and Permit Requirements
A.    Minor Short-Term Activities. A Temporary Use Permit allows short-term activities that might not meet the development or use standards of the applicable zone but may otherwise be acceptable because of their temporary nature.

B.     Categories of Uses. The following three categories of temporary uses identify the level of permit required based on the proposed duration, size, and type of use:

1.     Exempt temporary uses are identified in Section 17.46.030 (Exempt Temporary Uses);

2.     Uses requiring Temporary Use Permits for one-day events are identified in Section 17.46.040 (Allowed Temporary Uses). One-day events are defined to be “special events.” The City may establish a distinct application fee for Temporary Use Permits issued for special events.

3.     Uses requiring Temporary Use Permits for multi-day events are identified in Section 17.46.040 (Allowed Temporary Uses).

C.     Temporary Use Permit Required. Allowed temporary land uses shall not be established, operated, or conducted in any manner without the approval and maintenance of a valid Temporary Use Permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.030 Exempt Temporary Uses
The following temporary uses are exempt from the requirement for a Temporary Use Permit.

A.    Construction Yards—On-Site. On-site contractors’ construction yard(s) in conjunction with an approved construction project on the same site, subject to the following operational provisions.

1.     Security personnel may be present at any time.

2.     The construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project or the expiration of the companion building permit authorizing the construction project.

3.     An event conducted entirely inside of a building if no special parking arrangements are required and all activities will adhere to all noise standards in Chapter 17.20 (Noise) and other performance standards specified in Chapter 17.24 (Performance Standards).

B.     Emergency Facilities. Emergency public health and safety needs/land use activities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.040 Allowed Temporary Uses
The following temporary uses may be allowed, subject to the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit by the Director and subject to the following operational standards and any additional standards that may be stated in the applicable Temporary Use Permit. Other temporary uses which, in the opinion of the Director, are similar in nature to those described here, may be permitted.

A.    Car Washes.

1.     Any one permitted car wash activity shall be limited to six totals days within any one 12-month period.

2.     Sponsorship shall be limited to educational, fraternal, religious, or service organizations directly engaged in civic or charitable efforts, or to tax exempt organizations in compliance with 501(c) of the Federal Revenue and Taxation Code.

3.     All permitted car washes shall comply with water quality and runoff control requirements specified by the Development Services Department.

B.     Construction Yards—Off-Site.

1.     Off-site contractor construction yards shall only be permitted in conjunction with an approved construction project.

2.     Security personnel may be present at any time.

3.     The permit shall expire and the construction yard shall be removed immediately upon completion of the construction project or the expiration of the companion building permit authorizing the construction project.

C.     Estate Sales. Estate, garage, or yard sale events on a single residential property or group of residential properties shall be limited to no more than three events within a 12-month period and for no more than three consecutive days for each event.

D.    Filming Activities.

1.     The temporary use of a specified site or group of sites for outdoor activities of filmmaking on private property shall require review by the Fire Department and shall be subject to the issuance of any other required City, County, or State permits or authorizations (such as health permits for food service).

2.     In lieu of the Temporary Use Permit application, the applicant shall complete the Special Filming application form provided by the Development Services Department and shall adhere to the specific requirements set forth in that application and any additional conditions imposed.

E.     Outdoor Events. Amusement rides, arts and crafts exhibits, auctions, carnivals, circuses, concerts, fairs, farmer’s markets, festivals, flea markets, food events, outdoor entertainment/sporting events, rodeos, swap meets, rummage sales, second-hand sales, and the like shall be limited in duration to six consecutive days or fewer, or three two-day weekends, within a 12-month period.

F.     Outdoor Meetings. Outdoor meetings within parking areas shall be limited to seven consecutive days or fewer within a 12-month period. The applicant shall be required to demonstrate that adequate parking will be available for both the outdoor meeting event and the use which the parking area serves.

G.    Parking Lot Sales.

1.     The temporary outdoor display/sales of merchandise in private parking lots shall be allowed only if the merchandise is regularly sold on the premises.

2.     The duration of such sales shall be limited to either one 18-day event or two nine-day events within a 12-month period.

3.     The applicant shall be required to demonstrate that adequate parking will be available for both the outdoor sales event and the use which the parking area serves.

H.    Seasonal Sales Lots.

1.     Seasonal holiday sales activities (e.g., Halloween, Thanksgiving, Christmas, etc.) may include the use of a temporary residence/security trailer.

2.     All such events shall be conducted only on nonresidential properties.

3.     The duration of the event shall be limited to 45 days or fewer within a 12-month period.

I.      Temporary Model Homes.

1.     Temporary model homes and related facilities (e.g., parking lots) may be established within the area of an approved residential subdivision project, solely for the first sale of homes.

2.     The application may be approved for a maximum time period of 12 months; extensions of time of up to 12 additional months may be granted as long as homes are still being constructed.

J.      Temporary Structures. In the commercial and industrial districts, a temporary classroom, office, or similar portable structure, including a manufactured or mobile unit, may be approved for a maximum 12-month period as an accessory use or as the first phase of a development project.

K.    Temporary On-Site Work Trailers.

1.     A trailer, modular structure, or mobile home may be used as a temporary work site for employees of a business:

a.     During construction or remodeling of a permanent commercial or manufacturing structure, when a valid building permit is in force; or

b.     Upon demonstration by the applicant that the temporary work site is a short-term necessity, while a permanent work site is being obtained.

2.     A permit for temporary work trailer(s) may be granted for up to 12 months. The permit may be extended up to a second 12-month period upon demonstration by the applicant that additional time is required due to construction delays. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.050 Application Processing, Filing, and Review
A.    Application Filing. An application for a Temporary Use Permit shall be filed in the following manner:

1.     For events proposed within nonresidential zones, including mixed-use zones: At least 15 days before the date that the proposed use is scheduled to take place.

2.     For events proposed within residential zones: At least 30 days before the date that the proposed use is scheduled to take place.

B.     Review. The Development Services Director shall review the application for compliance with the provisions of this chapter for the specific proposed temporary use. The Director may impose conditions (e.g., buffers, hours of operation, lighting, parking, property maintenance, signs, traffic circulation, removal upon cessation, etc.) deemed reasonable and necessary to:

1.     Ensure compliance with the general purpose of this chapter;

2.     Ensure that the approval would be in compliance with the findings required by Section 17.46.060 (Findings and Decision; Acknowledgement by Applicant); and

3.     Protect the best interests of the surrounding property or neighborhood.

C.     Evidence. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the findings required by Section 17.46.060 (Findings and Decision—Acknowledgement by Applicant). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.060 Findings and Decision—Acknowledgement by Applicant
A.    Findings. A Temporary Use Permit may be approved, modified, conditioned, or denied by the Director. The Director, or the Commission on appeal, may approve, modify, or conditionally approve a Temporary Use Permit application only for a time period no greater than the duration identified in Section 17.46.040 (Allowed Temporary Uses), above, and only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

1.     The temporary use would be located, operated, and maintained in compliance with the applicable provisions of the Municipal Code and this Zoning Code;

2.     The location, operation, or maintenance of the temporary use would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare of persons residing or working in the surrounding neighborhood or business district;

3.     Approved measures for the removal of the use and site restoration have been required to ensure that no changes to the site would limit the range of possible future land uses otherwise allowed by this Zoning Code;

4.     The temporary use would be compatible with adjoining properties and the surrounding neighborhood and would not alter the integrity of the zone in which it is to be located;

5.     The applicant has provided evidence that the applicant’s liability insurance names or will name the City as additional insured; and

6.     The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA).

B.     Acknowledgment.

1.     The applicant shall sign an approved Temporary Use Permit acknowledging receipt, full understanding, and agreement with the conditions.

2.     By signing the written acknowledgment, the applicant acknowledges acceptance of the benefits of the Temporary Use Permit and agrees to waive a right to later challenge a condition(s) imposed as unfair, unnecessary, or unreasonable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.46.070 Post-Activity Requirements
A.    Each site occupied by a temporary use shall be cleaned of debris, litter, temporary structures, or other evidence of the temporary use within three days after the termination of the use, expiration of the Temporary Use Permit, and/or revocation of the Temporary Use Permit, whichever comes first, and shall thereafter be used in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

B.     A bond or other security approved by the Director may be required before initiation of the use to ensure cleanup and restoration after the use is finished.

C.     The Director or designee shall have the responsibility to verify that the cleanup and restoration has been completed in a satisfactory manner. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.48 VARIANCES
17.48.010 Purpose and Intent
A.    Purpose. The Variance procedure is established to allow minor relaxation of certain standards by the Commission which, with the strict application of this Zoning Code, would otherwise prevent a property from being used in the same manner as other, similar property because of special circumstances applicable to the property, including location, shape, size, surroundings, topography, or other conditions, where the intent of these regulations would not be compromised by such minor relaxation.

B.     Applicability. Setbacks, height limits, lot coverage, floor area ratio, and parking space requirements may be relaxed. No Variance to land use regulations or density standards may be granted.

C.     Limitations. A Variance shall not be granted that would have the effect of granting a special privilege not shared by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zone, or which is contrary to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.48.020 Application Filing, Processing, and Review
A.    Filing. An application for a Variance shall be filed and processed in compliance with Sections 17.30.030 (Application Filing). An application shall state the precise nature of the grounds for the Variance sought and shall be accompanied by any required fees.

B.     Investigation by Director. Following receipt of a completed application, the Director shall make an investigation of the facts bearing on the case to provide the information necessary for action consistent with the purpose of this chapter. A staff report shall be prepared pursuant to Section 17.30.080 (Staff Reports and Recommendations).

C.     Notice and Hearings.

1.     A public hearing before the Commission shall be required for all Variances.

2.     A public hearing shall be scheduled once the Director has determined the application complete.

3.     Noticing of the public hearing shall be given in compliance with Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notices). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.48.030 Burden of Proof
It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to provide evidence in support of the findings required in Section 17.48.040 (Required Findings). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.48.040 Required Findings
To approve a Variance, the Commission, or the Council on appeal, must make each of the following findings:

A.    That there are special circumstances applying to the site, such as size, shape, or topography, so that the strict application of this title denies the property owner privileges enjoyed by other property owners in the vicinity and under identical zoning;

B.     That the Variance will not be in conflict with the purpose and intent of this Zoning Code, the General Plan, or any applicable specific plan;

C.     That the Variance will not constitute a grant of special privilege—an entitlement inconsistent with the limitations upon other properties in the vicinity with the same zoning; and

D.    That the Variance will not adversely affect the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working on the site or in the vicinity. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.50 ZONING CONSISTENCY REVIEW
17.50.010 Purpose and Intent
Zoning Consistency Review is a ministerial process used by the Director to verify that a proposed land use activity complies with the list of allowed activities in the applicable zone for the subject site. Zoning Consistency Review is conducted in conjunction with the City’s Business License issuance process. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.50.020 Applicability
Zoning Consistency Review shall be required as part of the City’s review of any Business License for a proposed use of property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.50.030 Review Process
Upon the City’s receipt of a Business License application, the Director or designee shall review the proposed business use to determine whether that us complies with all applicable land use regulations for the zone of the subject parcel. Where the use is found to comply, the Director or designee shall issue, in writing, a determination of compliance. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

Division 6: ZONING CODE ADMINISTRATION, HEARING PROCEDURES, AND LEGISLATIVE ACTIONS
Chapter 17.52 ADMINISTRATIVE RESPONSIBILITIES
17.52.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to describe and establish the authority and responsibilities of the Development Services Director, Planning Commission, and City Council in the administration of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.52.020 Development Services Director
A.    Definition of the Term “Director.” When used in this Zoning Code or any permit or condition approved in compliance with this Zoning Code, the term “Director” shall be as defined in Division 7 (Definitions) and shall include designee(s) of the Director.

B.     Duties and Authority. The Director shall:

1.     Have the responsibility to perform all of the functions designated by State law, including, but not limited to, the following:

a.     Annual report related to implementation of the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65400;

b.     Review of public works projects for conformity to the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65401; and

c.     Review of acquisition of property for conformity to the General Plan in compliance with Government Code Section 65402.

2.     Perform the duties and functions prescribed in this Zoning Code, including the review of administrative development projects, in compliance with Table 5-01: Review Authority, Government Code Section 65901 et seq., and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA);

3.     Defer action on matters where the Director is the Review Authority and refer the matter to the Planning Commission for final determination;

4.     Perform other responsibilities assigned by the Council or City Manager;

5.     Delegate the responsibilities of the Director to Development Services Department staff under the supervision of the Director; and

6.     Serve in an advisory capacity, in compliance with State law (Map Act Section 66415). The Director is charged with the responsibility of making investigations and reports on the design and improvement of proposed divisions of real property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.52.030 Planning Commission
A.    Appointment. The appointment, terms, removal, and the filling of vacancies of the Planning Commission shall be in compliance with Chapter 2.38 (Planning Commission) of the Municipal Code.

B.     Duties and Authority. The Planning Commission shall perform the duties and functions prescribed by State law and this Zoning Code, including the following:

1.     The review of development projects;

2.     The recommendation to the Council for final decisions on Development Agreements, Zoning Code Amendments, General Plan amendments, specific plans, zoning map amendments, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the City’s planning process;

3.     Reviewing and acting upon environmental documents prepared pursuant to the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) for those projects for which the Planning Commission has final authority;

4.     The investigation and preparation of an annual report to the Council regarding the status of the General Plan, and the Housing Element in particular, and progress in its implementation in compliance with State law; and

5.     The above-listed functions shall be performed in compliance with Section 17.30.020 (Discretionary Permits and Actions—Authority), Table 5-01 (Review Authority), and CEQA. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 15-06 § 7, 2015; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.52.040 City Council
The City Council, referred to in this Zoning Code as the Council, in matters related to the City’s planning process shall perform the duties and functions prescribed in the Municipal Code and this Zoning Code, which include the following:

A.    Review Authority on Specific Planning Matters. Final decisions on Development Agreements, Zoning Code amendments, General Plan amendments, specific plans, zoning map amendments, environmental documents prepared pursuant CEQA for those projects for which the Council has final authority, and other applicable policy or ordinance matters related to the City’s planning process;

B.     Appeals. The review of appeals filed from Planning Commission decisions; and

C.     Compliance. The above-listed functions shall be performed in compliance with Section 17.30.020 (Discretionary Permits and Actions—Authority), Table 5-01 (Review Authority), and the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.54 PERMIT IMPLEMENTATION, TIME LIMITS, AND EXTENSIONS
17.54.010 Purpose
This chapter establishes the requirements for implementing, or “exercising,” the permits or entitlements identified in this Zoning Code, including time limits and procedures for granting extensions of time. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.020 Conformance with Approved Plans
A.    Compliance. Work performed under a building permit, for which project drawings and plans have received approval by the Director, Planning Commission, or Council, shall be in substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, statements (written or oral) made in support of the application, and conditions of approval imposed by the Review Authority.

B.     Changes. Changes to an approved project shall be submitted and processed in compliance with Section 17.30.090 (Alterations and Modifications). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.030 Effective Date of Permits
A.    Permits and Variances.

1.     An Administrative Use Permit, Conditional Use Permit, Site Development Permit, Variance, or designation of a Local Landmark shall become effective on the tenth day following the date the decision is rendered by the applicable review authority and upon recordation by the Orange County Recorder, unless appealed.

2.     A Home Occupation Permit and Temporary Use Permit shall become effective immediately upon written approval by the Director or designee.

B.     General Plan Amendments. An amendment to the General Plan shall become effective immediately upon the signing of the Council resolution approving the amendment.

C.     Plans and Code Amendments. Council actions to adopt or amend a Development Agreement, Specific Plan, the zoning map, or this Zoning Code shall become effective on the 30th day following the second reading by the Council.

D.    Effective Date. Certificates of occupancy, building permits, and other permits shall not be issued until the effective date, provided that no appeal of the Review Authority’s decision has been filed in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). In the event of an appeal, permits shall not be issued until after the Planning Commission’s or Council’s final determination. Permits shall not have force or effect until the applicant actually receives the permit, signed by the Director designating the conditions of its issue, and executes a written consent on a form prescribed by the Department to the conditions imposed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.040 Performance Guarantees
A permit applicant may be required by conditions of approval, or by action of the Director, to provide adequate security to guarantee the faithful performance of conditions of approval imposed by the Review Authority. The Director, in consultation with the Building Official, shall be responsible for setting the amount of the required security. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.050 Time Limits and Extensions
A.    Time Limits.

1.     When Permits Expire. To ensure continued compliance with the provisions of this title, each approved permit or entitlement shall expire 24 months from the date of approval—unless otherwise specified in the permit or entitlement or unless an extension has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter—if the use or entitlement has not been exercised.

2.     Approval Voided. If a permit or entitlement has not been exercised within the established time frame and a time extension is not granted pursuant to the provisions of subsection C (Extensions of Time) and subsection D (Action on Expiration/Extension), the permit or entitlement shall be deemed void.

B.     Permit Implementation—Exercising the Permit or Entitlement.

1.     “Exercised” Defined. An approved permit or entitlement shall be exercised before its expiration. The permit or entitlement shall not be deemed exercised until the applicant has completed one of the following:

a.     Obtained a building permit and a grading permit (if a grading permit is required) and has initiated grading where a grading permit is required or initiated construction where no grading permit is required. The Director shall have the authority to determine whether grading or construction has been initiated;

b.     Obtained a permit authorizing occupancy of the improvements to the site or structure(s), or has occupied the site or structure(s) where no building permit or certificate of occupancy is required by the City; or

c.     Actually implemented the allowed land use, in its entirety, on the subject property in compliance with the conditions of approval.

2.     Project Phasing.

a.     Two or More Phases. Where the permit or entitlement provides for development in two or more phases or units in sequence, the permit or entitlement shall not be approved until the Director has approved a phasing plan for the entire project site. The applicant shall not be allowed to develop a portion of the proposed development under the original approval, and then develop the remaining portion(s) in compliance with this section, without first obtaining Director approval.

b.     Commencement for Each Phase. If a project is to be built in preapproved phases, each subsequent phase shall have 18 months from the previous phase’s date of construction commencement to the next phase’s date of construction commencement to have occurred, unless otherwise specified in the permit or entitlement, or the permit or entitlement shall expire and be deemed void, unless an extension has been granted pursuant to the provisions of this section.

c.     Tentative Map. If the application for the permit or entitlement also involves the approval of a tentative map, the phasing shall be consistent with the tentative map, and the permit or entitlement shall be exercised before the expiration of the companion tentative map.

C.     Extensions of Time.

1.     Application. On the applicant’s own motion and on the timely filing of a request for extension by the applicant at least 30 days before the expiration date, the applicable review authority may extend the time to establish the approved permit or entitlement.

2.     Substantial Evidence.

a.     The applicant shall file a written request for an extension of time with the Department, together with the filing fee established by the City’s fee resolution.

b.     The review authority that approved the original permit or entitlement shall consider the application for the extension of time. Such review authority shall determine whether the applicant has made a good faith effort to establish the permit. Criteria the review authority shall use to determine whether a good faith effort has been made include, but are not limited to:

i.      Granting of Building Permits and where applicable, Grading Permits;

ii.     Initiation of grading;

iii.    Initiation of construction;

iv.    Issuance of a Business License where no grading or building permits are required;

v.     Execution of a lease.

c.     The burden of proof shall be on the applicant to establish, with substantial evidence beyond the control of the applicant (e.g., demonstration of financial hardship, legal problems with the closure of the sale of the parcel, poor weather conditions in which to complete construction activities, etc.), why the permit should be extended.

D.    Maximum Extension. An applicant may request up to three separate 12-month extensions. The maximum period of time that a permit or entitlement may be extended shall not exceed 36 months beyond the expiration of the original approval. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.060 Changes to an Approved Project
A.    Applicability.

1.     A development or land use allowed through a Conditional Use Permit, Home Occupation Permit, Site Development Permit, Temporary Use Permit, or Variance shall be in substantial compliance with the approved drawings and plans, statements (written or oral) made in support of the application, and conditions of approval imposed by the Review Authority, except where changes to the project are approved in compliance with this section.

2.     An applicant shall request desired changes in writing, shall furnish appropriate supporting materials, including an explanation of the reasons for the request; and shall pay the appropriate fee required by the City’s fee resolution.

3.     Requested changes may involve changes to one or more conditions imposed by the review authority or actual changes to the entitlement (e.g., hours of operation, expansion of use, etc.) as originally proposed by the applicant or approved by the Review Authority.

4.     Changes shall be approved before implementation of the changes and may be requested either before or after construction or establishment and operation of the approved use.

B.     Public Hearing—When Required. If the matter originally required a noticed public hearing, the review authority shall hold a public hearing on the requested change(s) and give notice in compliance with Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notice).

C.     Minor Changes. The Director may authorize minor changes to an approved site plan, architecture, or the nature of the approved use if the changes:

1.     Are consistent with applicable provisions of this Zoning Code and the spirit and intent of the original approval;

2.     Do not involve a feature of the project that was:

a.     A basis for findings in a negative declaration or environmental impact report for the project,

b.     A basis for conditions of approval for the project, or

c.     A specific consideration by the review authority (e.g., the Director, Planning Commission, or Council) in the approval of the entitlement;

3.     Do not result in an expansion of the use.

D.    Major Changes. Major modifications are changes to the project that do not meet the definition of minor changes in subsection C, above, of this section. Major changes shall only be approved by the review authority through a new entitlement application or modification and payment of applicable fees and shall be processed in compliance with this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.54.070 Resubmittals
A.    Resubmittals Prohibited within Six Months. For a period of six months following the approval, disapproval, or revocation/modification of a discretionary land use permit or entitlement, no application for the same or substantially similar discretionary permit or entitlement for the same site shall be filed. For the purposes of this section, substantially similar shall mean a use with similar operating characteristic and/or a building or site development involving similar lot coverage, orientation to the streets and surroundings, or layout of proposed structures and other improvements.

B.     Director’s Determination. The Director shall determine whether the new application is for a discretionary permit or entitlement that is the same or substantially similar to the previously approved or disapproved permit or entitlement. The determination of the Director may be appealed to the Planning Commission in compliance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals).

C.     Council Waiver. The Council may waive the prohibition identified in subsection A of this section upon finding that by reason of changed legal, physical, or sociological circumstances, reconsideration would be in the best interests of the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.56 PUBLIC HEARINGS AND NOTICE
17.56.010 Purpose
This chapter provides procedures for public hearings required by this Zoning Code. When a public hearing is required, advance notice of the hearing shall be given, and the hearing shall be conducted in compliance with this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.56.020 Notice of Hearing
A.    Generally. When this Zoning Code requires a public hearing before a decision on a permit or other discretionary entitlement, the public shall be provided notice of the hearing in compliance with Government Code Sections 65090, 65091, 65094, 65096, and 66451.3; Public Resources Code 21000 et seq.; and as required by this chapter.

B.     Content of Notice. Notice of a public hearing shall include all of the following information, as applicable.

1.     Hearing Information. The date, time, and place of the hearing and the name of the review authority; a brief description of the City’s general procedure concerning the conduct of hearings and decisions (e.g., the public’s right to appear and be heard); and the phone number, street address, and email or website address of the City Development Services Department where an interested person could call or visit to obtain additional information.

2.     Project Information. The name of the applicant; the City’s file number assigned to the application; a general explanation of the matter to be considered; and a general description, in text or by diagram, of the location of the property that is the subject of the hearing.

3.     Statement on Environmental Document. If a proposed Negative Declaration, Mitigated Negative Declaration, final Environmental Impact Report, or statement of exemption from the requirements of California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) has been prepared for the project in compliance CEQA, the hearing notice shall include a statement that the Review Authority will also consider approval (or recommendation of adoption/approval for an application requiring Council action) of the proposed Negative Declaration, Mitigated Negative Declaration, certification of the final Environmental Impact Report, or statement of exemption.

4.     Statement Regarding Challenges of City Actions. A notice substantially stating all of the following: “If you challenge the (nature of the proposed action) in court, you may be limited to raising only those issues you or someone else raised at the public hearing described in this notice, or in written correspondence delivered to the (public entity conducting the hearing) at, or before, the public hearing” in compliance with Government Code Section 65009(b)(2).

5.     Statement Regarding Commission’s Recommendations. For Council items that involve a recommendation from the Planning Commission, the notice shall contain the Planning Commission’s recommendations.

C.     Method of Notice Distribution. Notice of a public hearing required by this chapter, and any other type of notice specified in Division 6 (Permit Processing Procedures), shall be given as follows, as required by Government Code Sections 65090 and 65091.

1.     Mailing. Notice shall be mailed or delivered not less than 10 calendar days before the scheduled hearing to the following:

a.     Project Site Owners, Agent(s), and Applicant. The owners of the property being considered in the application, the owners’ agent(s), and the applicant.

b.     Local Agencies. Each local agency expected to provide roads, schools, sewage, streets, water, or other essential facilities or services to the property which is the subject of the application, whose ability to provide those facilities and services may be significantly affected;

c.     Affected Owners. All owners of real property as shown on the latest assessment rolls of the City or of the County, located within a radius of 500 feet of the exterior boundaries of the parcel that is the subject of the hearing; and any other person whose property might, in the judgment of the Director, be affected by the proposed project; the 500-foot radius shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the subject parcel to the exterior boundaries of the neighboring parcels, without reference to structures existing on any of the parcels;

d.     Commercial and Industrial Tenants. All occupants of commercial and industrial space within 500 feet of the real property that is the subject of the notice; the 500-foot radius shall be measured from the exterior boundaries of the subject parcel to the exterior boundaries of the neighboring parcels, without reference to structures existing on any of the parcels; and

e.     Persons Requesting Notice. Any person who has filed a written request for notice with the Director or City Clerk.

2.     Alternative to Mailing. If the number of property owners and occupants of commercial and industrial space to whom notice would be mailed in compliance with subsection (C)(1), above is more than 1,000, the Director may choose to provide the alternative notice allowed by Government Code Section 65091(a)(3).

3.     Additional Notice. In addition to the types of notice required above, the Director may require any additional notice with content or using a distribution method (e.g., posting on the City’s website) as the Director determines is necessary or desirable, including posting a notice on the property.

4.     Newspaper Notice. Notices of public hearings shall also be given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least 10 calendar days prior to the hearing.

D.    Affidavit of Method of Notice. Upon completion of publication or other notice required by this section, the secretary of the Planning Commission, if the hearing is held by the Commission, or the City Clerk, if the hearing is held by the Council, shall provide proof of the mailing or publication that shall be filed in the permanent records of the particular proceedings to which the notices pertain.

E.     Failure to Receive Notice. Failure to receive the mailed notice or failure to post notice shall not invalidate any proceedings. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.56.030 Scheduling of Hearing
After the completion of any environmental document required by CEQA, a matter requiring a public hearing shall be scheduled on the next available agenda (Planning Commission or Council, as applicable) reserved for public hearings, but no sooner than any minimum time period established by State law. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.56.040 Hearing Procedure
A.    Time and Place of Hearing. A hearing shall be held at the date, time, and place for which notice was given.

B.     Continued Hearing. Any hearing may be continued from time to time without further notice, provided that the chair of the hearing body announces the date, time, and place to which the hearing will be continued before the adjournment or recess of the hearing.

C.     Deferral of Final Decision.

1.     The review authority may announce a tentative decision and defer its action on a final decision until appropriate findings and/or conditions of approval have been prepared.

2.     The date of the final action shall be as described in the motion, ordinance, or resolution that incorporates the findings and/or conditions.

D.    Summary Information. A summary of all pertinent testimony offered at a public hearing, together with the information of all persons testifying, shall be recorded and made a part of the permanent files of the case.

E.     Formal Rules of Evidence or Procedure Not Applicable. Formal rules of evidence or procedure applicable in judicial actions and proceedings shall not apply in any proceeding subject to these Zoning Regulations, except as otherwise required by the City Charter or the Municipal Code, in compliance with Government Code Section 65010. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.58 AMENDMENTS
17.58.010 Purpose
A.    This chapter provides processing procedures for amendments to:

1.     Zoning Map. Zoning map amendment that has the effect of rezoning property from one zone to another;

2.     Zoning Code. Zoning Code amendment that may modify procedures, requirements, or standards applicable to the development, and/or use of property within the City; and

3.     Specific Plans. Specific plan amendment that may modify procedures, requirements, or standards applicable to the development and/or use of property within the boundaries of the specific plan area.

B.     Approval of Amendments. The amendments may be approved by the Council whenever required by public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare of the City. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.58.020 Authority to Initiate an Amendment
An amendment may be initiated by:

A.    City Council. Notification to the Development Services Director via a minute action of the Council;

B.     Planning Commission. Notification to the Development Services Director via a minute action of the Planning Commission;

C.     Development Services Director. Notification to the Council; or

D.    Property Owners. Filing with the Director an application from one or more record owners of land that is the subject of the proposed amendment, or their authorized agents. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.58.030 Application and Hearing Notice
A.    Application. For those amendments requested by owners of land or their authorized agents, the application shall be filed in compliance with Section 17.30.030 (Application Filing) and shall be accompanied by the information identified in the Department handout for amendment applications and by a fee established by the City’s fee resolution.

B.     Notice and Hearing.

1.     Date of Hearing. Upon receipt of a complete application to amend the zoning map or this Zoning Code, or on initiation by the Director, Planning Commission, or Council, and following Director review, public hearings shall be set before the Planning Commission.

2.     Notice. Notice of the hearing shall be given in compliance with Section 17.56.020 (Notice of Hearing) of this chapter. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.58.040 Planning Commission Proceedings
A.    Planning Commission Action. After the close of the public hearing, the Planning Commission shall forward a written recommendation to the Council whether to approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the proposed amendment based on the findings contained in Section 17.58.060 (Findings and Decision). The recommendations of the Planning Commission on proposed amendments shall be adopted by a majority of the total voting members of the Planning Commission.

B.     Planning Commission Report. The Planning Commission report of the hearing shall include a list of persons who testified at the hearing, a summary of the facts adduced at the hearing, the findings of the Planning Commission, and copies of maps or other data and documentary evidence submitted in connection with the proposed amendment. The recommendation shall include the findings of the Planning Commission constituting the basis for the recommendation.

C.     Notice of Planning Commission’s Action. The secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit the recommendation (together with the staff report) to the Council.

D.    Applicant’s Copy. The applicant’s copy of the recommendation shall be mailed to the address shown upon the application or provided to the applicant via electronic delivery. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.58.050 Council Proceedings
A.    Hearing. Following the receipt of either of the following, the City Clerk shall schedule a hearing in compliance with State law and this Zoning Code, and the Council shall conduct at least one public hearing on the amendment:

1.     Approval. A written recommendation from the Planning Commission recommending the approval of the amendment; or

2.     Disapproval. A written recommendation from the Planning Commission recommending disapproval of the amendment.

B.     Effect of Commission’s Recommendation to Disapprove Amendment. If the matter under consideration is an amendment to the Zoning Code to change property from one zone to another and the Planning Commission has recommended against the adoption of the amendment, the Council shall not be required to take further action on it unless otherwise provided by ordinance or unless an interested party requests a hearing before the Council by filing a written request with the City Clerk within 10 days after the Planning Commission files its recommendations with the Council.

C.     Council’s Action. The Council shall approve, approve in modified form, or disapprove the recommendation of the Planning Commission.

D.    Referral to Planning Commission. If the Council proposes to adopt a substantial modification to the amendment not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearings, the proposed modification shall be first referred back to the Planning Commission for its recommendation, in compliance with State law, but the Planning Commission shall not be required to hold a public hearing on the referral. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within 40 days after the reference, or a longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the proposed modification. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.58.060 Findings and Decision
A.    Findings Required. An amendment to the zoning map or this Zoning Code may be approved only if the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner, as applicable to the type of amendment. It is the responsibility of the applicant to establish evidence in support of the required findings.

B.     Mandatory Findings Required for All Amendments.

1.     The proposed amendment ensures and maintains internal consistency with the actions, goals, objectives, and policies of the General Plan, and would not create any inconsistencies with this Zoning Code, in the case of a Zoning Code amendment;

2.     The proposed amendment would not be detrimental to the public convenience, health, interest, safety, or welfare of the City; and

3.     The proposed project has been reviewed in compliance with the provisions of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) and the City’s environmental review procedures.

C.     Additional Finding for Zoning Map Amendments. The site(s) is/are physically suitable (including access, provision of utilities, compatibility with adjoining land uses, and absence of physical constraints) for the requested zone and anticipated land use development(s).

D.    Additional Finding for Zoning Code Amendments. The proposed amendment is internally consistent with other applicable provisions of this Zoning Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.60 APPEALS
17.60.010 Standing to Appeal
Any person may appeal a decision of any official body, except that administrative decisions requiring no discretionary judgment may not be appealed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 1, 2012; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.60.020 Time to File Appeal
Appeals must be filed within 10 business days of the rendering of a decision which is being appealed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 1, 2012; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.60.030 Content of Appeal Filing
The appeal shall concern a specific action and shall state the grounds for appeal. Applicable fees for the appeal shall be paid as established by Council resolution. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 1, 2012; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.60.040 Course of Appeals
A.    Decisions of the Director shall be appealed to the Planning Commission. Such appeals shall be filed with the Director.

B.     Decisions of the Planning Commission shall be appealed to the Council. Such appeals shall be filed with the City Clerk.

C.     The Director or City Clerk, as applicable, shall have the authority to combine multiple appeal filings for a single public hearing. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 1, 2012; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.60.050 Hearings and Notice
A.    Within 30 days after the receipt of a notice of appeal and fee, or after the Planning Commission or Council has voted for a call for review, the appeal shall be transmitted to either:

1.     Appeals to the Planning Commission. The Director, who shall place the item on the commission agenda for a public hearing; or

2.     Appeals to the Council. The City Clerk, who shall place the item on the Council agenda for a public hearing.

B.     Action on appeals shall be “de novo” review and shall be considered at the same type of hearing and after the same notice that is required for the original decision.

C.     In the event new or different evidence is presented on appeal, the Council may, but shall not be required to return the matter to the Planning Commission for further consideration. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 12-05 § 1, 2012)

 

Chapter 17.62 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENTS
17.62.010 Purpose and Scope
Development Agreements specify the rights and responsibilities of the City and developers. Used in conjunction with subdivision approval, annexation, rezoning, or architectural approval, Development Agreements establish the terms and conditions under which development projects may proceed. Development Agreements are best used for large, complex, or phased projects which require extended construction time and which involve numerous public improvements such as streets, utilities, flood improvements, schools, parks and open space, and other improvements of community-wide benefit. Under a Development Agreement, projects may proceed under the rules, standards, policies, and regulations in effect at the time of original project approval. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.020 Authority
This chapter establishes procedures and requirements for Development Agreements for the purposes specified in and as authorized by Article 2.5, Chapter 4, Title 7 of the Government Code, Section 65864 et seq. The Planning Commission may recommend and the Council may enter into a Development Agreement for the development of real property with any person having a legal or equitable interest in such property, as provided in this chapter. At its sole discretion, the Council may, but is not required to, approve a Development Agreement where a clear public benefit or public purpose can be demonstrated. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.030 Initiation of Hearings
Hearings on a Development Agreement may be initiated upon the filing of an application as provided below or by the Council by a simple majority vote. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.040 Applications—Legal Interest
Any person having a legal or equitable interest in real property or such other interest as specified in Section 17.62.070(A)(3)(b) may apply for a Development Agreement, except that a person may not file, and the Director shall not accept, an application which is the same as, or substantially the same as, an application which was denied within the previous year, unless the application is initiated or otherwise authorized by the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.050 Fees
The Council shall establish, and from time to time may amend, a schedule of fees to cover the City’s costs of processing applications for development agreements and conducting an annual review as required by the Government Code. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.060 Preapplication Review
Before submitting an application and support materials, applicants shall discuss the proposal with the Director. At such review, the applicant should present a preliminary site plan and show basic features of the proposed project, including its public purposes and/or benefits. For large or complex projects, the applicant may request Council review of the preliminary concept. Such a review shall be at the Council’s sole discretion and would allow the Council to review and comment on a proposal early in the review process. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.070 Application—Contents
A.    A Development Agreement application shall include the following information:

1.     A planning application and processing fee;

2.     The names and addresses of the applicant and of all persons having a legal or equitable interest in all or a part of the property proposed to be used;

3.     Evidence that the applicant:

a.     Has a legal or equitable interest in the property involved, or

b.     Has written permission from a person having a legal or equitable interest to make such application;

4.     Location of the subject property by address and vicinity map;

5.     Legal description of the property, including a statement of total area involved;

6.     A plan showing the location of all property included in the request for action, existing and proposed land uses, property lines and dimensions, topography, significant natural features, setbacks, the location of all highways, streets, alleys and the location and dimensions of all lots or parcels of land within a distance of 300 feet from the exterior boundaries of the property described in the application;

7.     Mailing list including addresses of all tenants occupying the subject property and properties within 500 feet from the subject property boundaries; and a mailing list of owners of adjacent properties within 500 feet from the subject property boundaries, as shown on the County Assessor’s latest available assessment roll;

8.     The proposed Development Agreement, together with all explanatory text, plans, maps, drawings, pictures and other information as may be required to evaluate such proposal, and as further described in Section 17.62.130; and

9.     Such other information as the Director may require.

B.     The Director may waive the filing of one or more of the above items where the required information is filed with an application for a rezoning, use permit, variance, subdivision approval, or other development entitlement to be considered concurrently with the Development Agreement.

1.     The Director may reject any application that does not supply the required information or may reject incomplete applications.

2.     The accuracy of all information, maps, and lists submitted shall be the responsibility of the applicant. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.080 Public Notice
A.    Director Responsibilities. When the Director certifies that the application is complete, the item shall be scheduled for Planning Commission hearing, and the Director shall give notice of the public hearing, as provided below.

B.     Manner of Giving Public Notice. Public notice shall be provided in compliance with Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notice). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.090 Failure to Receive Notice
The failure to receive notice by any person entitled thereto by law or this chapter does not affect the authority of the City to enter into a Development Agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.100 Planning Commission Hearing and Recommendation
The Planning Commission shall consider the proposed Development Agreement and shall make its recommendation to the Council. The recommendation shall include whether or not the proposed Development Agreement meets the following findings:

A.    The proposed Development Agreement is consistent with the General Plan and any applicable specific plan;

B.     The proposed Development Agreement complies with this Zoning Code, the subdivision ordinance, and other applicable ordinances and regulations;

C.     The proposed Development Agreement promotes the general welfare, allows more comprehensive land use planning, and provides substantial public benefits or necessary public improvements, making it in the City’s interest to enter into the Development Agreement with the applicant; and

D.    The proposed project and Development Agreement:

1.     Will not adversely affect the health, safety, or welfare of persons living or working in the surrounding area; and

2.     Will be appropriate at the proposed location and will be compatible with adjacent land uses. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.110 City Council Hearing
After the recommendation of the Planning Commission, the City Clerk shall give notice of a public hearing before the Council in the manner provided for in Chapter 17.56 (Public Hearings and Notice). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.120 City Council Action
A.    Referral. After it completes the public hearing and considers the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the Council may approve, conditionally approve, modify, or disapprove the proposed Development Agreement. The Council may refer matters not previously considered by the Planning Commission during its hearing back to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation.

B.     Approval. The Development Agreement may be approved if the Council makes the findings for approval listed in Section 17.62.100. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.130 Development Agreement—Contents
A.    Development Agreements shall include the following:

1.     The duration of the agreement, including a specified termination date if appropriate;

2.     The uses to be permitted on the property;

3.     The density or intensity of use permitted;

4.     The maximum height, size, and location of buildings permitted, as well as other pertinent development standards;

5.     The reservation or dedication of land for public purposes to be secured, including, but not limited to, rights-of-way, open space preservation, and public access easements;

6.     Proposed exceptions from the Zoning Code or other development standard, and findings where required;

7.     The time schedule established for periodic review as required by Section 17.62.200.

B.     Development Agreements may also include additional terms, conditions, and restrictions in addition to those listed in subsection A of this section. These additional terms may include, but are not limited to:

1.     Development schedules providing that construction of the proposed development as a total project or in phases be initiated and/or completed within specified time periods;

2.     The construction of public facilities required in conjunction with such development, including,but not limited to,vehicular and pedestrian rights-of-way, public art and other landscape amenities, drainage and flood-control facilities, parks and other recreational facilities, and sewers and sewage treatment facilities;

3.     Method of financing such improvements and, where applicable, reimbursement to developer or City;

4.     Prohibition of one or more uses normally listed as permitted, accessory, or subject to a Conditional Use Permit in the zone normally allowed by right;

5.     Limitations on future development or special terms or conditions under which subsequent development approvals not included in the agreement may occur;

6.     The requirement of a faithful performance bond where deemed necessary to and in an amount deemed sufficient to guarantee the faithful performance of specified terms, conditions, restrictions and/or requirements of the agreement. In lieu of a bond, the applicant may deposit with the City Clerk certificates of deposit or other security acceptable to the Finance Director;

7.     Specific design criteria for the exteriors of buildings and other structures, including colors and materials, landscaping, and signs;

8.     Special setbacks, opens spaces, trails, staging areas, buffer areas, fences and walls, public art, landscaping, and parking facilities, including vehicular and pedestrian ingress and egress;

9.     Performance standards regulating such items as noise, vibration, smoke, odors, gases, garbage, and the prevention of glare or direct illumination of adjacent properties;

10.   Limitations on operating hours and other characteristics of operation which the Council determines could adversely affect the reasonable use and enjoyment of surrounding properties;

11.   Incorporate or reference any environmental mitigation measures to reduce potentially significant environmental impacts, if applicable. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.140 Development Agreement—Adoption by Ordinance—Execution of Contract
A.    The Development Agreement shall be approved by the adoption of an ordinance. Upon the adoption of the ordinance, the City shall enter into the Development Agreement by the execution thereof by the Mayor or City Manager.

B.     No ordinance shall be finally adopted until it has been executed by the applicant and all other parties to the agreement. If the applicant has not executed the agreement or agreement as modified by the Council and returned the executed agreement to the City Clerk within 60 days following Council approval, the approval shall be deemed withdrawn, and the Council shall not finally adopt such ordinance, nor shall the City Manager execute the agreement.

C.     Such 60-day time period may be extended upon approval of the Council. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.150 Recordation of Executed Agreement
Following the execution of a Development Agreement, the City Clerk shall cause the executed agreement to be recorded with the County Recorder. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.160 Ordinance, Regulations, and Requirements Applicable to Development
Development projects covered by a Development Agreement shall comply with the General Plan, Zoning Code, subdivision ordinance, and other applicable codes, ordinances, rules, regulations, and official policies in effect on the date of execution of the Development Agreement; provided, however, that a Development Agreement shall not:

A.    Be construed to prevent the application of later adopted or amended ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies which do not conflict with such existing ordinances, rules, regulations and policies under the Development Agreement;

B.     Prevent the approval, conditional approval, or denial of subsequent development applications pursuant to such existing or later adopted or amended ordinances, rules, regulations, and policies; or

C.     Preclude the City from adopting and implementing emergency measures regarding water or sewer deficiencies when the Council determines that such action is necessary to protect public health and safety. If such action becomes necessary, the Council reserves the right to suspend water or sewer service on an equitable basis until such deficiencies are corrected. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.170 Subsequently Enacted State and Federal Laws
In the event that State or Federal laws or regulations enacted after execution of a Development Agreement prevent or preclude compliance with one or more provisions of such agreement, the provisions of such agreement shall be deemed modified or suspended to the extent necessary to comply with such laws or regulations. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.180 Enforcement—Continuing Validity
A.    Unless and until amended or canceled in whole or in part as provided in Section 17.62.190 or 17.62.210, a Development Agreement shall be enforceable by any party to the agreement, regardless of any change in regulations which alters or amends the regulations applicable to the project covered by a Development Agreement, except as specified in Sections 17.62.160 and 17.62.170.

B.     The Development Agreement shall be binding upon, and the benefits of the agreement shall inure to, all successors in interest to the parties to the agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.190 Amendment—Time Extension—Cancellation
A Development Agreement may be amended, extended, or cancelled, in whole or in part, by mutual consent of all parties to the agreement or their successors in interest. Procedures for amendment, time extensions, or cancellation of the Development Agreement by mutual consent shall be the same as provided for initiation and consideration of such agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.200 Review for Compliance—Director’s Authority
A.    Every Development Agreement entered into by the Council shall provide for Director review of compliance with the Development Agreement at time intervals as specified in the agreement, but not less than once every 12 months.

B.     The Director shall determine whether the applicant or his or her successor in interest has or has not complied with the agreement. If the Director determines that the terms or conditions of the agreement are not being met, all parties to the agreement shall be notified by registered or certified mail or other method guaranteeing proof of delivery, also indicating that failure to comply within a period specified may result in legal action to enforce compliance, termination, or modification of the agreement.

C.     It is the duty of the applicant or his or her successor in interest to provide evidence of good faith compliance with the agreement to the Director’s satisfaction at the time of the Director’s review. Refusal by the applicant or his or her successor in interest to provide the required information shall be prima facie evidence of violation of such agreement.

D.    If, at the end of the time period established by the Director, the applicant or his or her successor in interest has failed to comply with the terms of the agreement or has not submitted evidence substantiating such compliance, the Director shall notify the Council of his or her findings, recommending such action as he or she deems appropriate, including legal action to enforce compliance or to terminate or modify the agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.210 Violation of Agreement—Council Review and Action
A.    When the Director notifies the Council that a Development Agreement is being violated, a public hearing shall be scheduled before the Council to consider the matter. Procedures for conduct of such hearing shall be the same as provided for initiation and consideration of a Development Agreement.

B.     If the Council determines that the applicant or his or her successor in interest is in violation of a Development Agreement, it may take one of the following actions:

1.     Schedule the matter for Council hearing for modification or possible termination of the agreement. Procedures for hearing notice shall be the same as provided in Section 17.62.080; or

2.     Continue the matter for further consideration. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.220 Modification or Termination for Violations
A.    After the hearing required by Section 17.62.210(A), the Council may terminate or modify the agreement upon finding that:

1.     Terms, conditions, and obligations of any party to the Development Agreement have not been met; or

2.     The scope, design, intensity, or environmental effects of a project were represented inaccurately; or

3.     The project has been or is being built, operated, or used in a manner that differs significantly from approved plans, permits, or other entitlements; or

4.     Parties to the agreement have engaged in unlawful activity or have used bad faith in the performance of or the failure to perform their obligations under the agreement.

B.     Such remedial action may include, but is not limited to, changes to project design or uses, operating characteristics, or necessary onsite or off-site improvements which are determined to be reasonably necessary to protect public health, safety, or welfare, and to correct problems caused by or related to noncompliance with the terms of the agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.230 Consequences of Termination
Upon termination of the Development Agreement, the owner shall otherwise comply with City codes, regulations, development standards, and other applicable laws in effect at the time of termination of the agreement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.240 Irregularity of Proceedings
No action, inaction, or recommendation regarding the proposed Development Agreement shall be held void or invalid or be set aside by a court by reason of any error, irregularity, informality, neglect, or omission as to any matter pertaining to the application, notice, finding, record, hearing, report, recommendation, or any other matters of procedure whatsoever unless, after an examination of the entire record, the court is of the opinion that the error was prejudicial and that a different result would have been probable if the error had not occurred or existed. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.62.250 Coordination of Approvals
A.    Public Hearings. Where an application for a Development Agreement is concurrently filed with an application for a zone change, use permit, variance, minor subdivision or tract map, or annexation and the applications may be feasibly processed together, public hearings may be concurrently held.

B.     Zoning or Subdivision Exceptions. Yards, permit height, coverage, parking requirements, density, and other design standards may be modified or relaxed during consideration of a Development Agreement. The Council may modify or relax development or subdivision standards when: (1) such modification or relaxation is otherwise allowed by this Municipal Code; (2) the Council makes findings as required by zoning and subdivision regulations; and (3) the Council determines that such modification or relaxation of standards is consistent with the General Plan and reasonably necessary to allow the safe, efficient, and/or attractive development of the subject property. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

Chapter 17.64 GENERAL PLAN AMENDMENTS
17.64.010 Purpose
The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the orderly processing of General Plan amendments in a manner consistent with the overall goals of the community’s planning program and the requirements of the California law. In particular, this chapter is intended to:

A.    Assure that the General Plan is amended for good reason and with due consideration of community-wide interests;

B.     Help achieve and maintain internal consistency of General Plan elements and conformance between the Plan and implementing techniques, such as zoning; and

C.     Establish rights and assign responsibilities for the persons and agencies involved in General Plan administration so each can perform fairly and effectively. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.64.020 Authority to Initiate an Amendment
A.    Initiation of Amendment by the City Council. The Council may initiate General Plan amendments at any time by directing staff to prepare the necessary analysis and scheduling the proposed amendment for consideration at a hearing.

B.     Initiation of Amendment by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission, by a majority vote of all voting members, may initiate General Plan amendments at any time by directing staff to prepare the necessary analysis and scheduling the proposed amendment for consideration at a hearing.

C.     Initiation of Amendment by the Director. The Development Services Director may initiate General Plan amendments at any time by preparing the necessary analysis and scheduling the proposed amendment for consideration at a hearing.

D.    Applications to Initiate Amendments. Any person may request an amendment of the General Plan by filing an application with the Development Services Department. Such application shall include:

1.     A description of the proposed amendment, including, as may be necessary, additions or modifications to the text and graphics of adopted General Plan elements or reports.

2.     A statement explaining how the proposed change will better reflect community desires as expressed in General Plan goals and policies.

3.     If the amendment involves change of a basic goal or policy, why the change is warranted by new information or reevaluation of community needs.

4.     A description of how the amendment of one policy may reinforce or conflict with related policies, including those in other elements.

5.     Such other supporting data as the Director may require to help with evaluation of the proposal.

6.     A fee sufficient to cover the expected costs incurred in processing the application, to be established by resolution of the Council.

E.     Early Council Consideration of an Application. The Director shall have the authority, prior to processing a General Plan Amendment application in conformance with the provisions of this chapter, to forward any such application to the Council for early policy consideration to allow the Council to determine whether the proposed amendment is consistent with overall policy direction in the General Plan. The Council, upon making specific findings in reference to specific General Plan provisions, may direct the Director to reject the application as inconsistent with overall General Plan policy direction. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.64.030 Consultation, Notice, and Hearings
A.    Planning Commission Actions.

1.     Consultation. Pursuant to Government Code Section 65352.3, the City shall consult with California Native American tribes prior to scheduling the General Plan amendment for public hearing.

2.     Public Hearings—Notice. The Planning Commission shall hold at least one public hearing before taking action on any General Plan amendment.

3.     Recommendation. The recommendation for approval of the Planning Commission of any amendment to the General Plan shall be by resolution of the Planning Commission adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of its total voting members.

4.     Transmittal to Council. The Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be transmitted to the Council in the form of a resolution with findings.

5.     Other Situations. When neither a majority of the Planning Commission recommends approval nor a majority of a quorum recommends denial, the Planning Commission may transmit the amendment to the Council with a report explaining the situation and stating the recommendations of the individual Commissioners.

B.     City Council Actions.

1.     Public Hearings—Notice. Upon transmittal of the resolution from the Planning Commission, the Council shall hold at least one public hearing on proposed General Plan amendments.

2.     Resolution. Any amendment of the General Plan shall be adopted by resolution of the Council, adopted by the affirmative vote of not less than a majority of the total membership of the Council.

3.     Referral of Council Changes. In adopting any General Plan amendment which has been approved by the Planning Commission, the Council shall not make any substantive changes or additions involving issues not considered by the Planning Commission in their review until the proposed change or addition has been referred to the Planning Commission for a report and the report has been filed with the Council. Failure of the Planning Commission to report within 40 calendar days after the referral, or such longer period as may be designated by the Council, shall be deemed to be approval of the change or addition. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.66 NONCONFORMITIES
17.66.010 Purpose
A.    This chapter is established to permit the continuation of nonconformities on real properties relative to parcel size, use, occupancy, and building types that were legally established but no longer comply with all of the standards and requirements of this title. To this end, this chapter establishes the circumstances under which nonconformities may be continued or changed and provides for the removal of nonconformities when their continuation conflicts with the public health, safety, and general welfare.

B.     This chapter is not intended to limit the City’s ability to eliminate a public nuisance.

C.     Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the City from declaring a nonconformity to constitute a danger to the public health, safety, or general welfare and to take lawful action to remedy that danger. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.020 Applicability
A.    The provisions of this chapter apply to structures, land, and uses that have become nonconforming due to changes in this title or reclassification of zones under this Zoning Code. The provisions shall also apply when standards or regulations are adopted or changed which cause previously conforming structures, land, or uses to become nonconforming.

B.     For purposes of this chapter, the terms “nonconformity” or “nonconformities” shall refer to legal nonconforming uses, legal nonconforming structures, and legal nonconforming lots, all as more specifically defined in Chapter 17.74 (Definitions) of this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.030 Nonconforming Uses
A.    Nonconforming uses shall be allowed to remain, provided such use is not abandoned or intensified, or the space that the nonconforming use is located in is not reconstructed.

B.     A nonconforming use may not expand the area of its use beyond that for which it was legally approved.

C.     In a building which is nonconforming due to parking, a change of use or intensification of the existing use shall only be allowed if the full amount of the required parking is provided.

D.    Once a nonconforming use is terminated, discontinued, or abandoned, the occupancy afterwards may not revert to the same or another nonconforming use. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.040 Nonconforming Structures
A.    Nonconforming structures may only be continued and maintained provided there is no alteration, enlargement, or addition to any building or structure.

B.     Maintenance, repairs, nonstructural modifications, and nonstructural interior alterations to a nonconforming structure are permitted if the changes and improvements do not enlarge or extend the structure, or otherwise increase the degree of the nonconformity. Exterior improvements, such as a façade improvement, which are intended to better the appearance of the property, are included in these types of allowed changes. Nothing herein supersedes the requirement to obtain site plan review approval if otherwise required.

C.     A structure shall not be considered nonconforming if the nonconformity is caused due to a condemnation of a portion of the property by the City.

D.    A structure shall not be considered nonconforming with regard to parking because of a loss of required parking spaces due to conformance with the Americans with Disabilities Act.

E.     If any nonconforming structure is destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God, or the public enemy such that the cost of restoration or replacement exceeds 50 percent of the replacement cost of the entire structure, the replacement shall conform to current regulations, or a Conditional Use Permit shall be obtained to allow a deviation from current standards. The City Building Official shall determine the extent of destruction and costs of replacement. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.050 Nonconforming Lots
A.    Any lot that is smaller than the minimum lot size required by this title or does not meet any of the applicable dimensional requirements, shall be considered a legal nonconforming lot if it is described in the official records on file in the office of the Orange County Recorder as a lot of record. The lot shall not be further reduced below the area or dimension identified on the recorded map or other documents that establish the date on which the parcel was officially created.

B.     A lot of record may be used as a building site subject to compliance with all other applicable requirements, unless a Variance or other modification or exception is approved as provided for in this title. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.060 Continuation of Nonconformity
A.    Legal nonconformities may be continued and maintained in compliance with the requirements of this chapter unless the Building Official deems the nonconformity to be a public nuisance because of health or safety concerns. The Building Official is authorized to impose conditions on the nonconformity to eliminate or reduce the health or safety concerns.

B.     The right to continue a legal nonconformity attaches to the land and shall not be affected by a change in ownership. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.070 Abandonment
A.    A nonconforming use of land or a structure shall be considered to be abandoned after 180 days of nonuse, unless the interruption in use is involuntary due to casualty or other events outside the control of the owner or operator of the land or structure, as determined by the Director. Once abandoned, all subsequent uses of such land and structure shall conform to the regulations specified for the zone in which the land or structure is located.

B.     Upon determination that a use has been abandoned, the Director shall send a notice to the owner. If the owner disagrees with the Director’s determination, an appeal may be filed with the Planning Commission in accordance with Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). The burden of proof shall be on the owner to show that the use has not been abandoned. A determination that a use has been abandoned requires both: (1) evidence of an intention to abandon; and (2) an act or failure to act which shows or implies that the owner does not continue to claim or retain an interest in the nonconforming use. Evidence may include, but is not limited to, removal of equipment, furniture, machinery, structures, or other components of the nonconforming use; disconnected or discontinued utilities; or lack of business records to document continued operation. Maintenance of a valid business license shall of itself not be considered a continuation of the use. However, lack of a business license may be considered as a factor in determining discontinuation of the use. A broker agreement to solicit tenants or purchasers to continue a nonconforming use shall be sufficient evidence that the nonconforming use has not been abandoned. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

17.66.080 Exceptions—Public Facilities and Uses
A.    Facilities Directly Rendering Service. The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to public utility structures when the public utility structures pertain directly to the rendering of service or distribution, including generating plants, distribution, substations, water wells and pumps, gas storage, metering, and valve control stations, but shall apply to structures or uses that do not immediately relate to direct service to consumers (e.g., warehouses, corporation yards, storage, etc.).

B.     Changes to Facilities. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the expansion, increase in capacity, modernization or replacement of public utility structures, provided that there shall be no change of a use unless approved by the Planning Commission, and further provided that all setback requirements of the zone which the use is located shall be maintained. There shall be no enlargement of the site unless approved by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 16-04 § 2, 2016)

 

Chapter 17.68 REVOCATIONS AND CITY-INITIATED MODIFICATIONS
17.68.010 Purpose and Authority
A.    This chapter provides procedures for the City to secure revocation or modification of previously approved applications and entitlements.

B.     The City’s action to revoke an entitlement shall have the effect of terminating the entitlement and denying the privileges granted by the original approval.

C.     The City’s action to modify an entitlement, rather than revoke it, shall have the effect of changing the operational aspects of the entitlement. The changes may include the operational aspects related to buffers, duration of the entitlement, hours of operation, landscaping and maintenance, lighting, parking, property maintenance, signs, surfacing, traffic circulation, etc. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.68.030 Procedures
A.    Notice.

1.     An application, permit, or entitlement may by revoked or modified utilizing the same procedure used to approve an application, permit, or entitlement granted in compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code.

2.     Ten days before the revocation/modification process begins (except for Temporary Use Permits that require only 24-hour notice), notice shall be delivered in writing via certified mail, return receipt requested, or any other method providing proof of delivery, to the owner of the property for which the permit or entitlement was granted, as shown on the County’s latest equalized assessment roll, and/or the project applicant if not the owner of the subject property.

B.     Review Authority Action. A land use permit or entitlement may be revoked or modified by the Review authority (i.e., Director, Planning Commission, Council) that originally approved the permit or entitlement, with public notice and hearings conducted as required for the originally approved permit or entitlement, if any one of the following findings of fact can be made in a positive manner:

1.     Circumstances under which the permit or entitlement was granted have been changed by the applicant to a degree that one or more of the findings contained in the original permit can no longer be made in a positive manner;

2.     The permit or entitlement was issued, in whole or in part, on the basis of a misrepresentation or omission of a material statement in the application, or in the applicant’s testimony presented during the public hearing, for the permit or entitlement;

3.     One or more of the conditions of the permit have not been substantially fulfilled or have been violated;

4.     The improvement authorized in compliance with the permit is in violation of any code, law, ordinance, regulation, or statute;

5.     The improvement/use allowed by the permit or entitlement has become detrimental to the public health, safety, or general welfare or the manner of operation constitutes or is creating a nuisance; or

6.     There is a compelling public necessity.

C.     Appeals. The decision of a review authority to revoke or modify a land use permit or entitlement may be appealed as authorized by Chapter 17.60 (Appeals). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.70 ENFORCEMENT
17.70.010 Purpose
This chapter provides procedures that are intended to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Zoning Code and the conditions of land use permit and other entitlement approval. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.70.020 Duty to Comply
Departments, officials, and public employees of the City vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this Zoning Code and shall not issue permits or licenses for uses, structures, or purposes in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Code. A permit or license issued in conflict with the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be null and void. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.70.030 Types of Violations and Penalties
A.    Violations or Failure to Comply. It is unlawful for a person to violate a provision or to fail to comply with a requirement of this Zoning Code.

B.     Misdemeanor. A violation of any of the provisions or a failure to comply with a mandatory requirement of this Zoning Code shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any violation constituting a misdemeanor or under this Zoning Code may, in the discretion of the City Attorney, be charged and prosecuted as an infraction. A person convicted of a misdemeanor under the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or by imprisonment in the County Jail for a period of not more than six months or by both fine and imprisonment.

C.     Infraction. A person convicted of an infraction under the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be punished by fine in accordance with applicable Council resolutions.

D.    Separate Offenses. Each person shall be charged with a separate offense for each and every day during a portion of which a violation of a provision of this Zoning Code is committed, continued, or allowed by a person and shall upon conviction be punished accordingly. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

17.70.040 Violations and Remedies—Abatement, Removal, Injunction
A.    Public Nuisance. A structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code, and any use of land, structures, or premises established, conducted, operated, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code shall be, and is declared to be, unlawful and a public nuisance.

B.     Remedies. The City Attorney shall, upon order of the Council:

1.     Immediately commence action or proceedings for and removal and enjoinment of the unlawful structure or use in the manner prescribed by law;

2.     Take other steps; and

3.     Apply to the courts that have jurisdiction to grant relief that will abate and remove the structure and that will restrain and enjoin a person, firm, or corporation from setting up, erecting, building, maintaining, or using a structure contrary to the provisions of this Zoning Code.

C.     Cumulative. The remedies provided in this Zoning Code shall be cumulative and not exclusive. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

Division 7: DEFINITIONS
Chapter 17.72 PURPOSE
17.72.010 Purpose
This division provides definitions of terms and phrases used in these Zoning Regulations that are technical or specialized, or that may not reflect common usage. If definitions in this division conflict with definitions in other provisions of the Municipal Code, these definitions shall apply for the purposes of these Zoning Regulations. If a word is not defined in this division, or other provisions of the Municipal Code, the most common dictionary definition is presumed to be correct. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019; Ord. 688 § 1, 2006)

 

Chapter 17.74 DEFINITIONS
Note
*      Prior ordinance history: Ords. 11-06, 13-04, 13-06, 14-03, 14-08, 15-08, 15-12, 16-03, 16-05, 17-08, 18-04 and 18-06.

 

17.74.010 A Definitions
Abutting. Two or more parcels of land sharing a common boundary line, or two or more objects in contact with each other.

Access. The place, means, or way by which pedestrians and vehicles shall have safe, adequate, and usable ingress and egress to a property and/or use.

Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU). An attached or detached dwelling unit that provides complete independent living facilities for one or more persons and is located on a lot with another primary, single-unit dwelling. An ADU includes permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and sanitation on the same lot as the primary unit. An ADU may be structured as one efficiency unit, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 17958.1, and/or a manufactured home, as defined in Health and Safety Code Section 18007, among other formats.

Accessory Dwelling Unit, Attached. An ADU that is either attached to (by a minimum of one shared wall), or completely contained within, the primary existing space of the single-unit dwelling unit or existing accessory structure.

Accessory Dwelling Unit, Detached. An ADU that provides new residential square footage not attached or sharing any walls with the primary existing single-unit dwelling.

Accessory Structures and Uses.

Accessory Structures. A structure that is located upon the same site as the structure or use to which it is accessory. Accessory structures may consist of detached structures or additions to primary structures. The use of an accessory structure is incidental and subordinate to the use of the principal structure, or to the primary land use of the site. Does not include habitable accessory structures such as accessory dwelling units (ADUs).

Accessory Uses. A use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the primary use and located on the same parcel as the primary use. Accessory Use includes active or passive solar heating systems and cogeneration facilities.

Addition. The result of work that increases the volume of an existing structure or replaces a demolished portion.

Adjacent. Two or more parcels of land separated only by an alley, street, highway or recorded easement, or two or more objects that lie near or close to each other.

Adult Businesses. A business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities, or a business that offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

        Adult-oriented businesses do not include bona fide medical establishments operated by properly licensed and registered medical personnel with appropriate medical credentials for the treatment of patients.

        In determining whether a use is an adult-oriented business, only conduct or activities which constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct or a use which has a majority of its floor area, stock-in-trade, or revenue derived from material characterized by an emphasis on matters depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas shall be considered. Isolated instances of conduct or activities described in this section as characterizing an adult-oriented business shall not be considered except where these activities, taken together, constitute a regular and substantial course of conduct.

        Adult-oriented businesses include, but are not limited to, the following:

Adult Arcade. A place to which the public is allowed or invited and coin-operated or slug-operated, or electronically, electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections, or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Bookstore. An establishment that has as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area, or revenue derived from and offering for sale for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following:

•       Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which are characterized by an emphasis upon the depiction or description of specified anatomical areas.

•       Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities.

•       Goods which are replicas of, or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas, or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities to cause sexual excitement.

Adult Cabaret. A bar, nightclub, or similar establishment which features dancers, strippers, or similar entertainers who expose specified anatomical areas of their bodies.

Adult Motel. A hotel, motel, or similar commercial establishment which:

•       Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration; provides patrons with closed circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and has a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the availability of this adult-type of photographic reproductions;

•       Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period of time, i.e., less than 10 hours; or

•       Allows a tenant or occupant of a sleeping room to sub-rent the room for a period of time i.e., less than 10 hours.

Adult Motion Picture Arcade. A commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depictions or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Adult Tanning Salon or Parlor. A business establishment where patrons receive tanning services in groups of two or more and where patrons or employees of the establishment expose specified anatomical areas. Adult tanning salon or parlor also includes a business establishment where a patron and an employee of the establishment are nude or expose specified anatomical areas. An adult tanning salon or parlor also includes a business establishment where the employees are nude or expose specified anatomical areas.

Adult Theater. A place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure, partially or entirely used for live performances or presentations, which place, building, enclosure, theater, concert hall, auditorium, or structure is used for presenting matter characterized by an emphasis on depicting, exposing, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons. This place shall also include an adult theater where persons are regularly featured appearing in a state of nudity or giving live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified sexual activities or by specified anatomical areas.

Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person who appears in a state of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be conversed with or be observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons, for any form of consideration. Nude model studio shall not include any classroom of any school licensed under State law to provide art education, while the classroom is being used in a manner consistent with a State license.

Private Viewing Area. An area or areas in an adult-oriented business designed to accommodate no more than five or less patrons or customers for purposes of viewing or watching a performance, picture, show, film, videotape, slide, movie, or other presentation. Private viewing areas shall not be established, maintained, or authorized, and there shall be no doors, curtains, stalls, or other enclosures creating a private viewing area.

Semi-Nude. A state of dress in which clothing, including supporting straps or devices, covers no more than the genitals, pubic region, and areolae of the female breast.

Sex Supermarket/Sex Mini-Mall. The establishment or operation of more than one type of adult-oriented business or use as defined in these Zoning Regulations within the same structure.

Sexual Encounter Center. A business or commercial enterprise that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers, in any form of consideration, physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons of the opposite sex and/or activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or is semi-nude.

Sexual Novelty Store. An establishment having, as a substantial portion of its stock-in-trade, a majority of its floor area or a majority of its revenue derived from goods which are replicas of or which simulate, specified anatomical areas, or specified sexual activities, or goods which are designed to be placed on or in specified anatomical areas, or to be used in conjunction with specified sexual activities, to cause sexual excitement.

Sexually-Oriented Business. A business where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in or simulate specified sexual activities, or a business which offers to its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, exposing, describing, discussing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.

Specified Anatomical Areas. Includes any of the following human anatomical areas:

•       Less than completely and opaquely covered genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areolae.

•       Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.

Specified Criminal Act. Sexual crime against children; sexual abuse; rape; or crime connected with another adult-oriented business, including, but not limited to, the distribution of obscenity; violations involving the distribution, display, or sale of material harmful to minors; prostitution; or pandering. Specified criminal acts shall exclude those acts that are authorized or required to be kept confidential in compliance with Welfare and Institutions Code Sections 600 to 900.

Specified Sexual Activities. Includes all of the following:

•       The fondling or other erotic touching of the following human anatomical areas: genitals, pubic regions, buttocks, anuses, or female breasts.

•       Human sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.

•       Human masturbation, actual or simulated.

•       The actual or simulated infliction of pain by one human upon another, or by an individual upon him or herself, for the purpose of the sexual gratification or release of either individual, as a result of flagellation, beating, striking, or touching of an erogenous zone, including without limitation, the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region or, if the person is a female, a breast.

•       Sexual intercourse, actual or simulated, between a human being and an animal.

•       Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities detailed in “Specified Sexual Activities.”

Agent. A person authorized in writing by the property owner to represent and act for a property owner in contacts with City employees, committees, commissions, and the Council, regarding matters regulated by these Zoning Regulations.

Agriculture. All methods of production and management of crops, vegetation, and soil. This includes, but is not limited to, the related activities of tillage, fertilization, pest control, harvesting and marketing.

Agriculture, Commercial Indoor. An establishment engaged in the growth and sale of vegetables, produce, fruit crops, vines, shrubs, trees (including Christmas trees), sod, and nursery plants conducted within an enclosed structure. This use includes, but is not limited to, crop farms, orchards, groves, tree plantations, commercial greenhouses, nurseries, and a temporary stand for the sale of products grown on the premises, but specifically not including cannabis growth and sale.

Alcoholic Beverage Sales. The retail sale of beer, wine, and/or other alcoholic beverages for on- or off-premises consumption.

Alcohol Sales, Off-Site. Any business selling alcoholic beverages as a primary use, including beer, wine, distilled spirits, hard liquor, and/or any other alcoholic beverages. Does not include grocery stores, convenience stores, warehouse stores, or other alcohol sales authorized as part of an off-site wine tasting room or food and beverage product manufacturing.

Alley. A public way permanently reserved primarily for secondary vehicular service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.

 

Figure 7-01: Alley



 

Allowed Use. See “Permitted Use.”

Alteration. An exterior change or modification, through public or private action, to the character defining or significant physical features of a local landmark. Changes may include modification of the structure, architectural details, or visual characteristics, surface paving, addition of new structures, cutting or removal of trees and other natural features, disturbance of archeological sites or areas, or the placement or removal of significant objects such as signs, plaques, light fixtures, walls, fences, steps, plantings, and landscape accessories affecting the visual or historical qualities of the property. Alteration shall not mean routine maintenance that does not require a building permit; landscaping, including sprinkler system work; flat concrete work; and replacement of existing screens, awnings, or windows with the same materials, where the purpose or effect of maintenance work is:

1.     To correct deterioration of or minor damage to a structure or part of it and to restore it to its condition prior to the occurrence of the deterioration or damage.

2.     Does not result to any addition to the structure.

Ambient Noise Level. The all-encompassing noise level associated with a given environment, being a composite of sounds from all sources, excluding the alleged offensive noise, at the location and approximate time at which a comparison with the alleged offensive noise is to be made.

Ambulance Fleet Services. A base facility where ambulances and similar vehicles are parked and from which they are dispatched, and/or where ambulance vehicles and crews are not based at a hospital or fire department stand by for emergency calls.

Amusement and Recreation Establishments, Indoor. See “Commercial Recreation—Indoors.”

Amusement and Recreation Establishments, Outdoor. See “Commercial Recreation—Outdoors.”

Animal Care, Sales, and Services.

Animal Boarding/Kennels. The commercial provision of shelter and care for dogs, cats, other household animals, and horses (where allowed), including activities associated with such shelter and care (e.g., feeding, exercising, grooming, and incidental medical care).

Animal Grooming. The commercial provision of bathing and trimming services for dogs, cats, and other household animals permitted by the Municipal Code. Overnight boarding is not included with this use (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).

Animal Retail Sales. The retail sales of household animals within an entirely enclosed building. These uses include grooming, if incidental to the retail use, but specifically excludes boarding of animals other than those for sale (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).

Animal Shelter. An establishment that provides a temporary home for dogs, cats, and other animals that are commonly offered for adoption with the provision of adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter and wholesome and adequate food and water, in each case consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal’s size, age, species, breed, and physical condition.

Veterinary Services, Large Animal. Veterinary services for livestock, farm animals, and other large animals. This classification allows 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services.

Veterinary Services, Small Animal. Veterinary services for household pets. This classification allows 24-hour accommodation of animals receiving medical services, but does not include kenneling of animals not receiving medical services (see “Animal Boarding/Kennels”).

Antenna. See “Antennas/Wireless Communication Facilities.”

Antiques, Art, Collectibles, and Gifts. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Apartment. See “Multiple- Unit Dwelling.”

Appeal. Wherever there is a reference to an appeal being filed or available to be filed, the right of appeal shall also include the right to appeal administrative determinations made by the Director in compliance with this chapter to the Planning Commission and Council.

Arcade (Electronic Game Center). An establishment that provides more than four amusement devices, whether or not the devices constitute the primary use or an accessory or incidental use of the premises. Amusement devices mean an electronic or mechanical equipment, game, or machine that is played or used for amusement, which, when so played or used involves skill and which is activated by coin, key, or token, or for which the player or user pays money for the privilege of playing or using. This use may also include internet/cyber cafes, where three or more computers and/or other electronic devices, for access to that system commonly referred to as the “internet,” e-mail, playing video games over the Internet or other network system, and/or access to other computer software programs, is provided to the public for compensation and/or for public access. Internet cafe is also synonymous with PC café, cyber café, internet gaming center, computer/internet rental and cyber centers.

Art and Art Supply Store. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Artificial Turf. Any variety of synthetic, carpetlike materials made to resemble grass or similar ground cover and used as a replacement for live plant materials as permitted by this title, and specifically having an appearance of live grass or similar ground cover.

Assisted Living Facility. See “Residential Care Facility.”

Association. The organization of persons who own parcels, areas, airspace, or rights of exclusive occupancy in units of condominiums or other developments or tracts and who may have interests in the control of common areas of a project.

Attached Structure. A structure having at least five lineal feet of wall serving as a common wall with the structure to which it is attached, or connected to by a continuous roof of at least eight feet wide.

Auditoriums, Meeting Halls, and Theaters. See “Clubs, Lodges, Private Meeting Halls.”

Automated Teller Machines (ATMs). An unstaffed computerized, self-service machine used by banking customers for financial transactions, including deposits, withdrawals, and fund transfers. These machines may be located at or within banks, or in other locations. See also “Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities.”

Automobile Accessories and Installation Facility. An establishment in the commercial business of installing “aftermarket” parts and accessories into motor vehicles (e.g., lift kits, upholstery work, alarms, stereo equipment, or cellular telephones). See also “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Automobile Dismantling. Outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials from automobiles, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. See also “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Automobile Repair. See “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Auto Parts Store. See “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Awning. A canopy made of fabric to shelter people or things from rain or sun or as decoration (supported entirely from the exterior wall of a structure). (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.020 B Definitions
Banks and Financial Services. See “Financial Institutions and Related Services (Without Drive-Through Facilities).”

Bar. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments—Bars, Lounges, Nightclubs, and Tasting Rooms.”

Bingo. A game of chance in which prizes are awarded on the basis of designated numbers or symbols that are marked or covered by the player on a tangible card in the player’s possession and that conform to numbers or symbols, selected at random and announced by a live caller, as further defined by Penal Code Section 326.5(o), as the same may be amended from time to time.

Bingo, Remote Caller. A game of bingo in which the numbers or symbols on randomly drawn plastic balls are announced by a natural person present at the site at which the live game is conducted, and the organization conducting the bingo game uses audio and video technology to link any of its in-state facilities for the purpose of transmitting the remote calling of a live bingo game from a single location to multiple locations owned, leased, or rented by that organization, as further defined by Penal Code Section 326.3(u)(1), as the same may be amended from time to time.

Boarding House. A boarding house is a residence or dwelling, other than a motel or hotel, wherein two or more rooms, with or without individual or group cooking facilities, are rented to three or more individuals under separate rental agreements or leases, either written or oral, whether or not an owner, agent or rental manager is in the residence. Meals may also be included. This use type includes convents, monasteries, and student dormitories, but does not include fraternities and sororities. Notwithstanding this definition, no single-unit dwelling operated as a group home pursuant to the Community Care Facilities Act, which is otherwise exempt from local Zoning Regulations, shall be considered a boarding house.

Brewery, Winery, or Distillery. An establishment which produces ales, beers, meads, hard ciders, wine, liquor and/or similar beverages on site. Breweries may also serve beverages on‐site, and sell beverages for off‐site consumption in keeping with the regulations of the Alcohol Beverage Control (ABC) and Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF).

Building. Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of any individual, animal, process, equipment, goods, or materials. See also “Structure.”

Building Materials and Services. Retail sales or rental of building supplies or equipment. This classification includes lumber yards, tool and equipment sales or rental establishments, and includes establishments devoted principally to taxable retail sales to individuals for their own use. This classification includes the accessory retail sale of nursery and garden products, as defined under “Nursery and Garden Centers.”

Indoor. Storage and display of commercial goods or materials entirely within an enclosed building.

Outdoor. Storage and display of commercial goods or materials in open lots, outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or principal use.

Business, Retail. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Business Support Services. Establishments providing goods and services to other businesses on a fee or contract basis, including printing and copying, blueprint services, advertising and mailing, equipment rental and leasing, office security, custodial services, photo finishing, model building, taxi, or delivery services with two or fewer fleet vehicles on site.

Business, Wholesale. See “Warehouse, Wholesaling and Distribution.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 201)

 

17.74.030 C Definitions
Cannabis Definitions.

Authorized Grower. A person 21 years and older who is authorized by, and in compliance with, State law and the provisions of this chapter relating to the cultivation of cannabis for personal use.

Cannabis. All parts of the plant Cannabis sativa Linnaeus, Cannabis indica, or Cannabis ruderalis, whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin, whether crude or purified, extracted from any part of the plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the plant, its seeds, or resin. “Cannabis” also means the separated resin, whether crude or purified, obtained from cannabis, and any product containing cannabis. “Cannabis” includes cannabis that is used for medical, non-medical, or other purposes. “Cannabis” does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced from the stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the mature stalks (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant which is incapable of germination. “Cannabis” also does not include industrial hemp, as defined in California Health and Safety Code Section 11018.5.

Commercial Cannabis Activities. The cultivation, possession, manufacture, distribution, processing, storing, laboratory testing, labeling, packaging, transportation, delivery or sale of cannabis and cannabis products for non-medical, medical or any other purpose, and includes the activities of any business licensed by the State or other government entity under Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code or any other provision of State law that regulates the licensing of cannabis businesses. Notwithstanding any of the foregoing, “Commercial Cannabis Activity” shall not include: (1) an individual aged 21 years or older who possesses, processes, transports, purchases, obtains, or gives away to adults aged 21 years or older without compensation whatsoever, non-medical recreational cannabis; or (2) personal cultivation of cannabis in accordance with Section 17.39.040.

Cultivation. Any activity involving the planting, growing, harvesting, drying, curing, grading, or trimming of cannabis.

Delivery. The commercial transfer of cannabis or cannabis products to a customer. Delivery also includes the use by a retailer of any technology platform owned and controlled by the retailer.

Fully Enclosed and Secure Structure. A space within a building that complies with the California Building Code (“CBC”) as adopted by the City, or if exempt from the permit requirements of the CBC, a structure that has a complete roof, a foundation, slab, or equivalent base to which the floor is secured by bolts or similar attachments, is secure against unauthorized entry, and is accessible only through one or more lockable doors. Walls and roofs must be constructed of solid materials that cannot be easily broken through such as two-inch by four-inch nominal or thicker studs overlaid with three-eighths inch or thicker plywood or the equivalent. Plastic sheeting, regardless of the mil or inches, or similar products do not satisfy this requirement. If skylights are used, security bars shall be added to the skylights. The structure must provide complete visual screening.

Indoors. Space within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

MAUCRSA. The Medicinal and Adult-Use Cannabis Regulation and Safety Act, as codified in Division 10 of the California Business and Professions Code (Section 26000 et seq.) as the same may be amended from time to time.

Outdoors. Any location that is not within a fully enclosed and secure structure.

Person. Any person, firm, corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, collective, cooperative, non-profit, trust, estate, association, club, receiver, syndicate, society, or other organization. “Person” shall include any owner, manager, proprietor, employee, volunteer, or salesperson.

Private Residence. A house, apartment unit, condominium, mobile home, or other similar dwelling that is lawfully used as a residence.

Cabinet Shop. See “Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops, and Woodworking Shops.”

California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA). State law (California Public Resources Code Sections 21000 et seq.) requiring public agencies to document and consider the environmental effects of a proposed action, before allowing the action to occur.

California Public Utilities Commission (CPUC). The governmental agency which regulates the terms and conditions of public utilities in the state.

Call Center. An establishment designed and equipped to handle a large volume of telephone calls (especially for taking orders or serving customers).

Caretaker Quarters. A permanent residence that is secondary or accessory to the primary use of the property, and used for housing a caretaker employed on the site of any nonresidential use where needed for security purposes or to provide 24-hour care or monitoring of people, plants, animals, equipment, or other conditions on the site.

Carpet Cleaning and Dyeing Plants. See “Laundries and Dry-Cleaning Plants.”

Carport. See “Garage or Carport.”

Car Sharing—Parking. The provision of parking spaces for membership-based car sharing vehicles that charges a use-based fee related to a specific vehicle, primarily for hourly or other short-term use through a self-service fully automated reservation system, but not by means of a separate written agreement that is entered into each time a vehicle is transferred to a customer.

Car Wash. See “Vehicle Repair and Services—Vehicle Washing/Detailing.”

Catering Service. See “Food Preparation/Catering (No On-Site Sales or Service)”.

Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities. Establishments primarily engaged in operating sites or structures reserved for the interment of human or animal remains, including mausoleums, burial places, memorial gardens, columbaria, and crematories.

Columbarium. A structure or building substantially exposed above ground intended to be used for the inurnment of the cremated remains of a deceased person(s).

Crematory. A structure designed, intended to be used, or used for the cremation of human or animal remains.

Check Cashing and/or Payday Loans. A commercial land use that generally includes some or all of a variety of financial services, including cashing of checks, warrants, drafts, money orders, or other commercial paper serving the same purpose; deferred deposit of personal checks whereby the check casher refrains from depositing a personal check written by a customer until a specific date pursuant to a written agreement; money transfers; payday advances; issuance of money orders; making consumer or auto-title loans; and similar uses. This category does not include State or Federally chartered banks, savings associations, credit unions, or industrial loan companies. It also does not include retail sellers that are primarily engaged in the business of selling consumer goods, such as consumables to retail buyers, and that cashes checks or issues money orders as a service to its customers (for a fee not exceeding two dollars) incidental to their main purpose or business.

Child Day Care Centers. See “Day Care Center.”

Church. See “Religious Assembly Facilities.”

City. The City of Los Alamitos, State of California, referred to in these Zoning Regulations as the “City.”

City Council. The Los Alamitos City Council, referred to in these Zoning Regulations as the “Council.”

Clinics and/or Urgent Care. See “Hospitals and Clinic/Urgent Care.”

Clubs, Lodges, Private Meeting Halls. See “Public Assembly Facilities.”

Columbarium. See “Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities” and “Funeral Parlors and Interment Services.”

Commercial. An enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee.

Commercial Property. A parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for commercial purposes.

Commercial Recreation. Recreational facilities where visitors are participant actors rather than spectators. Examples include outdoor facilities such as amusement and theme parks, water parks, swimming pools; driving ranges, golf courses, miniature golf courses, riding stables; and indoor facilities such as large fitness centers, gymnasiums, handball, badminton, racquetball, dance hall and tennis club facilities; ice or roller skating rinks; trampoline and bounce house establishments; bowling alleys; pool and billiards lounges; and electronic game and amusement centers. This classification may include snack bars and other incidental food and beverage services to patrons. Bars or restaurants with alcohol sales shall be treated as a separate use and shall be regulated accordingly, even when operated in conjunction with the entertainment and recreation use.

Commercial Recreation—Indoors. Privately owned facilities for various indoor spectator or participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use. Indoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to:

•       Arcades

•       Archery and gun ranges

•       Batting cages

•       Bowling alleys

•       Billiard parlors/poolhalls

•       Dance halls

•       Ice rinks

•       Laser tag

•       Skateboarding, skating, and roller hockey rinks

•       Theaters

Commercial Recreation—Outdoors. Privately owned facilities for various outdoor spectator or participant sports and types of recreation where a fee is charged for use. Outdoor commercial recreation uses include, but are not limited to:

•       Amphitheaters

•       Amusement parks

•       Batting cages

•       Bocce ball

•       Drive-in theaters

•       Go-cart and miniature auto race tracks

•       Golf driving ranges (separate from golf courses)

•       Miniature golf courses

•       Motorcycle racing and drag strips

•       Race tracks

•       Shooting ranges

•       Skateboard parks

•       Stadiums and coliseums

•       Swim and tennis clubs

•       Swimming pools

•       Tennis courts

•       Water slides

•       Zoos

Commission or Planning Commission. The Planning Commission of the City of Los Alamitos.

Common Area or Property. A portion of land within a development, together with improvements on the land, that is not individually owned or dedicated for public use and that is intended for the common use or enjoyment of all property owners within the development.

Common Use. The utilization of common areas by the owners of condominium interests within a condominium or the lot owners or residents of a development or a tract.

Community/Cultural Center. See “Cultural Institutions.”

Community Gardens. A site used for growing plants for food, fiber, herbs, flowers, and others which is shared and maintained by community residents, either as an accessory or principal use of property.

Completely Enclosed Structure. A structure enclosed by a permanent roof and by solid exterior walls pierced only by windows and customary entrances and exit doors.

Conditional Use. A use of land identified by Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Land Uses and Development Regulations) as being allowed in a particular zoning district subject to a conditional use permit approval in compliance with Chapter 17.42 (Conditional Use Permits).

Condominium. A condominium project as defined in Civil Code Section 1350, containing two or more condominiums, as defined in Civil Code Section 783; a community apartment project, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11004, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy; stock cooperative, as defined in Business and Professions Code Section 11003.2, containing two or more rights of exclusive occupancy or another project as defined by law.

Consignment Store. See “Secondhand Store.”

Construction Equipment Rental/Sales. See “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Contractor’s Storage Yard. See “Storage.”

Convalescent Home. See “Residential Care Facilities.”

Convenience Store. A retail establishment with not more than 4,500 square feet of gross floor area, offering for-sale prepackaged food products, household items, newspapers and magazines, and sandwiches and other freshly prepared foods, such as salads, for off-site consumption. Sale of alcoholic beverages is limited to beer and wine only in conjunction with an ABC License Type 20.

Corner Cut-Off. See “Sight Safety Triangle.”

Corporation Yard. Base facility for City construction and property maintenance services including administrative offices, mechanical equipment, motor vehicles, trucks, and other items associated with the care, repair, and maintenance of City-owned real and personal property. Not open to the public. See also “Utility Facilities.”

Couch Dancing/Straddle Dancing. An employee of an adult-oriented business intentionally touching a patron while engaged in the display or exposure of specified anatomical areas, or while simulating specified sexual activities.

County. The County of Orange, California.

Court. A space, open and unobstructed to the sky, bounded on three or more sides by walls of a structure or structures. An inner court is a court entirely enclosed within the exterior walls of a structure. Other courts are outer courts.

Coverage. See “Site Coverage.”

Crematorium. See “Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities” and “Funeral Parlors and Interment Services.”

Cultural Institutions. A nonprofit institution displaying or preserving objects of interest in one or more of the arts or sciences. This use includes libraries, museums, and art galleries. May also include accessory retail uses such as a gift/book shop, restaurant, etc.

Cumulative Period. An additive period of time composed of individual time segments that may be continuous or interrupted. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.040 D Definitions
Data Centers. An industrial building containing floor space that houses computer mainframes, servers, and IT equipment primarily for the purpose of storing data and distributing data stored on-site. Data centers also contain all associated power distribution, cooling, cabling, fire suppression, and physical security systems.

Day Care Center. Establishments providing non-medical care for persons (children or adults) on a less than 24-hour basis other than “Family Day Care Homes.” This classification includes nursery schools, preschools, and day care facilities for children or adults, and any other day care facility licensed by the State.

Decibel (dB). A unit which denotes the ratio between two quantities which are proportional to power: the number of decibels corresponding to the ratio of two amounts of power is  10 times the logarithm to the base 10 of this ratio. This definition includes dB(A).

Density. The number of dwelling units that may be constructed per acre measured in density units. This definition of density does not preclude the requirements of other property development standards such as maintenance of required yard setbacks, maximum site coverage, off-street parking, outdoor living space, structure height, structure intensity, and vehicular access.

Density Bonus. An increase in the number of dwelling units normally allowed on a parcel by the applicable zoning district, granted by the City in compliance with Section 17.28.050 (Affordable Housing).

Department. The Los Alamitos Development Services Department.

Developer. Individuals, firms, or corporations that buy land in order to build on it or to sell it to others who want to build on it.

Development Services Director. The Development Services Director for the City or a designee of the City Manager.

Dining, Outside Seating Areas. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments.”

Director. The City of Los Alamitos Development Services Director, referred to in these Zoning Regulations as the “Director.”

Discretionary Permits and Actions. Authority granted by the City to use a specified site for a particular purpose, including conditional use permits, home occupation permits, planned development permits, site development permit, temporary use permits, and variances, as established by Division 5 (Land Use and Permit Procedures) of these Zoning Regulations.

Domestic Animals. Various animals customarily kept as household pets such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and birds.

Donation Boxes. A bin, storage shed, or similar facility established as an accessory use to a primary use for the purpose of providing a collection location for donated clothes, shoes, and small household items.

Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities. An establishment that sells products or provides services to occupants in vehicles, including automated teller machines, drive-in or drive-up windows and drive-through services. Examples include fast food restaurants, banks, and pharmacies. Does not include “click and collect” facilities in which an online order is picked up in a stationary retail business without use of a drive-in service (see “Retail Sales—General”). Does not include drive-in theaters or “Vehicle Services—Washing.”

Driveway. A paved portion of a parcel located between the public right-of-way and the garage or carport designed and intended as an accessway between the public right-of-way and the garage or carport.

Drought Tolerant Plant Material. Plants that tolerate heavy clay to sandy soil with use of limited supplemental water. These plants are able to thrive with deep infrequent watering once their root systems are established. These plants include those that grow naturally in areas of limited natural water supply and are adaptable to weather and soil conditions prevalent in Los Alamitos.

Dry Cleaning Establishments. See “Laundries and Dry-Cleaning Plants.”

Duplex. See “Two-Unit Dwelling (Duplex).”

Dwelling. A structure designed or used for the shelter or housing of one or more persons, including single-unit and multi-unit dwellings, but not including hotels, boarding houses, or rooming houses.

Dwelling, Multiple-Family. See “Multiple-Family Dwelling.”

Dwelling, Single-Family. See “Single-Family Dwelling.”

Dwelling Unit. Any structure or portion thereof designed for living and sleeping purposes that contains independent cooking and sanitation facilities. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.050 E Definitions
Eating and Drinking Establishments. Businesses primarily engaged in serving prepared food and/or beverages for consumption on or off the premises.

Bars, Lounges, Nightclubs, and Tasting Rooms. Any establishment that sells or serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises and is holding or applying for a public premises license from the State Department of Alcoholic Beverages and in which persons under 21 years of age are restricted from the premises. References to the establishment shall include any immediately adjacent area that is owned, leased, or rented, or controlled by the licensee. This use includes wine tasting rooms and micro-breweries where alcoholic beverages are sold and consumed on site and any food service is subordinate to the sale of alcoholic beverages. Does not include adult entertainment businesses.

Food Preparation/Catering (No On-Site Sales or Service). Businesses preparing and/or packaging food for off-site consumption, excluding those of an industrial character in terms of processes employed, waste produced, water used, and traffic generation. Typical uses include catering kitchens, bakeries, and small-scale specialty food production. Food Preparation may also be considered accessory to allowed restaurant uses.

Restaurant. Establishments where food and beverages may be consumed on the premises, taken out, or delivered.

Restaurant—Full or Limited Service, Serving Alcohol. A restaurant that provides alcohol service.

Restaurant—With Drive-Through Facilities. See “Drive-Through or Drive-Up Facilities.”

Snack Bar. A food facility limited to serving labeled prepackaged food, including, but not limited to, candy, chips, prepackaged cookies, canned beverages, hot dogs, sandwiches, or comparable items which are considered nonpotentially hazardous and limited to single service utensils.

Educational and Research Institutions. See “Schools” and “Research and Development.”

Emergency Machinery, Vehicle, or Alarm. Machinery, vehicle, or alarm that is used, employed, performed, or operated in an effort to protect, provide, or restore safe conditions in the community or for the citizenry, or work by private or public utilities when restoring utility service.

Emergency Shelter. See “Lodging—Homeless Shelters.”

Emergency Work. Work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency.

Encroachment Permit. A permit for improvements within a public right-of-way as required or otherwise provided pursuant to Chapter 12.08 of this Code.

Enlargement of Use. The expansion of a land use activity on a site or within a structure so that the use or activity occupies more floor or site area than before the expansion.

Entertainment, Indoor. An establishment offering predominantly spectator uses conducted within an enclosed building. Typical uses include motion picture theaters, live performance theaters, meeting halls, and dance halls.

Establishment. Includes any of the following:

•       The opening or commencement of an adult-oriented business as a new business.

•       The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult-oriented business, to an adult-oriented business.

•       The addition of an adult-oriented business to another existing adult-oriented business; or to another existing nonadult-oriented business, with or without expansion of floor area.

•       The relocation of an adult-oriented business.

•       The expansion or enlargement of the premises by 10 percent or more of the existing floor area.

Exaction. A contribution or payment required as an authorized precondition for receiving a development permit. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.060 F Definitions
Family. A group of persons, whether related or unrelated, who live together in a nontransient and interactive manner, including the joint use of common areas of the premises which they occupy and sharing household activities and responsibilities such as meals, chores, and expenses. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any group of persons required to be considered as a “family” for zoning purposes pursuant to California Health & Safety Code Sections 1267.8, 1566.3, 1568.0831, 1569.85, 11834.23, or any other state law shall be deemed to be a family for purposes of these Zoning Regulations.

Family Day Care Homes. A day care facility licensed by the State that is located in a single-unit residence or other dwelling unit where a resident of the dwelling provides care and supervision for children under the age of 18 for periods of fewer than 24 hours a day.

Large. A facility that provides care for nine to 14 children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of 10. See Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78.

Small. A facility that provides care for eight or fewer children, including children who reside at the home and are under the age of 10. See Health and Safety Code Section 1596.78.

Farmers’ Market. A temporary marketplace, either indoors or outdoors, for the display and sale of produce and other agricultural products such as, but not limited to, fresh fruits, vegetables, nuts, honey, shell eggs, flowers, and nursery stock.

Feasible. Capable of being accomplished in a successful manner within a reasonable period of time, taking into account economic, environmental, social, and technological factors.

Fence. A freestanding structure made of a combination of metal, masonry, or wood that rests on or is partially buried in the ground and rises above ground level; used for confinement, privacy, protection, screening, or partition purposes.

Financial Institutions and Related Services (Without Drive-Through Facilities). Financial institutions providing retail banking services. This classification includes only those institutions engaged in the on-site circulation of money, including credit unions, but does not include “Check Cashing Shops and/or Payday Loans” or any facility exchanging valuables for payment.

Fixed Noise Source. A stationary device that creates sounds while fixed or motionless, including but not limited to, industrial and commercial machinery and equipment, pumps, fans, compressors, generators, air conditioners, and refrigeration equipment.

Flood Control Facility. A structure designed and constructed to control floodwaters.

Floor Area Ratio (FAR). The numerical value obtained by dividing the aboveground floor area of any building(s) located on a lot by the net area of the lot. See Figure 7-02: Floor Area Ratio.

 

Figure 7-02: Floor Area Ratio



 

Florist. A retail establishment engaged in selling cut flowers, floral arrangements, and potted plants purchased from others. These establishments customarily prepare the arrangements they sell.

Food Preparation. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments.”

Food Processing. Food processing establishment includes any room, building, or place or portion thereof, maintained, used, or operated for the purpose of commercially storing, packaging, making, cooking, mixing, processing, bottling, canning, packing, slaughtering, or otherwise preparing or handling food except restaurants.

Fortune-Telling/Palm Reading/Psychic Readers. See “Personal Services, Restricted.”

Fraternities and Sororities. See “Organizational Houses.”

Freight/Truck Terminals. Transportation facilities furnishing services incidental to freight, courier, and postal services by truck, airplane, or rail. This classification does not include local messenger and local delivery services (see “Light Fleet-Based Services”).

Frozen Food Locker. Refrigerated warehousing and storage facilities. The services provided by these establishments include blast freezing, tempering, and modified atmosphere storage services.

Funeral Parlors and Interment Services. An establishment primarily engaged in the provision of services involving the care, preparation, or disposition of human remains and conducting memorial services. Typical uses include crematories, columbaria, mausoleums, mortuaries, funeral chapels, and funeral homes.

Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops, and Woodworking Shops. Manufacturing establishments that produce wood and metal household furniture and appliances; bed-springs and mattresses; office furniture and partitions, lockers, shelving and store furniture; and miscellaneous drapery, hardware, window blinds, and shades. Also includes wood and cabinet shops, but not sawmills or planing mills. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.070 G Definitions
Gas/Fueling Station. See “Service/Fueling Station.”

Garage or Carport. Parking space and shelter for automobiles or other motor vehicles, where the size of the parking space complies with the provisions of Chapter 17.22 (Parking and Loading).

Carport. An attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides.

Garage. An attached or detached accessory structure enclosed on no more than two sides.

Garage Sale. A temporary event, generally only one or two days held for the sale or offering for sale, to the general public, of over five items of personal property on a portion of a parcel in a residential zoning district, whether within or outside a structure.

General Plan. A comprehensive declaration of goals, policies, and programs for the development of the City and including, where applicable, diagrams, maps, and text identifying objectives, principles, standards, and other features, and which has been adopted by the Council.

General Retail. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Golf Courses/Country Clubs. A tract of land which is laid out with at least nine holes for playing a game of golf and improved with tees, greens, fairways, and hazards. A golf course includes a clubhouse and shelters as accessory uses. Country clubs provide private recreational, social, and multi-purpose uses associated with a private golf course for the benefit and enjoyment of members and their guests. Typical uses include clubhouses, tennis courts, playgrounds, and swimming pools.

Government Facilities. A building or structure owned, operated or occupied by a governmental agency to provide a governmental service to the public.

Grade. The average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior walls of the structure.

Grading. Excavating or filling of earth material, or any combination conducted to prepare the site for construction or the placement of the improvements on the site.

Granny Flat. A residential unit that was approved in accordance with Government Code Section 65852.1 and is grandfathered under State law.

Grocery Store. A retail establishment where the majority of the floor area open to the public is occupied by food products packaged for preparation and consumption away from the site of the store.

Gross Floor Area. The total horizontal area of the floor of a structure included within the surrounding walls, exclusive of vent shafts and courts.

Group Home—Six Residents or Fewer. A facility which provides 24-hour care and supervision to children, provides services to a specific client group, and maintains a structured environment, with such services provided at least in part by staff employed by the licensee. The care and supervision provided by a group home shall be nonmedical except as permitted by Welfare and Institutions Code Section 17736(b). Since small family and foster family homes, by definition, care for six or fewer children only, any facility providing 24-hour care for seven or more children must be licensed as a group home. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.080 H Definitions
Hazardous Waste Facilities. See also “Hazardous Waste Facilities.”

Applicant. Any person applying to the City for a Conditional Use Permit or a land use decision concerning a specified hazardous waste facility, as defined under the term “proponent” of State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(i).

Governor’s Appeal Board. A board formed to review the appeal of an “Applicant,” as defined in this section, of a specified hazardous waste facility land use decisions disapproved by the City or of one or more conditions of approval placed on an approved specified hazardous waste facility or an appeal by an “Interested Person,” as defined in this section, based solely on the ground that the conditions imposed do not adequately protect the public health, safety, or welfare. The Governor’s Appeal Board’s membership, purpose, and procedures are defined by State Health and Safety Code Sections 25199.9 through 25199.14.

Hazardous Waste. A waste, or combination of wastes, which because of its quantity, concentration, toxicity, corrosiveness, mutagenicity or flammability, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may: (1) cause, or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible, or incapacitating reversible illness; or (2) pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported or disposed of, or otherwise managed.

Health and Safety Assessment. A technical and environmental evaluation of a proposed facility, site, and surrounding area before approval of a Conditional Use Permit. The assessment shall consider the qualities and the physical and chemical characteristics of the specific types of waste that would be handled. The assessment shall include a hydraulic evaluation as well as risks due to flooding, earthquakes, and potential water or air pollution. It is not intended that the health and safety assessment duplicate information developed for environmental impact reports or risk assessments required under local, State, or Federal regulations.

Immobile Populations. Occupants associated with schools, hospitals, convalescent homes, prisons, facilities for the mentally ill, and other similar facilities.

Interested Person. A person who participated in one or more public meetings or hearings held to consider an application for a land use decision for a specified hazardous waste facility project. “Participation” as defined in State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.1(c) includes, but is not limited to, the giving of oral or written testimony at a meeting or hearing, submission of questions at a meeting or hearing, or attendance at the meeting or hearing.

Land Use Decision. A discretionary decision of the City concerning a specified hazardous waste facility including the issuance of a permit, a Conditional Use Permit, the granting of a variance, the subdivision of property, and the modification of existing property lines in compliance with Title 7 (commencing with Section 65000) of the Government Code.

Local Assessment Committee (LAC). A State-required committee of locally appointed representatives, designed to represent, generally, the interests of the residents in the City and residents in adjacent communities in meetings with the applicants of a proposed hazardous waste facility. The membership, duties, and mission of the committee are defined by State Health and Safety Code Section 25199.7(d), as reiterated in this chapter under (Local Assessment Committee).

Off-Site Hazardous Waste Facility. Any structures, other appurtenances, and improvements on the land, and all contiguous land serving more than one producer of hazardous waste and used for the treatment, transfer, storage, resource recovery, disposal, or recycling of hazardous waste, including, but not limited to:

•       Incineration facility (i.e., rotary kiln, fluid bed, etc.)

•       Residual repository (receives only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities)

•       Stabilization/solidification facilities

•       Chemical oxidation facilities

•       Neutralization/precipitation facilities

•       Transfer/storage facilities

Residuals Repository. A waste disposal facility specifically restricted to receiving only residuals from hazardous waste treatment facilities.

Specified Hazardous Waste Facility. A specific off-site facility project proposal.

Health Facilities, Therapy and Rehabilitation. Establishments of independent health practitioners primarily engaged in one of the following:

Rehabilitation. Planning and administering educational, recreational, and social activities designed to help patients or individuals with disabilities, regain physical or mental functioning or to adapt to their disabilities;

Specialized Sensory Treatments. Diagnosing and treating speech, language, or hearing problems. These practitioners operated private; and

Therapy. Administering medically prescribed physical therapy treatment for patients suffering from injuries or muscle, nerve, joint, and bone disease.

Health/Fitness Facilities.

Large. A full-service fitness center, gymnasium, or health and athletic club which is over 2,500 square feet in size and may include any of the following: sauna, spa, or hot tub facilities; weight rooms; indoor tennis, handball, or racquetball courts; rock climbing wall, boxing ring, cheerleading, aerobic classes and other indoor sports activities; locker rooms, and showers.

Small. An indoor facility of 2,500 square feet or less in size where passive or active exercises and related activities are performed using minimal muscle-building equipment or apparatus for the purpose of physical fitness, improved circulation or flexibility, and/or weight control. Examples of uses include Pilates, personal training, dance, yoga, and martial arts studios.

Height (of Structures). The vertical distance from the top of the nearest curb to the highest point of the roof.

Historical Landmark. An individual structure or group of structures having a special historical, architectural, cultural, or aesthetic value.

Homeless Shelters. Churches, public buildings, or quasi-public facilities that provide emergency or temporary shelter for more than 31 days in any six-month period to homeless individuals and/or groups. These accommodations may include temporary lodging, meals, laundry facilities, bathing, counseling, and other basic support services.

Home Occupation. The conduct of a business within a legal dwelling unit, with the business activity being incidental and clearly accessory to the primary residential use of the property.

Hospitals and Clinic/Urgent Care. State-licensed facilities providing medical, surgical, psychiatric, or emergency medical services to sick or injured persons. This classification includes facilities for inpatient or outpatient treatment, including substance-abuse programs as well as training, research, and administrative services for patients and employees. This classification excludes veterinaries and animal hospitals (see “Animal Care, Sales, and Services”).

Clinic/Urgent Care. A facility other than a hospital, providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical service for sick or injured persons exclusively on an out-patient basis, including emergency treatment, diagnostic services, administration, and related services to patients who are not lodged overnight. Services may be available without a prior appointment. This classification includes licensed facilities such as blood banks and plasma centers, and emergency medical services offered exclusively on an outpatient basis such as urgent care centers. Typically operates beyond standard medical office hours and may provide emergency treatment. May include educational aspects such as medical instruction and/or training as well as house a lab, radiology, pharmacy, rehabilitation, and other similar services as accessory uses. This classification does not include private medical and dental offices that typically require appointments and are usually smaller scale, see “Office, Medical and Dental Office.”

Hospital. A facility providing medical, psychiatric, or surgical services for sick or injured persons primarily on an in-patient basis, and including ancillary facilities for outpatient and emergency treatment, diagnostic services, training, research, administration, and services to patients, employees, or visitors.

Hotel. See “Lodging—Hotel and Motel.”

Hydrozone. A portion of the landscaped area having plants with similar water needs that are served by a valve or a set of valves with the same schedule. A hydrozone may be irrigated or nonirrigated, such as a naturalized area planted with native vegetation that will not need supplemental irrigation once established in a nonirrigated hydrozone. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.090 I Definitions
Impact Noise. The noise produced by the collision of one mass in motion with a second mass that may be either in motion or at rest.

Impound Yard. See “Vehicle Storage.”

Improvement. An improvement adds to the value of a facility, prolongs its useful life, or adapts it to new uses. Improvements are distinguished from repairs. Repairs keep facilities in good operating condition, do not materially add to the value of the facility, and do not substantially extend the life of the facility.

Industrial Property. A parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for manufacturing purposes including research and development uses.

Instructional Services. Commercial establishments that offer specialized programs in personal growth and development served provided on an individual or group setting. Typical uses include classes or instruction in music, art, or academics. Instructional Services also include rehearsal studios as an accessory use.

Intensification of Use. A change in the use of a structure or site, where the new use is required by Chapter 17.26 (Off-Street Parking and Loading) to have more off-street parking spaces than the former use; or a change in the operating characteristics of a use (for example, hours of operation), which generate more activity on the site.

Internet Café. See “Arcade (Electronic Game Center).” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.100 J Definitions
Jewelry Store. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Junk or Salvage Yard. See “Recycling Facilities—Scrap and Dismantling Yards.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.110 K Definitions
Kennel. See “Animal Care, Sales, and Services.”

Kitchen/Kitchenette. A room used for preparation of food. A complete kitchen contains a sink, refrigerator, stove or range top, and oven or microwave. A partial kitchen is missing one of the above components. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.120 L Definitions
Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing. A facility for testing, analysis, and/or research. Examples of this use include medical labs, soils and materials testing labs, and forensic labs. This type of facility is distinguished from industrial research and development (see “Research and Development”) in its orientation more toward testing and analysis than product development or prototyping; an industrial research and development facility may typically include this type of lab. The “medical lab” subset of this land use type is oriented more toward specimen analysis and processing than direct blood drawing and specimen collection from patients (see “Hospitals” and “Clinics”), but may also include incidental specimen collection.

Laboratory, Medical and Dental. See “Office, Medical and Dental.”

Landscaping. Any combination of native or exotic plants, lawn, green walls, landscaped roofs, groundcover, trees, shrubs, and other plant materials, plus decorative outdoor and complementary elements such pools, fountains, water features, paved or decorated walkways or surfaces of rock, stone, brick, block, or similar material (excluding driveways, parking, loading, or storage areas), and sculptural elements. Plants on rooftops or porches or in boxes attached to structures typically are not considered landscaping.

Landscaping Screen. The planting and continued maintenance of a compact screen of evergreen shrubbery forming a physical barrier or enclosure not less than six feet in height.

Land Use Permit. See “Discretionary Permits and Actions.”

Laundries and Dry-Cleaning Plants. Establishments engaged in high volume laundry and garment cleaning services, including power laundries; garment pressing and dry cleaning; linen supply; diaper service; industrial laundries; carpet and upholstery cleaners. Does not include coin-operated laundries (“laundromat”) or dry-cleaning drop-off/pick-up stores (“personal services”) without dry cleaning equipment.

Laundromat. An establishment engaged in operating facilities with coin operated or similar self-service laundry and dry-cleaning equipment for customer use on the premises.

Library. See “Cultural Institutions.”

Live Entertainment. A musical act (including karaoke), theatrical act (including standup comedy), play, revue, scene, dance act, or combination, performed by one or more persons, whether or not they are compensated for the performance, in a privately-owned premises that is open to the public, whether or not admission is charged.

Live/Work Unit. An integrated housing unit and working space, occupied and utilized by a single household in a structure, either single-unit or multiple-unit, and may include only commercial activities and pursuits that are compatible with the character of a residential environment. May be designed or structurally modified to accommodate joint residential occupancy and work activity, and which includes: (1) complete kitchen space and sanitary facilities in compliance with the City Building Code; and (2) working space reserved for and regularly used by one or more occupants of the unit.

Loading Space/Area. An off-street space or berth on the same parcel with a main structure, or contiguous to a group of structures, for the temporary parking of commercial vehicles while loading or unloading. The space shall not abut a street, alley, or other appropriate means of ingress or egress.

Local Landmark. A designated structure, natural, or manmade feature having a historic character or historic, cultural, architectural, or aesthetic value relating to the heritage of the City that is shown to merit preservation, restoration, and/or protection.

Locksmith. An establishment that can install and repairs locks; make or sell locks and keys; or open locks when keys are lost, misplaced, or stolen.

Lodging. An establishment providing overnight accommodations to transient patrons for payment for periods of fewer than 30 consecutive calendar days.

Hotel and Motel. An establishment with guest rooms or suites, with or without kitchen facilities, rented to the general public for overnight lodging to transient patrons. These establishments may provide additional services, such as conference and meeting rooms, restaurants, bars, personal services, retail services, or recreational facilities available to guests or to the general public. This use classification includes short-term residential rental, which is a dwelling unit that are shared, in whole or in part, for transient occupancy for periods of up to 30 consecutive days as a way of generating rental income. This use classification does not include boarding or rooming housings (see “Boarding Houses”) or bed and breakfasts (see “Bed and Breakfast Inns”), or hostels (see “Hostels”) which are separately defined and regulated.

Lot. A recorded lot or parcel of real property under single ownership, lawfully created as required by the Subdivision Map Act and City ordinances, including these Zoning Regulations. See Figure 7-03 (Lot Types) for various lot types.

 

Figure 7-03: Lot Types



Abutting Lot. A lot having a common property line or separated by a public path or lane, private street, or easement to the subject lot.

Corner Lot. A lot bounded on two or more sides by street lines that have an angle intersection that is not more than 135 degrees.

Cul-de-Sac Lot. A lot located on the curving portion of a cul-de-sac street.

Flag Lot. A lot that is located to the rear of another lot and is shaped such that the main portion of the lot area does not have access to a street other than by means of a corridor having less than 25 feet of width.

 

Figure 7-04: Flag Lot



Interior Lot. A lot bounded on one side by a street line and on all other sides by lot lines between adjacent lots or that is bounded by more than one street with an intersection greater than 135 degrees.

Irregular Lot. A lot of irregular, rather than rectangular, shape.

 

Figure 7-05: Irregular Lots



 

Key Lot. An interior lot, the front of which adjoins the side property line of a corner lot.

Reverse Corner Lot. A corner lot, the rear of which abuts the side of another lot, whether across an alley or not.

Through Lot. A lot having frontage on two parallel or approximately parallel streets.

Lot Area. The total area measured in a horizontal plane, included within the lot lines of a lot.

Lot Area, Gross. The area of a lot including planned or existing right-of-way dedications, private street easements, and all other easements.

Lot Area, Net. The ultimate lot area after the area of right-of-way dedications and private street easements have been subtracted.

Lot Coverage. The percentage of the net area of the lot covered by structures. This includes the perimeter of the building as viewed from a plan view, plus the area of all accessory buildings and structures, including but not limited to: covered porches and patios (including trellis covers), carports, porte-cocheres, storage sheds, and permanent playhouses.

Lot Depth. Lot depth is the measured distance along an imaginary straight line drawn from the midpoint of the front property line of the lot to the midpoint of the rear property line or to the most distant point on any other lot line where there is no rear lot line.

Lot Frontage. The boundary of a parcel adjacent to a public street right-of-way.

Lot Line. The boundary between a lot and other property or the public right-of-way. See Figure 7-06 (Lot Lines) for various lot lines.

 

Figure 7-06: Lot Lines



Lot Line, Front. On an interior lot, the line separating the lot from the street. On a corner lot, the shorter lot line abutting a street. On a through lot, the lot line abutting the street providing the primary access to the lot. On a flag lot, the interior lot line most parallel to and nearest the street from which access is obtained.

Lot Line, Rear. A lot line which is opposite and most distant from the front lot line. Where no lot line is within 45 degrees of being parallel to the front lot line, a line 10 feet in length within the lot, parallel to and at the maximum possible distance from the front lot line (or from a straight line drawn at a tangent to the midpoint of a front lot line on a curved street), will be deemed the rear lot line for the purpose of establishing the minimum rear setback.

Lot Line, Side. Any lot boundary line that is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.

Lot Line, Street Side. On a corner lot, the longer lot line abutting a street.

Lot Width. The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the lot depth line, measured from the front property line or at the required front setback line, whichever is greater.

Low and Very Low Income Households. Persons and families of incomes as defined by California Health and Safety Code Sections 50093 and 50105.

Low Water Flow Irrigation. A system of watering plant material using drip or other reduced water emitting devices that restrict the amount of water in gallons per minute to allow for deep percolation into the soil.

Lumber Yards, Retail and Wholesale. See “Building Materials and Services.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.130 M Definitions
Machine Shop. See “Vehicle Service, Major.”

Maintenance and Repair Services—Indoor. Establishments engaged in the maintenance or repair of office machines, household appliances, furniture, and similar items. This classification excludes maintenance and repair of vehicles or boats (see “Vehicle Sales and Services”) and personal apparel (see “Personal Services”).

Manufactured Home. See “Accessory Dwelling Unit (ADU).”

Manufacturing—Heavy. Manufacturing of products from extracted or raw materials or recycled or secondary materials, or bulk storage and handling of such products and materials. This classification includes operations such as biomass energy conversion; textile mills; leather and allied product manufacturing; wood product manufacturing; paper manufacturing; chemical manufacturing; plastics and rubber products manufacturing; nonmetallic mineral product manufacturing (such as sand, gravel, or clay into products for intermediate or final consumption); primary metal manufacturing; fabricated metal product manufacturing; petroleum refining and related industries; and automotive, ship, aircraft, and heavy equipment manufacturing. Includes accessory office uses associated with the on-site use. This classification does not include recycling (see “Recycling”) or the processing of animals.

Manufacturing—Light. A use engaged in the manufacture, predominately from previously prepared materials, of finished products or parts, including processing, fabrication, assembly, and treatment packaging, taking place primarily within enclosed buildings and producing minimal impacts on nearby properties. Includes accessory wholesale and/or direct retail sale to consumers of only those goods produced on-site. Includes accessory office uses associated with the on-site use. Examples of light industrial uses include, but are not limited to the manufacture of electronic instruments, equipment, and appliances; brewery and alcohol production, pharmaceutical manufacturing; and production apparel manufacturing.

Massage. See “Personal Services.”

Massage Establishment. See “Personal Services.”

Materials Storage Yard. See “Building Materials and Services.”

Mausoleum. See “Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities” and “Funeral Parlors and Interment Services.”

Medical Services. See “Hospitals and Clinics” and “Office, Medical and Dental Office.”

Metal Plating. See “Manufacturing—Heavy.”

Metal Working/Fabrication. See “Manufacturing—Heavy.”

Mixed-Use. A development project, containing both residential and commercial floor space, which is conceived and designed as a single integrated environment and in which both residential and commercial amenities are provided. A residential and commercial mixed-use development project shall be contained within one structure or on one site.

Mobile Home. A trailer, transportable in one or more sections, that is certified under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, which is over eight feet in width and 40 feet in length, with or without a permanent foundation and not including recreational vehicle, commercial coach, or factory-built housing. A mobile home on a permanent foundation is included under the definition of “Single Family Dwelling.”

Mobile Home Parks. A parcel of land under one or more ownerships that has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes, as the term “mobile home” is defined in Civil Code Section 798.3 or successor provision of the State Mobile home Residency Law, for nontransient use.

Mobile Home Space. The portion of a mobile home park set aside and designated for the occupancy of a mobile home or a manufactured home, including the area set aside for parking or structures which are accessory to the mobile home such as awnings, cabanas, and armadas.

Mobile Noise Source. A noise source other than a fixed noise source.

Mortuary. See “Cemeteries, Crematories, Columbaria, and Related Facilities” and “Funeral Parlors and Interment Services.”

Motel. See “Lodging—Hotel and Motel.”

Moving Companies. An establishment that moves the possessions of a family or business from one site to another. The company may also provide storage, or incidental sales of moving supplies.

Mulch. Shredded or chipped wood from tree branches and trunks and from uncontaminated wood products or lumber; this matter is often mixed with leaves and grass clippings for optimal effect.

Multiple Family Dwelling. Two or more dwelling units attached or detached on a site or lot, which does not include an accessory dwelling unit. Types of multiple unit dwellings include a duplex, triplex, fourplex, townhouses, common interest subdivisions, garden apartments, senior housing developments, and multistory apartment buildings. Multiple-unit dwellings may also be combined with nonresidential uses as part of a mixed-use development.

Museum. See “Cultural Institutions.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.140 N Definitions
Nightclub. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments.”

Noise Level. The “A” weighted sound pressure level in decibels obtained by using a sound level meter at slow response with a reference pressure of 20 micropascals (micronewtons per square meter). The unit of measurement shall be designated as dB(A).

Nonconforming Lot or Parcel. Any property created by a legal subdivision of land that was created in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time the property was subdivided but which, due to subsequently enacted ordinances or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and standards for the zone in which the property is located.

Nonconforming Structure. Any structure, building, or improvement that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time it was erected but which, due to subsequently enacted ordinances or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and standards for the zone in which the structure is located.

Nonconforming Use. See “Use, Nonconforming.”

Nudity/State of Nudity. The appearance of a human bare buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals, or female breast.

Nurseries and Garden Centers. Establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products—such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod—that are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. Fertilizer and soil products are stored and sold in package form only. This classification includes wholesale and retail nurseries offering plants for sale. This classification also includes farm supply and feed stores.

Nursery School. See “Day Care Centers.”

Nursing Home. See “Residential Care Facilities.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.150 O Definitions
Offices.

Business and Professional (Non-Medical and Dental Office). Offices of firms or organizations providing professional, executive, management, or administrative services, such as accounting, architectural, computer software design, engineering, graphic design, interior design, legal offices, and tax preparation offices, but excluding banks and savings and loan associations (see “Financial Institutions and Related Services” and “Check Cashing and/or Payday Loans”).

Medical and Dental Office. Office use providing consultation, diagnosis, therapeutic, preventive, or corrective ser treatment services by doctors, dentists, chiropractors, acupuncturists, optometrists, and similar medical professionals, medical and dental laboratories within medical office buildings but excluding clinics or independent research laboratory facilities and hospitals (see “Hospitals and Clinics”), and similar practitioners of medical and healing arts for humans licensed for such practice by the State of California. Incidental medical and/or dental research within the office is considered part of the office use, where it supports the on-site patient services.

Public Utility Commercial. A workplace for a government establishment engaged in the administration, regulation, licensing, and inspection of utilities, such as communications, electric power (including fossil, nuclear, solar, water, and wind), gas and water supply, and sewerage.

Office Supply Store. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Open Space.

Open Space, Common. The total land area within a residential development that is not individually owned nor dedicated for public use, and that is designed, intended, and reserved exclusively for the shared use of all the residents of the development and their guests. Examples include barbecue and picnicking areas, play areas, swimming pools, tennis courts, turf areas, and other recreational or leisure features and facilities. Common open space does not typically include enclosed spaces/facilities such as a community center, meeting rooms, etc.

Open Space, Private. A usable open space adjoining and directly accessible to a dwelling unit, reserved for the exclusive use of residents of the dwelling unit and their guests. May include a combination of landscape and hardscape.

Open Space, Unimproved. Any open space that has not been landscaped or otherwise provided with amenities, and is generally kept in a natural state.

Open Space, Usable or Improved. Outdoor space that serves a recreational function or provides visual relief from the building mass. May include a combination of landscape and hardscape.

Organizational Houses. Residential lodging houses operated by educational and religious institutions and/or membership organizations for their members and not open to the general public. Includes fraternity and sorority houses, convents, monasteries, and religious residential retreats. Does not include living quarters for ministers and staff serving a religious facility.

Outdoor Commercial Recreation Facilities. See “Commercial Recreation.”

Outdoor Retail Sales and Activities. Permanent outdoor sales and rental establishments including auction yards, lumber and other material sales yards, newsstands, outdoor facilities for the sale or rental of other vehicles/equipment, and other uses where the business is not conducted entirely within a structure. Does not include the sale of motor vehicles. See “Motor Vehicle Sales/Rentals.”

Outdoor Temporary and/or Seasonal Sales. The temporary outdoor use of property for retail sales.

Outside Storage Area. See “Storage.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.160 P Definitions
Paper Product Fabrication. See “Manufacturing—Heavy.”

Parcel. See “Lot.”

Park and Recreation Facilities. Parks with playgrounds and recreation facilities, all of which are noncommercial and intended for neighborhood or community use. This classification also includes noncommercial playing fields, courts, gymnasiums, public swimming pools, picnic facilities, tennis courts, and golf courses, as well as related food concessions or community centers within the facilities.

Parking. The act of stopping and leaving a vehicle; usually with the intention of leaving it for some time.

Parking Facility. A surface parking lot or parking structure that is a primary use of a site.

Parking Facility—Temporary. The temporary use of property for the parking of vehicles.

Parking Lot. A ground level, outdoor area where operative cars, buses, recreational vehicles, trucks, vans, and other motor vehicles are stored.

Parking Structure. A structure for the temporary indoor storing of operative cars, buses, recreational vehicles, trucks, vans, and other motor vehicles are stored.

Patio. Typically, a paved outdoor area on the site of a dwelling that is used for lounging, dining, etc.

Pawn Shop. A commercial establishment that sells secondhand personal property and in which the operator provides loans secured by such personal property.

Pedestrian Amenities/Orientation. A use that is intended to encourage walk-in customers and which generally does not limit the number of customers by requiring appointments or otherwise excluding the general public. A pedestrian oriented use provides spontaneous draw from sidewalk and street due to intense and surprising visual interest, high customer turnover, and intense social interaction. Physical structures or places with design qualities and elements that contribute to an active, inviting and pleasant place for pedestrians including:

•       Design amenities related to the street level such as awnings, paseos, arcades

•       Continuity of structure facades along the street with few interruptions in the progression of structures and stores

•       Continuity of the sidewalk with a minimum of intrusions into pedestrian right-of-way

•       Highly articulated facades at the street level with interesting uses of material, color, and architectural detailing

•       Landscaping

•       Signage oriented and scaled to the pedestrian rather than the motorist

•       Street furniture

•       Visibility into structures at the street level

Permitted Use. Land uses that are listed as allowed or conditionally allowed in Division 2 (Zoning Districts, Allowable Uses, and Development Regulations), subject to compliance with applicable provisions of these Zoning Regulations.

Person. Any individual, firm, co-partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, limited liability company, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, and the plural as well as the singular.

Personal Services. Provision of recurrently needed services of a personal nature. This classification includes barber shops and beauty salons, seamstresses, tailors, day spas, massage services where all persons engaged in the practice of massage are certified pursuant to the Business and Professions Code Section 4612, dry cleaning agents (excluding large-scale bulk cleaning plants), shoe repair shops, self-service laundries, tattoo and body piercing services, video rental stores, photocopying, photo finishing services, and travel agencies mainly intended for the consumer.

Personal Services, General. Establishments that provide recurrently needed services of a personal nature. Examples of these uses include:

•       barber shops, hair salon

•       clothing rental shops

•       day spa without massage

•       dry-cleaning pick-up stores with limited on-site cleaning equipment

•       laundromats (self-service laundries)

•       locksmiths

•       nail salon

•       shoe repair shops

•       tailors and seamstresses

•       ticket services shops

Personal Services, Restricted. Personal services with characteristics that have the potential to adversely impact surrounding areas and which may need to be dispersed to minimize their adverse impacts. Examples of these uses include:

•       day spa with massage

•       fortune-telling, palm reading, and psychic services

•       massage establishments

•       palm and card readers

•       tanning salons

•       tattoo and body piercing services

Pet Store. An establishment that sells birds, cats, dogs, fish, and other common household pets, including supplies for the care and feeding of the animals sold. This use may include pet grooming, but not the boarding of animals other than those for sale.

Pharmacy. An establishment where a licensed pharmacist prepares prescription medicines for sale, which may also sell over-the-counter medicines, personal care products, and other miscellaneous products.

Photofinishing Shop. See “Personal Services, General.”

Planned Development. As defined by Civil Code Section 1351(k), a development (other than a community apartment project, condominium, or stock cooperative) having either or both of the following features:

1.     The common area is owned either by an association or in common by the owners of the separate interests who possess appurtenant rights to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area; and/or

2.     A power exists in the association to enforce an obligation of an owner of a separate interest with respect to the beneficial use and enjoyment of the common area by means of an assessment which may become a lien upon the separately owned parcel, or area in compliance with Civil Code Section 1367.

Postal Service. An establishment that provides commercial postal services directly to the customer, including letter and parcel mailing, post office box rental, and related services.

Predominant Tone Noise. A noise characterized by a predominant frequency or frequencies so that other frequencies cannot be readily distinguished.

Primary Use. See “Use, Primary.”

Printing and Publishing. Establishments engaged in printing by letterpress, lithography, gravure, screen, offset, or electrostatic (xerographic) copying; and other establishments serving the printing trade, including bookbinding, typesetting, engraving, photoengraving and electrotyping. This use also includes establishments that publish newspapers, books, and periodicals; establishments manufacturing business forms and binding devices. See also “Business Support Services.”

Property Line. A boundary line separating parcels of real property having separate legal descriptions.

Property Maintenance Service. An establishment engaged in cleaning structure interiors and/or windows, ensuring trash removal, maintaining landscaping, etc.

Public Assembly Facilities. A facility for public or private assembly and meetings, exclusive of “Religious Assembly Facilities,” which is defined separately. Examples of these uses include:

•       banquet rooms

•       civic and private auditoriums

•       community centers

•       conference/convention facilities

•       meeting halls for clubs and other membership organizations

        Public assembly facilities do not include gymnasiums or other “Sports and Entertainment Assembly” facilities, or “Day Care Centers” or “Schools,” which are all separately classified and regulated.

Public Facility. A facility or structure including outdoor recreation areas owned by a local, regional, State, or Federal agency.

Public Right-of-Way. Any public street, public way, public alley or public place, laid out, reserved, or dedicated for street, sidewalk, storm drainage, bicycle path, or other public uses or purposes under the jurisdiction of the City.

Public Safety Facilities. A facility operated by public agencies including fire stations, other fire prevention and fire fighting facilities, police and sheriff substations and headquarters, including interim incarceration facilities.

Public Utility Commercial Office. See “Office, Public Utility Commercial.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.170 Q Definitions
Reserved. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.180 R Definitions
Rear Yard. See “Yard, Rear.”

Recording Studio. Workplaces where movies, television shows or radio programs are produced and recorded, including administrative and technical production, administrative and production support offices, post-production facilities (editing and sound recording studios, foley stages, etc.), optical and special effects units, film processing laboratories, etc.

Recreational Equipment Rentals. Rental of bicycles, scooters, skate board, ice skate, snow boards, surf boards, and similar recreational vehicles and equipment that are manpowered and do not include a motor, including on-site storage and incidental maintenance that does not require pneumatic lifts.

Recreational Vehicle (RV). A motor home, travel trailer, truck camper, or camping trailer, with or without motive power, originally designed for human habitation for recreational, emergency, or other occupancy, which meets all of the following criteria:

1.     It contains less than 320 square feet of internal living room area, excluding built-in equipment, including wardrobe, closets, cabinets, kitchen units or fixtures, and bath or toilet rooms;

2.     It contains 400 square feet or less of gross area measured at maximum horizontal projections;

3.     It is built on a single chassis; and

4.     It is self-propelled, truck-mounted, or permanently towable on the highways without a towing permit.

Recreation Facilities, Private—Indoor or Outdoor. A building, structure, or open space designed as an accessory recreational use to a permitted principal use. Private recreational facilities include such uses as swimming pools and tennis courts and are not open to the general public and not operated for profit.

Recyclable Materials. Those materials separated from solid waste and designated as recyclable under City sponsored recycling programs or source-separated, individual solid waste materials such as paper, cardboard, glass, plastics, or metals.

Recycling or Recyclable Material. Reusable domestic containers and other materials that can be reconstituted, remanufactured, or reused in an altered form, including glass, metals, paper and plastic. Recyclable material does not include refuse or hazardous materials.

Recycling Area. The space allocated in a development project for collecting and loading of recyclable materials. If source separation of recyclable materials is required, this area shall accommodate the necessary receptacles for the recyclable materials. Recycling areas shall be accessible and convenient to deposit recyclable materials, and for the collection of recyclable materials.

Recycling Facilities. A facility for receiving, temporarily storing, transferring and/or processing materials for recycling, reuse, or final disposal. This use classification does not include facilities that deal with animal matter nor does it include waste transfer facilities that operate as materials recovery, recycling, and solid waste transfer operations, which are classified as utilities.

Collection Facility. A facility available for the general public for the recycling of California Redemption Value (CRV) products such as glass, aluminum cans, and plastic beverage containers as defined by the State’s Department of Resources Recycling and Recovery. Also includes reverse vending machines, where an automated mechanical device that accepts, sorts, and processes recyclable materials and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip. Processing and sorting is not conducted on site.

Large Collection Facility. A facility that occupies an area of more than 500 square feet and/or includes permanent structures where the public may donate, redeem, or sell recyclable materials.

Mobile Recycling Unit. An automobile, truck, trailer, or van used for the collection of recyclable materials, carrying bins, boxes, or other containers.

Reverse Vending Machine(s). An automated mechanical device which accepts at least one or more types of empty beverage containers, including, but not limited to, aluminum cans, glass and plastic bottles, and issues a cash refund or a redeemable credit slip with a value of not less than the container’s redemption value as determined by the state. A “reverse vending machine” may sort and process containers mechanically provided that the entire process is enclosed within the machine. In order to accept and temporarily store all three container types in a proportion commensurate with their relative redemption rates, and to meet the requirements of certification as a recycling facility, multiple grouping of reverse vending machines may be necessary.

Small Collection Facility. A facility that occupies an area of 500 square feet or less where the public may donate, redeem, or sell recyclable materials and may include:

•       A mobile unit

•       Bulk reverse vending machines or a grouping of reverse vending machines occupying more than 50 square feet

•       Kiosk-type units that may include permanent structures

•       Unattended containers placed for the donation of recyclable materials

Processing Facility. A facility used for the collection and processing of recyclable materials for shipment, or to an end user’s specifications, by such means as baling, briquetting, cleaning, compacting, crushing, flattening, grinding, mechanical sorting, remanufacturing and shredding. Processing facilities include the following types, both of which are included under the definition of “Recycling Facilities—Scrap and Dismantling Yards”:

Heavy Processing Facility. A facility that occupies an area of 45,000 square feet and over of collection, processing and storage area, and averages more than two outbound truck shipments each day.

Light Processing Facility. A facility that occupies an area of under 45,000 square feet of collection, processing and storage area, and averages two outbound truck shipments each day. Light processing facilities are limited to baling, briquetting, compacting, crushing, grinding, shredding and sorting of source separated recyclable materials sufficient to qualify as a certified processing facility. A light processing facility shall not shred, compact, or bale ferrous metals other than food and beverage containers.

Scrap and Dismantling Yards. Outdoor establishments primarily engaged in assembling, breaking up, sorting, and the temporary storage and distribution of recyclable or reusable scrap and waste materials, including auto wreckers engaged in dismantling automobiles for scrap, and the incidental wholesale or retail sales of parts from those vehicles. Includes light and heavy processing facilities for recycling (see the definitions above). Does not include junk or salvage yards (“Junk and Salvage Yards”); places where these activities are conducted entirely within structures; pawnshops (“Pawnshops”) and other secondhand stores (“Secondhand/consignment Stores”); the sale of operative used cars; or landfills or other waste disposal sites.

Religious Assembly Facilities. Any facility specifically designed and used to accommodate the gathering of persons for the purposes of fellowship, worship, or similar conduct of religious practices and activities. This definition includes functionally related internal facilities (i.e., kitchens, multi-purpose rooms, storage, etc.) and residences for clergy. Other establishments maintained by religious organizations, including full-time educational institutions, hospitals and other related operations, are classified according to their respective activities.

Repair/Maintenance, Consumer Products. See “Maintenance and Repair Services—Indoor.”

Research and Development. A facility for scientific research, and the design, development and testing of electrical, electronic, magnetic, optical and computer and telecommunications components in advance of product manufacturing, and the assembly of related products from parts produced off-site, where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities. Includes pharmaceutical, chemical and biotechnology research and development. Does not include soils and other materials testing laboratories (see “Laboratory—Medical, Analytical, Research, Testing”), or blood drawing and specimen collection from patients (see “Hospitals and Clinics, Clinic”), or testing of computer software (see “Office”). Includes assembly of related products from parts produced off-site where the manufacturing activity is secondary to the research and development activities.

Residential Care Facilities—Seven or More Persons. Facilities that are licensed by the State to provide permanent living accommodations and 24-hour primarily non-medical care and supervision for seven or more persons in need of personal services, supervision, protection, or assistance for sustaining the activities of daily living. Living accommodations are shared living quarters with or without separate kitchen or bathroom facilities for each room or unit. This classification includes facilities that are operated for profit as well as those operated by public or not-for-profit institutions, including hospices, nursing homes, convalescent facilities, and group homes for minors, persons with disabilities, and people in recovery from alcohol or drug addictions. This use classification excludes “Supportive and/or Transitional Housing.”

Residential Property. A parcel of real property that is developed and used either in part or in whole for residential purposes, other than transient uses such as hotels and motels.

Resident Manager’s Unit. A dwelling unit within a residential housing project or a multiple-family development in which a manager, acting as agent for the owner-lessor(s) of the residential housing project or the multiple-family development, resides.

Restaurant. See “Eating and Drinking Establishments.”

Retail Carts and Kiosks. The retail sale or viewing of merchandise located in a non-motorized pushcart or stand, designed to be portable and not permanently affixed to a structure or location.

Retail Sales—General. The retail sale or rental of merchandise not specifically listed under another use classification. This classification includes department stores, clothing stores, furniture stores, pet supply stores, hardware stores, and businesses retailing the following goods: toys, hobby materials, handcrafted items, jewelry, cameras, photographic supplies and services (including portraiture and retail photo processing), medical supplies and equipment, pharmacies, electronic equipment, sporting goods, kitchen utensils, hardware, appliances, antiques, art galleries, art supplies and services, paint and wallpaper, carpeting and floor covering, office supplies, bicycles, and new automotive parts and accessories (excluding vehicle service and installation). Retail sales may be combined with other services such as office machine, computer, electronics, and similar small-item repairs. Does not include swap meet, pawn shop, or secondhand stores.

Retail Sales—Restricted. The retail sale of gun and ammunition stores, pawn shops, consignment stores, secondhand stores, and business offering payment for valuable goods such as jewelry and gold.

Retirement Home. See “Senior Housing.”

Reverse Corner Lot. See “Reverse Corner Lot.”

Roominghouse. See “Boarding House.”

Rubber Products. See “Manufacturing—Heavy.”

Runoff. Water that is not absorbed by the soil or landscape to which it is applied and flows from the area. Usually occurs when water is applied at too great a rate (application rate exceeds infiltration rate) or when there is a severe slope. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.190 S Definitions
Salvage Yard. Places used for storing or keeping of recyclable or salvage materials.

Satellite Antenna. See “Wireless Telecommunication Facilities.”

Schools. A public or private educational institution which is run by the state or a subdivision or which is licensed by the state to offer preschool, elementary or secondary academic instruction—including kindergartens, elementary schools, middle or junior high schools, and high schools.

Schools, K through 12—Private. A private academic educational institution, including boarding schools; elementary, middle/junior, and high schools; military academies; and businesses providing instruction in arts and languages. This definition does not include “Trade and Vocational Schools,” “Tutoring and Education Centers,” or non-tuition part-time instruction at religious assembly facilities.

Schools, Private. A private academic educational institution, including boarding schools; colleges and universities; elementary, middle/junior, and high schools; military academies; and businesses providing instruction in arts and languages. This definition does not include “Trade and Vocational Schools,” “Tutoring and Education Centers,” or non-tuition part-time instruction at religious assembly facilities.

Schools, Public. A publicly-funded academic educational institution, including colleges and universities; elementary, middle/junior, and high schools; military academies; and charter schools. This definition does not include “Trade and Vocational Schools,” “Tutoring and Education Centers,” or non-tuition part-time instruction at religious assembly facilities.

Secondhand Store. Defined and regulated as “Personal Services, Restricted” and further, a business involved in the retail sale of used goods and merchandise such as a thrift store or consignment, whereby the sale of such used goods and merchandise comprise 25 percent or more of total monthly sales volume. This definition does not include pawn shops and swap meets.

Self-Storage. See “Storage—Personal.”

Senior Care Facilities. See “Senior Housing.”

Senior Housing. A housing development incorporating independent dwelling units that are designed for, and limited to, the occupancy by persons who are at least 62 years of age, or who are at least 55 years of age and meet the qualifications found in Section 51.3 of the California Civil Code. This definition includes senior apartments, retirement communities, retirement homes and homes for the aged. It does not include extended care facilities such as convalescent homes or skilled nursing facilities (“Medical Services—Extended Care”); assisted living facilities or senior care facilities.

Service Station. See “Vehicle Repair and Services.”

Setback. The distance by which a structure, parking area, or other development feature shall be separated from a parcel line, other structure or development feature, or street centerline. Setbacks from private streets are measured from the edge of the easement. Figure 7-07 (Setbacks) shows the location of front, side, street side, rear, and interior setbacks. See also “Yards.”

Front Setback. The minimum distance required between a structure and the front property line.

Rear Setback. The minimum distance required between a structure and the rear property line.

Side Setback. The minimum distance required between a structure and a side property line.

Street Side Setback. The minimum distance required between a structure and the side property line adjacent to the street. Figure 7-08 (Street Side Setbacks) shows street side setbacks.

 

Figure 7-07: Setbacks



 

Figure 7-08: Street Side Setback



 

Shopping Center. See “Retail Sales—General.”

Short-Term Residential Rental. See “Lodging—Hotel and Motel.”

Side Yard. See “Yard, Side.”

Sight Safety Triangle. The area maintained with adequate and safe visibility for vehicular and pedestrian traffic at intersections of streets, alleys, or private driveways.

Signs.

Abandoned Sign. A sign that no longer correctly directs or exhorts a person, nor advertises a bona fide business, lessor, owner, product, or activity conducted or product available on the premises where the sign is displayed.

Advertising Device or Display. An object, person, item or animal, or other device including, but not limited to, banners, balloons, statues, flags, pennants, lights, portable signs, signs, or landscaping, used to attract attention for the purpose of drawing attention to a site or promoting the sale of goods or services.

A-Frame Sign. A sign generally not securely attached or fixed to the ground or to a permanent structure used as a stationary advertising devise and usually supported by two upright sign faces.

Aggregate Area. The total area of sign and/or advertising device surface.

Alteration. A change of copy, sign face, color, size, shape, illumination, position, location, construction, or support of a sign or advertising device.

Animated Sign. A sign designed to attract attention through movement or the semblance of movement of the whole or a part, including, but not limited to, signs which swing, twirl, revolve, move back and forth or up and down; or signs which can change color or shades of color; or another method or device which suggests movement, but not including flags or banners.

Area of Sign. The entire area within which a single continuous perimeter of not more than six straight lines enclose the extreme limits of the text, representation, emblem, figure, or similar character together with material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate the sign against which it is placed. Necessary supports or uprights on which the sign may be placed are excluded unless supports or uprights are designed to form an integral background or part of the display. When a sign has two or more faces, the area of all faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign except where two faces are placed back to back.

Awning. A roof-like structure, either temporary or portable in nature, that projects from a wall of a structure for the purpose of shielding a doorway or window from the elements and may be periodically retracted into the face of a structure.

Balloon. A spherical, flexible, nonporous bag or similar object capable of being filled with air or gas.

Banner Sign. A publicly visible temporary advertising device made of cloth, paper, plastic, cardboard, metal, or other usually flexible material, which may indicate the identity or give or ask information about or convey a message, either directly or indirectly, about a person, entity, business, commodity, service, or idea.

 

Figure 7-09: Banner Sign



Bench. A seat located upon or adjacent to a public or private right-of-way for the purpose of persons resting and which is capable of displaying a sign or advertising device.

Billboard. A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted, sold, or offered at a location other than the premises on which the sign is located.

Building Sign. A sign lettered to provide the name of a building itself, as opposed to the names of occupants or services.

Building Identification Sign. A sign which contains only the name of a building and/or the address of the building and is incorporated into the architecture of the building.

Bulletin Board. A sign that signifies an institution or organization on the premises of which it is located and that contains the name of the institution or organization, the names of the individuals connected with it, and general announcements of events or activities occurring at the institution or similar messages.

Campaign Sign. A political sign but may include an advertising device or sign designed to influence the passage or defeat of a measure on the ballot or designed to influence the voters with respect to the nomination, election, defeat, or removal of a candidate from public office at any national, state, or local election.

Canopy. See “Awning.”

Canopy Sign. A form of advertising or illumination attached, painted, or constructed on a canopy or awning.

Center. A commercial, industrial, or professional use, consisting of one or more structures sharing common facilities. In each case, a center will consist of two or more retail stores or businesses, but may not necessarily be under a single ownership.

Center Identification Sign. A freestanding sign that advertises or directs attention to a shopping center or area having two or more separate businesses or activities.

Civic Activity Sign. A bulletin board or other similar advertising device incident to religious assembly facilities, hospitals, libraries, museums, and other similar public or bona fide nonprofit institutions.

Construction Sign. A temporary sign on the premises listing the development, architect, engineer, planner, contractor, or other person or firm participating in the development, construction, or financing of a development.

Detached Sign. See “Freestanding Sign.”

Digital Sign: A variable message sign that utilizes computer-generated messages or some other electronic means of changing copy. These signs generally include displays using LEDs (light emitting diodes), CCDs (charge coupled devices), plasma, or functionally equivalent technologies to display a series of still images or full motion, usually remotely programmable and changeable. Also known as “electronic message centers.”

Directional Sign. A sign erected to serve as a public convenience in directing pedestrian and vehicular traffic, but not used for the purpose of advertising uses and activities on-site.

 

Figure 7-10: Directional Signs



 

Directly Illuminated Sign. A sign designed to provide artificial light, either through exposed lighting on the sign face or through transparent or translucent material from a light source within the sign, including, but not limited to, exposed neon signs.

Directory Sign. A sign erected to serve as a convenience in directing patrons or guests to a business or residential unit.

Eave line. The part of a roof which projects over or meets the wall.

Electrical Sign. A sign containing electrical wiring that is attached, or intended to be attached, to an electrical energy source for the purposes of illuminating its surface.

Electronic Message Sign. A directly illuminated sign that presents variable advertising messages displayed by an electronically controlled lighting pattern against a contrasting background, and that may be programmed to change the message display periodically.

Exempt Sign. Signs exempt from the permit requirements of Chapter 17.26 (Signs).

Façade. The exterior walls of a structure exposed to public view.

Fascia. A broad well-defined horizontal member of color or material having the form of a flat band between the top of a wall and the eaves of a roof. The area used for identification over the front of a shop.

Fascia Sign. A sign attached to or erected against a wall of a structure, with the face horizontally parallel to the structure wall.

Flag. Cloth or other lightweight material of distinctive size, color, and design, used as a symbol, standard, signal, emblem, or a device used to attract attention.

Flashing Sign. A directly or indirectly illuminated sign that exhibits changing natural or artificial light or color effects by any means whatsoever.

Freestanding Sign. A nonmoveable sign not affixed to a building, including but not limited to pole signs, ground signs, and construction signs.

 

Figure: 7-11: Types of Freestanding Signs





 

Frontage, Building. The lineal measurement of a building façade which fronts on a public or private street.

Frontage, Street. The linear measurement of a parcel along a public or private right-of-way but not including the lineal measurement along an alley, railroad, or freeway.

Garage Sale Sign. A temporary sign announcing the limited sale, from a private residence, of goods, furniture, clothing, or other similar articles.

Height of Sign. Calculated by measuring the vertical distance of a sign from the uppermost point of a sign measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure.

Historical Sign. A sign, which because of its character, age, or influence, is of historic significance to the community.

Identification Sign. A sign that is limited to the name, address, and number of a building, institution, or person and to the activity carried on in the building or institution, or to the occupancy of the person.

Illegal Sign. A sign not allowed or exempted by this title.

Illuminated Sign. A sign which reflects light from a source intentionally directed upon it; by means of, including, but not limited to, floodlights, gooseneck reflectors, or externally mounted fluorescent light fixtures.

Interior Sign. A sign located within the inside of a business that is not visible from any area outside the structure that is open to the public.

Internally Illuminated Sign. An electric sign whose source of illumination is not visible to the viewer.

Kiosk. A freestanding, round, or multiple sided structure whose main purpose is to display signs or information.

Linear Frontage. The horizontal measurement of a building face, legal parcel, or site.

Logo. A name, symbol, feature, or trademark that represents a business, enterprise, group, or activity.

Mansard. A roof system having a steep slope, normally on all building sides.

Marquee. A hood, canopy, awning, or permanent construction that projects from a wall of a structure usually above an entrance and able to depict changeable copy.

Menu Board Sign. A sign displaying food or items sold on the premises.

Monument Sign. A free-standing sign or trademark incorporated in a wall or structure, constructed of concrete, wood, steel, or other similar building materials.

Multitenant Identification Sign. A single sign identifying each tenant or business individually.

Nameplate. A sign naming the occupant of the premises, the business, and/or address.

Nonconforming Sign. An advertising structure or sign which was lawfully erected and maintained before a time as it came within the purview of these Zoning Regulations and amendments of them, and which fails to conform to applicable regulations and restrictions of these Zoning Regulations; or a nonconforming sign for which a special permit has been issued.

Off-Site Sign/Off-Premises (Outdoor Advertising Sign). See “Billboard.”

On-Site Sign. A sign identifying or advertising a business, person, activity, goods, products, or services located on the premises where the sign is installed and maintained.

Owner. A person recorded on official records and including any duly authorized agent or notary, a purchaser, devisee, judiciary, and persons having a vested or contingent interest in the property in question.

Parapet Wall. The portion of a structure wall that extends above the roof level.

Pole Sign. A freestanding sign directly supported by a pole or poles with air space between the grade level and any portion of the sign face.

Political Sign. A sign advocating the election of a specific candidate or candidates for political office, advocating a position with respect to a ballot issue or issues.

Portable Sign. A sign not designed to be attached to a structure or anchored to the ground, including, “A-Frame Sign,” fence signs and “Vehicle Mounted Sign.”

Projecting Sign. A sign other than a wall sign suspended from or supported by a structure and projecting outward either parallel or perpendicular.

Public Service Information Sign. A sign intended primarily to promote items of general interest to the community, including, but not limited to, time, temperature, date, atmospheric conditions, news, or traffic control.

Pump Sign. Signs displayed upon service station gas pumps for the purpose of advertising the sale of products incidental to the sale of gas and oil or other automobile service provided on the premises.

Real Estate Sign. A sign or sign structure relating to the sale, lease, or other disposition of the real property on which the sign is located and which is temporary in nature.

Resident Identification Sign. A sign provided on a residential parcel for the purpose of identifying the name of the occupants and the address of the residence.

Roof. The upper covering of a structure for weather protection or an architectural feature resembling the covering in design or material.

Roof Sign. A sign erected, constructed, and maintained upon or connected to the roof, roof system, roof line, or parapet of a structure.

Seasonal or Holiday Sign. Signs that are used for a historical holiday or special time of the year and installed for a limited period of time.

Service Station. A parcel or a portion of a parcel used for the servicing of motor vehicles including gas stations or sales.

Sign. An identification, description, item, illustration, or device, illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible from a public place or is located on private property and exposed to the public and which directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including permanently installed or situated merchandise; or emblem, painting, banner, pennant, placard, or temporary sign designed to advertise, identify, or convey information.

Sign Program. A comprehensive program intended to provide incentive, latitude, and variety in order to achieve aesthetically appealing and compatible signage for shopping and professional office centers and industrial parks with two or more occupants. A sign program may also be applicable for a single business proposing two or more signs.

Sign Structure. The supports, uprights, braces, cables, framework, and display surface of a sign.

Snipe Sign. A sign made of cloth, paper, cardboard, poster material, plastic, metal, or other material affixed to or upon fences, posts, trees, structures, people, or other surfaces usually found off-site.

Temporary Sign. A sign constructed of paper, cloth, canvass, or other similar lightweight material, with or without frames, including painted windows, flags, streamers, pennants, banners, and other signs not designed to be attached to a structure or anchored to the ground.

Time and Temperature Device. A device that displays the time or temperature whether or not it displays advertising or establishment identification.

Tract Identification Sign. A sign provided on residentially zoned property for the purpose of identifying the name of the tract and/or the range of addresses of the residences within the tract.

Transit Advertising Shelter. A structure housed on three sides usually located within the public right-of-way for the purpose of sheltering and seating persons awaiting transit and which is capable of displaying an advertising message.

Under-Canopy. A sign that is perpendicular to and suspended below the ceiling or roof of a canopy.

Unlawful Sign. A sign which contravenes these Zoning Regulations, or which the administrator may declare as unlawful if it becomes dangerous to public safety by reason of dilapidation or abandonment, or a nonconforming sign for which a permit required under a previous code was not obtained; a sign or group of signs which has been modified or altered so that it or they differ in size, shape, height, width, light intensity, or from the plans submitted and approved by the authorized person or entity.

Use. The purpose for which a building, parcel, sign, or other structure is arranged, intended, designed, occupied, or maintained.

Vehicle Mounted Sign. A sign or advertising device attached to a vehicle for the purposes of advertisement.

Wall Sign. A sign attached to or erected against the wall of a structure with the face in a parallel plane to the plane of the structure wall.

Figure 7-12: Wall Sign



 

Window. An opening that is in a wall of a structure; designed to allow light and/or ventilation into the structure and to allow for the display of products and services for commercial and industrial businesses; enclosed by frame and/or mullion; and containing a single pane of glass or other similar transparent or semi-transparent material.

Window Sign. A sign exposed to public view, attached, painted, posted, or displayed, either permanent or temporary, on or within one foot of the interior or exterior surface of a window.

Single-Family Dwelling. A dwelling unit designed for occupancy by one household which is not attached to or located on a lot with commercial uses or other dwelling units, other than an accessory dwelling unit. For the purpose of accounting for housing units, a single-unit dwelling may also include, as an accessory use, one legally established accessory dwelling unit. This definition also includes individual manufactured housing units installed on a foundation system pursuant to Health and Safety Code Section 18551.

Single Unit Dwelling. See “Single-Family Dwelling.”

Site. A parcel of land that encompasses the main structures, the accessory structures, and the open spaces as required by these Zoning Regulations.

Site Coverage. The percentage of total site area occupied by structures, including the primary structure, architectural features such as chimneys, balconies, decks above the first floor, porches, and stairs, and by accessory structures such as carports, garages, patio covers, storage sheds, and trash dumpster enclosures. Structure coverage is measured from exterior wall to exterior wall.

Social Service Facilities. Residential or nonresidential facilities providing assistance and aid to those persons requiring counseling and/or treatment for psychological problems, addictions, learning disabilities, physical disabilities or to those persons in need of food and/or shelter. May include feeding centers, and substance abuse recovery and treatment facilities.

Solid Waste. All putrescible and non-putrescible solid and semisolid wastes, generated in or upon, related to the occupancy or, remaining in or emanating from residential or commercial premises, including recyclable materials, garbage, trash, refuse, paper, rubbish, ashes, industrial wastes, demolition and construction wastes, discarded home and industrial appliances, manure, vegetable or animal solid or semisolid wastes, and other solid and semisolid wastes, as defined in Public Resources Code Section 40191, excluding liquid wastes, abandoned vehicles and manifested hazardous or medical wastes.

Sound Level Meter. A type of noise monitoring equipment that meets standards established by the American National Standards Institute for Type 1 or Type 2 sound level meters.

Sound Pressure Level. A sound, in decibels, 20 times the logarithm to the base 10 of the ratio of the pressure of the sound to a reference pressure, which reference pressure shall be explicitly stated.

Storage.

Storage—Accessory. The indoor storage of materials accessory and incidental to the primary use is not considered a land use separate from the primary use.

Storage—Outdoor. The storage of various materials outside of a structure other than fencing, either as an accessory or primary use.

Storage—Outdoor Recreational Vehicle Storage. The storage of operative or inoperative recreational vehicles. These uses include storage of towed recreational vehicles, impound yards, and storage lots for recreational vehicles, but do not include recreational vehicle dismantling.

Storage—Personal. A structure containing a separate storage space that is designed to be leased or rented individually. Indoor storage shall mean that access to all storage spaces shall be from common interior corridors, and the facility has only shared loading areas. This use does not include outdoor storage of any kind. Further, such storage does not involve any manufacturing, office or business services, or human habitation in any storage space or anywhere on site. Also known as mini-storage.

Street. A public thoroughfare accepted by the City, that affords a principal means of access to an abutting property, including avenues, places, ways, drives, lanes, boulevards, highways, roads, and other thoroughfares except alleys as defined in these Zoning Regulations.

Street, Private. A right-of-way or easement used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic privately owned and maintained.

Street, Public. A right-of-way or easement used for vehicular or pedestrian traffic and maintained by public funds.

Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground or attachment to something having location on the ground including swimming pools and patio covers, but not including paved areas and not including electrical transformers and power poles. See also “Buildings.”

Structure, Accessory. See “Accessory Structures and Uses.”

Structure, Main. A structure where the primary use allowed on the parcel is conducted.

Studio—Art and Music. Small-scale instructional facilities or a small practice space for the individual artist, musician, or any individual practitioner of the activities defined here, typically accommodating one group of students at a time, in no more than one instructional space. Examples include individual and group instruction and training in the arts, production rehearsal, photography and the processing of photographs produced only by users of the studio facilities. Also includes production studios for individual filmmakers, musicians, painters, sculptors, photographers, and other artists. These uses may also include accessory retail sales of products related to the services provided. Does not include dance, yoga, gymnastics, and martial arts studios (see Health/Fitness Facilities).

Substance Abuse Treatment Center. See “Social Service Facilities.”

Supportive and/or Transitional Housing. The term Supportive Housing (per Government Code Section 65582[f], as may be amended) shall mean a dwelling unit occupied by a target population, with no limit on length of stay, that is linked to on-site or off-site services that assist the supportive housing resident(s) in retaining the housing, improving their health status, and maximizing their ability to live and, when possible, work in the community. A target population means persons with low incomes having one or more disabilities, including mental illness, HIV or AIDS, substance abuse, or other chronic health conditions, or individuals eligible for services provided under the Lanterman Developmental Disabilities Services Act (Welfare and Institutions [W&I] Code Section 4500) and may include—among other populations—adults, emancipated youth, families, families with children, elderly persons, young adults aging out of the foster care system, individuals exiting from institutional settings, veterans, and homeless people.

        The term Transitional Housing (per Government Code Section 65582[h], as may be amended) shall mean buildings configured as rental housing developments, but operated under program requirements that require the termination of assistance and recirculating of the assisted unit to another eligible program recipient at a predetermined future point in time that shall be no less than six months from the beginning of assistance.

        Supportive and/or transitional housing may be designed as a residential group living facility or as a regular residential use and includes both facilities that provide on-site and off-site services.

Supermarket. See “Grocery Store.”

Swimming Pool. Any confined body of water, located either above or below the finished grade of the site or on a rooftop, which exceeds 18 inches in depth (or as otherwise defined by Building Code Chapter 31 (Special construction), Section 3119.B.5 (Pools), as it may be amended from time to time), and which is designed, used, or intended to be used for swimming or bathing purposes. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.200 T Definitions
Temporary Uses/Activities. Any activity of limited duration that is permitted through the issuance of a Temporary Use Permit (See [Temporary Use Permits]).

Textile Manufacturing. See “Manufacturing—Heavy.”

Theaters. Facilities for indoor display of films, motion pictures, or dramatic, musical, or live performances. This classification may include incidental food and beverage services to patrons.

Through Lot. See “Through Lot.”

Townhouse. Attached or semi-detached structures, each containing a single dwelling unit and each located or capable of being located on a separate parcel. See also “Multiple-Unit Dwelling.”

Trade and Vocational Schools. Public or private post-secondary schools (other than a community college or four-year college) providing occupational or job skills training for specific occupations, including business and computer schools, management training, and technical training schools. Excludes personal instructional services such as music lessons and tutoring.

Trailer. A nonautomotive vehicle designed to be pulled by a car, truck, or tractor for the purposes of transporting property or serving as a temporary dwelling or place of business.

Trailer, Utility. A trailer used solely for the transportation of personal property.

Transitional Housing. See “Supportive and/or Transitional Housing.”

Transit Station and Terminal. Passenger stations for vehicular and rail mass transit systems; also terminal facilities providing maintenance and service for the vehicles operated in the transit system. Includes buses, taxis, railway, etc.

Transit Stop Shelter. A small-scale covered waiting area for buses, taxis, and rail mass transit stops.

Truck Terminal. See “Freight/Truck Terminals.”

Tutoring and Educational Centers. A business where supplemental educational instruction in specific subjects and skills is provided to school-age children. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.210 U Definitions
Unit. The element (structure or airspace) of a residential, office, or industrial condominium that is not owned in common with the owners of other condominium interests in the development plus a proportionate share of common areas.

Urgent Care. See “Hospitals and Clinic/Urgent Care.”

Use. The purpose for which land or the premises of a building, structure, or facility thereon is designed, arranged, or intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.

Use, Accessory. A use that is customarily associated with, and is incidental and subordinate to, the primary use and located on the same parcel as the primary use. Accessory use includes active or passive solar heating systems and cogeneration facilities.

Use, Nonconforming. Any use of land or activity that was lawfully established and in compliance with all applicable ordinances and laws at the time such use was initiated but which, due to subsequently enacted ordinances or laws, no longer complies with the applicable regulations and standards for the zone in which the use is located.

Use, Primary. A primary, principal, or dominant use established, or proposed to be established, on a parcel.

Use, Temporary. A use or activity allowed for less than one year consisting of activities that represent a variation from the normal business operations. Examples include, but are not limited to, parking lot sales, benefits, and special events.

Utility Facilities. A structure or improvement built or installed above ground for the purpose of providing utility services, communications services, and materials transfer to more than one lot. Generating plants; electric substations; solid waste collection, including transfer stations and materials recovery facilities; solid waste treatment and disposal; water or wastewater treatment plants; and similar facilities of public agencies or public utilities, including corporation and maintenance yards.

Facilities with On-Site Staff. Utility facilities that include office and/or working space for employees, and/or that require employees to be located on site for general operation of the facility.

Facilities with No On-Site Staff. Utility facilities that do not include office and/or working space for employees, and where on-site staff are required intermittently only for maintenance and/or infrequent monitoring. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.220 V Definitions
Vacation Rentals. See “Lodging—Hotel and Motel.”

Variance. A discretionary entitlement that may waive or relax the development standards of these Zoning Regulations, in compliance with Chapter 17.48 (Variances).

Vehicle and Freight Terminals. See “Freight/Truck Terminals.”

Vehicle Sales and Rental. A retail establishment selling and/or renting automobiles, trucks and vans, motorcycles, and bicycles (bicycle sales are also included under “Retail Sales—General”). May also include repair shops and the sales of parts and accessories, incidental to vehicle dealerships. Does not mobile home, recreational vehicle, or watercraft sales (see “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental”); tire recapping establishments (see “Vehicle Repair and Services”); businesses dealing exclusively in used parts; or “Service/Fueling Stations,” which are separately defined.

Vehicle Services. See “Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental.”

Vehicle Storage. The storage of operative or inoperative vehicles. These uses include storage of towed vehicles, impound yards, and storage lots for buses and recreational vehicles, but do not include vehicle dismantling.

Vehicle/Transportation Equipment Manufacturing and Assembly. Establishments primarily engaged in manufacturing or assembling complete equipment for transporting people and goods. Includes: passenger automobiles, trucks, commercial cars and buses, special purpose motor vehicles such as auto trailers, campers, and recreational vehicles, chassis or passenger car bodies, boat building, motorcycle building, and related incidental parts manufacturing.

Vehicles—Trucks, Construction, and Heavy Equipment Sales, Service, and Rental. Sales, servicing, rental, fueling, and washing of large trucks, trailers, tractors, and other heavy equipment used for construction, moving, agricultural, or landscape gardening activities, as well as boats, mobile homes, and recreational vehicle/campers. Examples include cranes, earth moving equipment, tractors, combines, heavy trucks, etc. Includes large vehicle operation training facilities. Sales of new or used automobiles are excluded from this classification (see “Vehicle Sales and Rental”).

Vehicle Charging Facilities. A location that supplies electricity for the recharging of electric vehicles (including plug-in hybrids).

Vehicle Repair and Services. The service and repair of motor vehicles in an enclosed building, including the repair or replacement of engines and transmissions, body and fender repair, and the installation of nonfactory-installed products.

Service/Fueling Station. An establishment engaged in the retail sale of vehicle fuels or the retail sale of these fuels in combination with activities, such as providing minor vehicle repair services; selling automotive oils, replacement parts, and accessories; and/or ancillary retail and grocery sales. Does not include body and fender work or “heavy” repair of trucks or other motor vehicles (see “Vehicle Service, Major”).

Vehicle Service, Major. Major repair of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or trucks including light-duty trucks (i.e., gross vehicle weights of less than 10,000 pounds) and heavy-duty trucks (i.e., gross vehicle weights of more than 10,000 pounds). Examples of uses include full-service motor vehicle repair garages; body and fender shops; brake shops; machine shops, painting shops; towing services, and transmission shops. Does not include vehicle dismantling or salvage and tire retreading or recapping.

Vehicle Service, Minor. Minor repair of automobiles, motorcycles, recreational vehicles, or light trucks, vans or similar size vehicles (i.e., vehicles that have gross vehicle weights less than 10,000 pounds) including installation of electronic equipment (e.g., alarms, audio equipment, etc.); servicing of cooling and air conditioning, electrical, fuel and exhaust systems; brake adjustments, relining and repairs; oil and air filter replacement; wheel alignment and balancing; tire sales, service, and installation shops; shock absorber replacement; chassis lubrication; smog checks; engine tune-ups; and installation of window film, and similar accessory equipment.

Vehicle Washing/Detailing. Washing, waxing, detailing, or cleaning of automobiles or similar light vehicles, including self-serve washing facilities.

Vending Machine. An automated mechanical device which ejects consumer products, including but not limited to snack food items, non-alcoholic beverages, electronic devices, and movies, and that accepts cash, debit, and/or credit.

Video Rental Stores. An establishment engaged in renting prerecorded video tapes and digital video discs for viewing away from the premises on home electronic equipment. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.230 W Definitions
Warehouse, Wholesaling, and Distribution. Indoor storage and sale of goods to other firms for resale, storage of goods for transfer to retail outlets of the same firm, or storage and sale of materials and supplies used in production or operation, including janitorial and restaurant supplies. Wholesalers are primarily engaged in business-to-business sales, but may sell to individual consumers through mail or internet orders. They normally operate from a warehouse or office having little or no display of merchandise, and are not designed to solicit walk-in traffic.

Water Efficient Irrigation. The scheduling and management of an irrigation system to supply moisture to a landscape without excess or waste in compliance with the landscape/irrigation criteria established in Chapter 17.18 (Landscaping).

Water Efficient Landscaping. A landscape that is designed and maintained to function in a healthful and visually pleasing manner in compliance with the standards provided in Chapter 17.18 (Landscaping). This generally involves the strategic use of plants which have minimal water requirements for subsistence, plants native to hot/dry environments (See “Xeriscape”), and hardscape to achieve an overall landscape concept that is water conserving.

Wireless Communication Facilities. Wireless telecommunication facilities consist of commercial wireless communication systems, including but not limited to cellular, PCS, paging, broadband, data transfer, and any other type of technology that fosters wireless communication through the use of portable electronic devices. A facility includes all supporting structures and associated equipment. The following are definitions used in association with the regulation of wireless telecommunications facilities.

Accessory Equipment. Any equipment associated with the installation of a small wireless facility, including, but not limited to, cabling, generators, air conditioning units, electrical panels, equipment shelters, equipment cabinets, equipment buildings, pedestals, meters, vaults, splice boxes, and surface location markers.

Antenna. That part of a small wireless facility designed to radiate or receive radio frequency signals or electromagnetic waves for the provision of services, including, but not limited to, cellular, paging, personal communications services (PCS) and microwave communications. Such devices include, but are not limited to, directional antennas, such as panel antenna, microwave dishes, and satellite dishes; omnidirectional antennas; wireless access points (Wi-Fi); and strand-mounted wireless access points. This definition does not apply to broadcast antennas, antennas designed for amateur radio use, or satellite dishes designed for residential or household purposes.

Antenna Equipment. Equipment, switches, wiring, cabling, power sources, shelters or cabinets associated with an antenna, located at the same fixed location as the antenna, and, when collocated on a structure, is mounted or installed at the same time as such antenna.

Antenna Facility. An antenna and associated antenna equipment.

Antenna Structure. An antenna that is secured at a fixed and specified location, a structure designed specifically to support an antenna, and/or appurtenances mounted on a structure or antenna.

Cellular. An analog or digital wireless telecommunications technology that is based on a system of interconnected neighboring cell sites.

Collocation. The same as defined by the FCC in 47 C.F.R. Section 1.40001(b)(2), as may be amended, which defines that term as the mounting or installation of transmission equipment on an eligible support structure for the purpose of transmitting or receiving radio frequency signals for communications purposes.

Commercial Wireless Facility. An antenna structure located within the City limits that provides radio communication service that:

1.     Is offered in return for monetary compensation;

2.     Is available to the public or a substantial portion of the public; and

3.     Provides subscribers with the ability to access or receive communication from the public switched telephone network.

        Commercial wireless facilities include, but are not limited to, antenna structures that provide paging service, wireless data transmission, cellular telephone service, specialized mobile radio service (“SMR”), and personal communications service (“PCS”).

Deployment. Placement, construction, or modification of a small wireless facility.

Existing. A structure, building, or improvement, including without limitation utility poles, reviewed and/or otherwise approved under the applicable zoning or siting process, or under another State or local regulatory review process, provided that a tower that has not been reviewed and approved because it was not in a zoned area when it was built, but was lawfully constructed, is existing for purposes of this definition.

FCC. The Federal Communications Commission or its duly appointed successor agency.

Ground Mounted. A facility mounted to a pole, lattice tower, or other freestanding structure specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna.

Lattice Tower. A structure in excess height of 40 feet with three or four steel legs used to support antennae.

Major Facility. A commercial wireless facility, either ground mounted or roof mounted, whether or not the facility employs stealth design or shielding. Exception: a roof-mounted facility that is screened on all four sides by a solid material that does not exceed the maximum height of the applicable zoning district shall be deemed a “Minor Facility.”

Minor Facility. A commercial wireless facility that is wall mounted, utility mounted, or roof mounted and the entire facility is either: (1) designed to using a stealth approach to integrate the facility into the architectural design of the building on which it is located; (2) screened by solid material on four sides and does not exceed the maximum height of the applicable zoning district; or (3) co-located on an existing wireless communication facility tower.

Modification. Any change to an existing small wireless facility that involves any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation, including, but not limited to, a change in size, shape, color, visual design, or exterior material. Modification does not include repair, replacement, or maintenance if those actions do not involve a change to the existing facility involving any of the following: collocation, expansion, modification, alteration, enlargement, intensification, reduction, or augmentation.

Mounted. Attached or supported.

Panel. A wireless communication facility where the antennae are mounted on the roof or top of a building or structure, or the side of a building or structure, other than on a stand-alone facility.

Personal Wireless Service Facilities means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as facilities that provide personal wireless services.

Personal Wireless Services means the same as defined in 47 U.S.C. Section 332(c)(7)(C)(i), as may be amended, which defines the term as commercial mobile services, unlicensed wireless services, and common carrier wireless exchange access services.

Pole. A single shaft of wood, steel, concrete, or other material capable of supporting the equipment mounted thereon in a safe and adequate manner and as required by provisions of this Code.

Radio Communication. The transmission and/or reception of impulses, writing, signs, signals, pictures, and sounds of all kinds through space by means of electromagnetic waves.

Roof Mounted. Mounted on any structure (not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting antennae) in a manner that does not satisfy either the definition of wall mounted or utility mounted; typically mounted on the roof of an existing structure.

Satellite Dish Antenna. A device incorporating a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar-configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone, horn, or cornucopia, that is used to transmit and/or receive radio, microwave or other electromagnetic waves between terrestrially and/or orbitally based use.

Small Wireless Facility. A facility that meets each of the following conditions:

1.     The facility—

a.     Is mounted on structures 50 feet or less in height including their antennas, or

b.     Is mounted on structures no more than 10 percent taller than other adjacent structures, or

c.     Does not extend existing structures on which it is located to a height of more than 50 feet or by more than 10 percent, whichever is greater;

2.     Each antenna associated with any deployment, excluding associated antenna equipment, is no more than three cubic feet in volume;

3.     All other wireless equipment associated with the structure, including the wireless equipment associated with the antenna and any pre-existing associated equipment on the structure, is no more than 28 cubic feet in volume;

4.     The facility does not require antenna structure registration under 47 CFR Part 17;

5.     The facility is not located on Tribal lands, as defined under 36 CFR 800.16(x);

6.     The facility does not result in human exposure to radiofrequency radiation in excess of the applicable safety standards specified in 47 CFR 1.1307(b).

Stand-Alone Facility. Improvements or treatments added to a wireless telecommunication facility which mask or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it effectively unnoticeable to the casual observer.

Stealthing. Improvements or treatments added to a wireless telecommunication facility which mask or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual backdrop in such a manner as to render it effectively unnoticeable to the casual observer.

Structure. A pole, tower, base station, or other building, whether or not it has an existing antenna facility, that is used or to be used for the provision of personal wireless service (whether on its own or comingled with other types of services).

Utility Mounted. Mounted to an existing aboveground structure specifically designed and originally installed to support electrical power lines, cable television lines, street lighting, or traffic signal equipment.

Utility Pole. A pole or tower owned by any utility company that is primarily used to support wires or cables necessary to the provision of electrical or other utility services regulated by the California Public Utilities Commission.

Wall Mounted. Mounted on a vertical or nearly vertical surface of a building or other existing structure (not specifically constructed for the purpose of supporting an antenna, including the exterior walls of a structure, an existing parapet, the side of a water tank, the face of a religious institution steeple, or the side of a freestanding sign) and the highest point of the antenna structure is at an elevation equal to or lower than the highest point of the surface on which it is mounted.

Woodworking Shop. See “Furniture and Fixtures Manufacturing, Cabinet Shops, and Woodworking Shops.” (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.240 X Definitions
Xeriscape. A combination of landscaping and irrigation techniques that reduce the demand for water required to maintain a given landscape. The primary techniques are:

1.     Use of water conserving plants;

2.     Use of appropriate species, quantities and placement of turf;

3.     Planning landscape areas with hydrozones, plants grouped based on watering needs using irrigation systems designed to meet the long-term needs of each hydrozone in the landscape; and

4.     Planting landscape areas based on watering needs, hydrozones. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.250 Y Definitions
Yard. An open space, other than a sports court, on a lot that is unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted by this title.

Yard, Front. A yard extending across the front of a lot for the full width of the lot between the side lot lines. The depth of a front yard shall be at least equivalent to the required setback distance specified by this title for the district in which it is located and measured inward from the front lot line. For the purpose of defining which is the front yard, in the case of an interior parcel, a yard fronting the street; in the case of a corner parcel, the yard facing the narrowest street frontage. (If the frontages of a corner parcel are equal in length, the front yard shall be determined by the Director.) On a through parcel, both yards are considered front yards and the parcel is considered to have no rear yard or parcel line.

Yard, Rear. A yard extending across the rear of a lot for its full width between side lot lines. The depth of a rear yard shall be at least equivalent to the required rear setback distance specified by this title for the district in which it is located.

Yard, Interior Side. A yard extending along an interior side of a lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The depth of an interior side yard shall be at least equivalent to the required setback distance specified by this article for the district in which it is located and measured inward from the interior side lot line.

Yard, Street Side. A yard extending along the street side of a corner lot from the front lot line to the rear lot line. The depth of a street side yard shall be at least equivalent to the required street side setback distance specified by this title for the district in which it is located and measured inward from the street side lot line. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

 

17.74.260 Z Definitions
Zone. An area of the City delineated on the official zoning map, designated by name or abbreviation as provided in the regulations codified in these Zoning Regulations.

Zoning Map. The designated official map or maps which show the location and boundaries of the zones established by these Zoning Regulations and are referred to as the zoning map and incorporated as a part of these Zoning Regulations. The zoning map together with everything shown on it and amendments to it, are as much a part of these Zoning Regulations as if fully identified and described in context. (Ord. 19-03 § 3, 2019)

